Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
We appreciate the fact that non-members of the
Security Council are regularly afforded an opportunity
to address that issue. My appreciation goes also to
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive and informative briefing this morning.

Over the past few months, there have been
positive developments in the Middle East. We welcome
the continuing efforts to advance the Annapolis track.
The international community should continue to
support the efforts of the parties concerned to reach an
agreement by the end of this year.

We highly appreciate the active diplomatic efforts
that countries in the region have been making. As a
result of such efforts, indirect peace talks between
Israel and Syria have resumed under the auspices of
Turkey, the Doha agreement was reached in May with
the mediation of the relevant Arab countries, and a new
cabinet was formed in Lebanon.

At the Hokkaido Toyako Summit, the leaders of
the Group of Eight reiterated their commitment to
realizing a comprehensive peace in the region. The
Paris Summit for the Mediterranean also provided
valuable support for the parties concerned.

The situation in the Middle East, however,
remains fragile and much still needs to be done. We
believe that progress on the Palestinian track, which is
the core issue in the Middle East peace process, will
lead to peace between Israel and its neighbours and
eventually to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East as a whole.

A peace agreement between the Israelis and the
Palestinians should be achieved as soon as possible.
We hope that peaceful coexistence and prosperity for
the Israeli and the Palestinian people will thereby be
realized. We call on all parties to make every effort to
that end by showing maximum restraint and good faith
in the bilateral negotiations, to refrain from any action
that would undermine the negotiations and the
momentum for peace, and to implement their road map
obligations such as ending all acts of Violence,
terrorism and incitement. We reiterate the call on Israel
to freeze all settlement activities and the construction
of houses in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

Japan welcomes the truce that took effect in Gaza
recently through the mediation of Egypt and calls for it
to be observed. At the same time, we remain concerned
about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. The integrity of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip should soon be restored under the leadership of
President Abbas. We support the reform efforts of the
Palestinian Authority, including the training of the
security forces. In that connection, we call on Israel to
take further steps to ensure movement and access.

On 2 July, Foreign Minister Koumura of Japan
hosted the third round of the ministerial meeting of the
Four-Party Consultative Unit for the "Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity" initiative, with the participation
of Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Jordan and Japan.
The four parties then issued a press statement
welcoming the developments made so far and stating
how they were looking forward to future progress.

The feasibility study on the agro-industrial park
in Jericho will be completed in November and projects
to develop basic infrastructure will move into the
implementation stage as early as next year. We strongly
believe that this initiative will help build confidence
between the two sides by contributing to the creation of
a viable Palestinian economy and will ultimately give
Palestinian youth hope for a productive future.

Japan welcomes the formation of the new cabinet
headed by Prime Minister Siniora. We hope that, under
the leadership of President Sleiman, all parties
concerned in Lebanon will continue to engage in
08-4336]
dialogue with a view to enhancing the stability and
political independence of the country.

To achieve stability in Lebanon, it is essential
that Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) be fully
implemented. We therefore welcome the recent
exchange of prisoners by Israel and Hizbollah as a step
towards reducing tensions and building confidence,
and extend our sincere condolences to the families of
the deceased.

However, much remains to be done by parties in
the region, including all Lebanese parties concerned
and Israel, in order to achieve a permanent ceasefire
and a long-term solution. They must vigorously
continue to disarm and disband all remaining militias,
to delineate the borders of Lebanon, including the
Shaba'a Farms, and to ensure that there is no illegal
trafficking of weapons. We welcome the recent
comment of President Assad that Syria is ready for the
reciprocal establishment of embassies in Syria and
Lebanon.

Japan decided recently to extend financial
support to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We hope
that it will assist in the efforts to fulfil its intended
goal.

In conclusion, Japan remains fully committed to
providing all possible support in the hope of achieving
progress in the peace process.

