Mr. Pronin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the delegations of
the Netherlands, Sweden, Kuwait and Cote d'Ivoire
for preparing the text of resolution 2417 (2018). We
are particularly grateful to our Dutch colleagues
for coordinating it and for facilitating its agreement.
We have noted our partners' professionalism and
constructive approach to problem-solving and finding
consensus-based language for a number of delegations'
most sensitive issues. We are grateful for their
willingness to consider the priorities and concerns of
all delegations during the course of a quite complex
negotiation process, which has ultimately enabled
us to achieve a balanced document supported by all
Council members.

We continue to believe that the problem of food
security is complex and involves many factors. Armed
conflicts are only one of the issues that can have a
negative effect on supplying a population with food.
We also have to take into account important factors
such as fluctuations in the global price of raw materials
and manufactured goods, imbalances in global food
distribution, the consequences of natural disasters,
and climate change. Another important item on that
list are unilateral economic restrictions and sanctions.
All of those factors, to a lesser or greater extent,
make it difficult to ensure food security around the
world, something that research by the United Nations
specialized humanitarian agencies clearly confirms.
This problem cannot be solved on the political
front alone. It extends far beyond the scope of the
Security Council. Ensuring that all parties comply
with international humanitarian law, which is the point
of this resolution, is certainly an important criterion
for success, but it is no less important to combine
efforts on every front to create opportunities and
capacities for local food production, stabilize global
commodity markets, liberalize trade, mitigate the
effects of natural disasters and refrain from unilateral
restrictive measures. It goes without saying that this is
a labour-intensive process, but until we take that path,
humanitarian needs will only increase. Humanitarian
assistance can treat the symptoms, but it cannot cure
the disease itself. The continued worrying situation
in four countries where the threat of starvation was
announced last year only confirms that fact.

Without comprehensive efforts by the international
community to create a more just socioeconomic system,
the burden on humanitarian agencies, in real terms, is
only going to increase. For our part we will continue to
provide them with support, and we encourage them in
turn to work with full commitment and respect for the
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance, as the
resolution that we have adopted today stipulates.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
