I join colleagues in extending our congratulations to Estonia for its excellent work in the presidency of the Security Council during the month of May and assure the current President of our full support for this month of June. I thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Force Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force - Lieutenant-General Gyllensporre, Lieutenant-General Tinaikar and Brigadier-General O'Brien, respectively - for their insightful briefings and service. We highly commend all peacekeepers under their command for the great efforts they have made on the ground during this challenging period. We are saddened by the recent demise of two peacekeepers from MINUSMA due to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and would like to send our deepest condolences to their families. We also wish a speedy recovery to the more than 150 women and men in various peacekeeping missions who are infected with coronavirus. United Nations peacekeeping missions are currently facing unprecedented difficulties owing to the new and complex conditions caused by the spread of COVID-19. In that regard, we welcome the implementation of mitigation measures and salute the efforts of all United Nations peacekeeping missions to help protect peacekeepers and local communities, while supporting Government-led efforts against the pandemic and maintaining the continuity of their critical operations. Against that backdrop, it is necessary for us to reiterate the following points. We must ensure that the missions have adequate medical tools, personal protective equipment, handwashing supplies and ventilators. All the protocols put in place to contain the spread of the virus in a mission must be strictly implemented and regularly revised in order to adjust to developments in the situation. We must also ensure regular information-sharing, awareness-raising and smooth communication between a peacekeeping mission and the relevant United Nations country team and the local authorities and communities. We believe that this is an important and practical measure peacekeeping missions can take in assisting host countries during this extraordinary time. Finally, in recognition of the critical role of women in peacekeeping activities, a gender dimension should be included in all response plans. We call for more attention to be paid to the need to adopt supportive and priority policies for women peacekeepers, including with regard to safety, security, necessary facilities and the creation of an enabling working environment. I would like to this opportunity to ask the following questions. First, it has now been more than two months since the appeal of the Secretary- General for a global ceasefire. Have the Force Commanders seen the appeal materialize in the country where their missions are deployed? Has humanitarian assistance been allowed to reach unimpeded the populations most vulnerable to the spread of COVID-19? Secondly, MINUSMA has the highest number of infections among United Nations peacekeeping missions. How has the pandemic impacted the delivery of the Mission's mandates? What activities could not be implemented and remain pending owing to this situation? Thirdly, the protection of civilians in armed conflicts has been a main task for peacekeeping missions. In terms of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the total number of civilians seeking safety in six protection-of-civilians sites on Mission bases is more than 190,000. What has been done to prevent the outbreak of COVID-19 at those sites? Fourthly, could Under-Secretary-General Lacroix please share the rotation plan of United Nations peacekeeping missions for the second half of this year?
