Mr. Jilani (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Germany for convening today's debate on an
issue that is close to our hearts and a very important
and long-standing item on the Security Council's
agenda. I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and welcome the ministers attending today's debate.
We also welcome the Secretary General of the League
of Arab States, Mr. Nabil Elaraby, to the Security
Council for the third time in a few months, a sign of
the increasing coordination between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States.

Pakistan's ties with the Arab world have a deep
and continuing historical, cultural and religious
underpinning. We regard the peace and progress of
the Arab world as synonymous with our own. Pakistan
supports cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in various areas, including
the maintenance of peace and security, humanitarian
assistance, development and human rights. Pakistan
believes that regional organizations can play an
important role in the pacific settlement of disputes.
They are better placed to understand the realities and
complexities of situations on the ground, and thus bring
a complementary role and perspective to the United
Nations.

The spirit ofmultilateralism lies in building bridges,
finding common ground and pooling resources. The
appointment of a Joint Special Envoy, and subsequently
a Joint Special Representative, for Syria is an example
of synergy flowing from multilateralism.

The Arab world is going through a period of
uncertainty as well as reform. As a country born of a
democratic struggle, and as a functioning and vibrant
democracy, Pakistan fully supports the fulfilment of a
people's legitimate aspirations. However, the decision
for change must be channelled through peaceful means,
and should be led and owned by the people themselves.
Pakistan has always been opposed on principle to any
outside interference, use of force or violence. Similarly,
we feel that coercive measures lead to a hardening
of positions and are seldom effective. Dialogue and
engagement are the essence of multilateralism, and that
should be maintained.

It is important to reiterate that the era of
rejuvenation, often euphemistically termed the Arab
Spring, should not bypass the people of Palestine. They
have suffered under the yoke of tyrannical oppression
and unlawful occupation for too long. The gentle winds
of spring must visit the Palestinian territory and other
occupied lands as well. The Security Council must not
remain silent in the face of Israel's continued defiance
of the collective will of the international community, its
illegal settlement policy and its collective punishment
of the Palestinians with the continued blockade of
Gaza, which has now entered its sixth year.

We call on the League of Arab States to continue
to play its crucial and unquestioned role in bringing
those historical injustices to the world's attention and
working towards ajust settlement. The Security Council
must fully support those efforts. We firmly believe that
without a resolution of the core issue in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
Arab Peace Initiative, aimed at the re-establishment
of an independent and viable State of Palestine on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with A1-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, a comprehensive peace plan would not be
possible.

The United Nations and the League of Arab States
have been building institutional ties over the past few
years. The presence here today of Secretary General
Nabil Elaraby is proof of that. Apart from the area of
peace and security, there has also been cooperation in
other fields, ranging from counter-terrorism to disaster
risk reduction and humanitarian issues. We hope that
the United Nations and the League will build further on
those linkages. Increased cooperation and coordination
between them is in the interest of both organizations.
We hope that such synergies will lead to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in the region, especially over the
attainment of the inalienable right to self-determination
by the people of Palestine.

Pakistan strongly condemns the recent release of
a defamatory video and the publication of derogatory
caricatures in the newspapers. We endorse the
Secretary-General's pronouncement that those are
senseless and disgraceful acts.

They are indeed abhorrent examples of incitement
to hatred and discrimination against Muslims under the
pretext of freedom of expression and opinion. As we
have witnessed, the global reaction to, and consequences
of, those acts have a strong bearing on international
peace and security. The international community must
therefore take stock of those reprehensible acts and take
concerted actions to introduce and implement adequate
measures, including legislation, against such acts at all
levels, in accordance with international human rights
standards. There is an obvious need to strengthen
dialogue and cooperation among all religions,
cultures and civilizations for promoting harmony and
coexistence.

