Mr. N eewoor (Mauritius): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting so soon after
the return of the mission. I am very pleased to associate
myself fully with the comprehensive briefing that
Ambassador Levitte has given on the Security Council
mission, which he led, to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and seven other African countries from 15
to 26 May and in which I had the privilege of
participating.

We have addressed the Democratic Republic of
the Congo conflict regularly in the Security Council,
and all of us are familiar with its complexity. The
importance of the mission can be better understood if
we realize that it provided an opportunity, after the
process had been bogged down for quite some time, for
us to move the Lusaka process forward. The mission
had an opportunity to interact with the major players,
with the leaders of seven of the countries that we
visited, and also with the leaders of two other
countries, whom we met in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I believe that this interactive process with
them was extremely important, as it enabled both sides
much better to understand the concerns we have.

All the parties involved in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo conflict recognize, as does the
Security Council, that the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
is the only basis for the achievement of a peaceful
settlement of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
crisis. In the course of meetings with the leaders of the
countries concerned and with other parties, the Security
Council mission was left in no doubt that the parties
remain fully committed to the Lusaka process. We are
satisfied that, at the Political Committee meeting in
Lusaka last week, the parties to the Lusaka Agreement
engaged in serious discussions on the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We remain cautiously
optimistic that the timetable worked out in Lusaka for a
phased and orderly withdrawal from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be scrupulously adhered to
by all the parties concerned.

We welcome the announcement by Sir Ketumile
Masire that the preparatory conference on starting the
national dialogue will begin on 16 July. The success of
the national dialogue is paramount in terms of the
overall settlement of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo crisis. All the Congolese parties we met appear
to be eager to participate in the national dialogue, but
we know that this is not going to be easy, since each
party has a separate agenda of its own and since a
commonality of purpose remains to evolve.

The mission was reminded again and again
during its visit that, so long as the negative forces
remain active on the soil of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, peace will remain threatened in the Great
Lakes region. It is therefore extremely important that
the United Nations take up its responsibility for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration under
the Lusaka Agreement as soon as possible. Time will
tell whether the 5,500-odd-person strength of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) will be
sufficient for it to meet its responsibilities under phase
III, especially in terms of effectively undertaking the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in addition to its other responsibilities.
The Security Council must not hesitate to enhance the
strength of MONUC if the need is felt as the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
progresses.

Regarding Burundi, the present situation appears
to be quite explosive in view of the refusal of the
armed groups to join the peace process. In that regard,
the Security Council should continue to extend its full
cooperation to former President Nelson Mandela, who
is doing everything possible to bring peace to Burundi
under the Arusha Agreement.

