Ms. Sori-Coulibaly: I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council once more on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, particularly as the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) draws nearer to its closure on or before 31 December 2020. As countries around the world grapple with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the situation in Guinea-Bissau is particularly fragile given its dire health infrastructure and limited resources, with the peak still to come. The United Nations is supporting the implementation of the national response plan to the pandemic, led by my deputy in his capacity as Resident Coordinator, together with the World Health Organization, the World Bank and other United Nations agencies. As aresult, a coordination framework was established and resources have been channelled to support national efforts. Meanwhile, United Nations staff in the country has been telecommuting since 26 March. Recent political developments in the country have led to a politically charged atmosphere, with mounting mistrust among stakeholders. Mutual accusations and reported acts of intimidation against those opposing the new political dispensation have created a hostile environment, making it difficult to reach a compromise for the sake of political stability and consensus-building around national peacebuilding priorities. While the new authorities are focused on consolidating power, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) is contesting the parliamentary vote of 29 June that approved the programme of the Nuno Gomes Nabiam Government. The PAIGC continues to question the legality of the session, alleging procedural errors and denouncing threats and _ intimidation against members of Parliament, which preceded the session. The PAIGC continues to reiterate its call for a political solution. While President Umaro Sissoco Embald has expressed the wish to form a broad-based Government with Nuno Gomes Nabiam as the Prime Minister, the prospects of a breakthrough are poor, given the PAIGC's strong opposition to joining the Government under the current circumstances. A sustainable solution that promotes stability requires all sides to compromise, but this appears far-fetched at the present time as both sides remain deeply entrenched in their positions. Concerns about insecurity and human rights abuses, such as the 26 July raid on Radio Capital FM, which is considered to be allied to the opposition, as well as the arbitrary arrests, intimidation and detention of persons and political figures perceived as opposing the current Administration have been reported. These occurrences have heightened political tensions. Resolutions 2458 (2019) and 2512 (2020) determined a phased closure for UNIOGBIS. The transition, the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the country and the drawdown of UNIOGBIS are proceeding accordingly. The political crisis and the parliamentary paralysis that emerged following the presidential election prevented the mission from supporting urgent reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement, including the review of the Constitution, the electoral law and the law on political parties. Regretfully, therefore, the UNIOGBIS mandate is unlikely to be fully implemented before the mission's departure. Regarding the Constitution, the technical commission established by President Sissoco Embalde on 11 May to review the Constitution is expected to submit a draft to the President in the next few days. The establishment of the commission has been criticized by several national stakeholders, including the President of the National Assembly, the PAIGC alliance, civil society organizations and prominent legal figures, who argue that the revision of the Constitution is the prerogative of the legislature. President Sissoco Embalo counterargues that the work of the commission is in line with the request of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and will provide the foundation for the revision of the Constitution in conformity with the country's legal framework. It remains unclear how the technical commission'sdraft will reconcile with the one being drafted by the parliamentary ad hoc commission on the review of the Constitution, which UNIOGBIS has been supporting. While there is no political consensus at this juncture on the approval process of a constitutional review, the parallel mechanisms and processes have a potential to further exacerbate political tensions. Meanwhile, the President has expressed his desire to change the system of governance - from semi-presidential to presidential - under the new constitution. This will likely lead to internal disputes within the new Movimento para Alternancia Democratica parliamentary alliance as well as with its supporters and the new Prime Minister, if not carefully managed and widely discussed, thus further compounding an already fragile situation. Regarding the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, despite the political crisis and challenges posed by COVID-19, coordination with the United Nations country team on the transition is ongoing. The Peacebuilding Fund has been utilized to identify and support key partners, including United Nations agencies and civil society organizations, for the continuation of the implementation of key peacebuilding priorities. Efforts are ongoing to reconfigure the United Nations presence in the country to allow the United Nations country team to continue critical peacebuilding activities, including political dialogue, confidence-building measures, urgent reforms and combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, following the closure of UNIOGBIS. In coordination with the United Nations country team and the Peacebuilding Fund, capacity-building activities for the National Assembly were supported, including training tailored for parliamentarians. Further to those endeavours, a comprehensive action plan is being defined by the mission in coordination with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and ECOWAS, to, inter alia, extend technical support to specialized commissions towards achieving cross-party consensus. In this framework, civil society contributions to political dialogue and peacebuilding are also being supported, in coordination with the European Union. In that context, women's groups continue to play a prominent role. My plan to establish a high-level platform that brings together relevant international partners and national authorities to discuss, sustain momentum in and accompany the country's reform efforts is progressing. Following the closure of UNIOGBIS, the platform would continue under the leadership of the Resident Coordinator and in line with commitments made by the Peacebuilding Commission. Despite challenges, regular meetings of the United Nations Strategic Policy Group ensure high-level coordination and decision-making on joint strategic and operational issues. The assessment of the United Nations country team's capacity to meet peacebuilding priorities identified in the conflict analysis was concluded. A comprehensive assessment of the capacities of the Government and other partners remains outstanding. Meanwhile, opportunities and challenges for the United Nations country team have been identified, and peacebuilding priorities will be anchored in the new United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, which will need to be aligned with the country's development programme following consultations with the national authorities. Continuing our efforts in support of the country will remain crucial. Funding will be essential to averting a financial cliff, and I appeal once again to the international community to generously support the Cooperation Framework. Considering the closure of UNIOGBIS, the mission remains committed to exploring options to move the process ahead. I have been engaging with regional partners to ensure that the United Nations transition is fully supported by all stakeholders. Coordination with international partners, including with the group of five in Bissau and particularly with ECOWAS, continues. Additionally, tripartite coordination meetings between UNIOGBIS, ECOWAS and UNOWAS are being held to accompany the transition process and for supporting ECOWAS mediation efforts. A strengthened Resident Coordinator's Office is being envisioned, with adequate and dedicated capacity to continue supporting the protection and promotion of human rights in the country. Meanwhile, the first phase of UNIOGBIS staff separation was concluded in July. Further separations are planned for September and December. A residual number of 28 staff will remain, for mission closure and liquidation purposes, until 28 February 2021. A prognosis of the current impasse and beyond underscores the need for continued and _ robust engagement by the international community to avoid a deterioration of the political and human rights situation, consolidate past democratic gains and preserve the much-needed peace and stability. Entrenched postures and divisions among political stakeholders pose a serious threat to stability and sustainable development. All political forces must be encouraged to commit to constructive dialogue and consensus-building around national priorities. The military and security forces must consistently be reminded not to interfere in politics. Security-sector reform remains paramount, as the Conakry Agreement had highlighted. The military and security forces should become agents of change towards peace and stability. The implementation of key reforms, notably the constitutional review as well as the continuation of efforts in key peacebuilding priorities, namely, the protection and promotion of human rights and the rule of law, women's participation and gender parity and the fight against drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, are an imperative beyond UNIOGBIS. I would also recall that as included in the Conakry Agreement, the local elections are to be considered among the peacebuilding priorities. Accordingly, the continued role of the Peacebuilding Commission in maintaining - the international community's attention on Guinea-Bissau will be of utmost importance following the departure of UNIOGBIS. That will help ensure long-term sustainable support for the implementation of peacebuilding priorities that remain crucial. Allow me therefore to encourage Council members and international partners to extend additional financial contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund, in support of its catalytic role and the United Nations transition in Guinea-Bissau, to help shape the United Nations country team's footprint and enable it to continue supporting national efforts in implementing the Conakry Agreement. As UNIOGBIS advances towards its closure in less than five months, I would like to stress that the support provided by the international community to the 2019 electoral process was necessary but not sufficient to address the long-term political instability of Guinea-Bissau. Therefore, I wish to emphasize the need for the country to remain high on the international community's agenda, with paramount focus on reforms and the strengthening of State institutions. The recent political crisis linked to the electoral dispute is self-explanatory of the structural weaknesses of the country. The country and its people need the Council's support to uphold stability, sustain peace and advance socioeconomic development. UNOWAS will be required to play a greater good-offices role. More importantly, the Council's support for ECOWAS, in its role as lead mediator and in putting in place an effective monitoring mechanism for its decisions, will remain imperative. In conclusion, I would like to express my deep gratitude to the Security Council for its continued support for Guinea-Bissau in the face of the recurrent political crises. The people of Guinea-Bissau deserve a country with stable, transparent and independent State institutions that adhere to the principles of separation of power, accountability and the rule of law.
