Mr. Ngongi: It is both an honour and a pleasure
for me to come to the Security Council and have the
privilege of presenting the ninth report of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) (S/2001/970).

The report contains the Secretary-General's
recommendations for entry into the third phase of
MONUC's deployment in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well a concept of operations for the
approval of the Council. The third phase will involve
the total withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the disarmament, demobilization and
repatriation of non-signatory armed groups. In the
report now before the Council, the Secretary-General
proposes ways of approaching these difficult tasks.

Another area of concern is the continued military
occupation of Kisangani by the Rassemblement
Congolais pour la democratie (RCD). The Secretary-
General informed RCD leaders, during his meeting
with them in Kisangani on 3 September, that the
demilitarization of the town remained a priority issue,
both for the Security Council and for him personally.
MONUC has continued to press this matter in its
contacts with the RCD.

The Secretary-General's plan for the third phase
is to deploy MONUC personnel in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from a secure base
to be established in the town of Kindu, on the Congo
River. Initially, MONUC would deploy a force of some
400 men in Kindu, building up later to some 2,000. At
this point, it is envisaged to remain within the strength
of 5,537 authorized by the Security Council in its
resolution 1291 (2000).

The main objective of the Kindu deployment,
which would be robust enough to deter any potential
attackers, would be to establish a secure base from
which civilian personnel who deal with disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation (DDRR) and
human rights issues and provide humanitarian
assistance would be able to go into the area to carry out
their work.

During the initial stages of phase III, MONUC
and the parties will continue to work on plans for the
withdrawal of foreign forces and will gather the
information needed to undertake the voluntary
disarmament and demobilization of the armed groups.
It should be recalled that these groups did not sign the
Lusaka Agreement and that, so far, MONUC has had
no contact with their leaders. Their exact numbers,
their location, the quantity of armaments that they
possess and their intentions are not known with any
certainty. The armed groups have a violent history, and
some of them are still engaged in the continuing
fighting in the east. It will therefore be necessary to
approach them with great care.

It is intended that MONUC's presence and
activities will have a normalizing and stabilizing effect
on the situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have observed in many of
the places where MONUC is deployed that the
population increases as people return from taking
refuge in the bush. A very clear example of this is the
tenfold increase in the population of Mbandaka since
the deployment of the Senegalese battalion earlier this
year

MONUC will also continue assisting efforts to
open the Congo River, which is perhaps the single most
effective step that could be taken to restore peace
throughout the country; mitigate humanitarian distress,
including hunger; strengthen the territorial integrity of
the country; and promote the rebuilding of
communities disrupted by the conflict.

Before concluding my statement, I would like to
bring to the attention of the Council some recent
developments.
(spoke in French)

The elements that I would like to bring to the
Council's attention relate, first, to the inter-Congolese
dialogue; secondly, to the situation of the former
Rwandese combatants at Kamina; and, thirdly, to the
troubling situation in the north-eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As the Council knows, the inter-Congolese
dialogue began in Addis Ababa on 15 October, as
agreed at the preparatory meeting in Gaborone.
Unfortunately, because of insufficient resources, only
80 people took part in the Addis Ababa meeting,
instead of the 300 who were expected to do so. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
raised objections about the reduced number of
participants and refused to allow substantive issues to
be addressed. After several days, the governmental
delegation returned to the capital, Kinshasa. On 21
October, the neutral facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire,
announced that the dialogue would be postponed until a
later date. Following an invitation from the South
African Government, it is expected that the dialogue
will soon be resumed in South Africa.

With regard to the second issue, in my absence,
President Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo summoned my deputy in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to ask why MONUC had not yet begun the
technical work involved in interviewing the 3,000
individuals located at Kamina.

It should be noted that, after two attempts to carry
out its work, MONUC has been unable to begin such
practical tasks because of fears on the part of the
Government and the so-called leadership of the groups
of people located at Kamina that answering certain
questions about the identity and previous activities of
those individuals might put at risk the security of the
former combatants or of their family members.

It should be noted, however, that the questions
that MONUC would like to ask those individuals
already appear in the document adopted by the Political
Committee on 4 May in Lusaka. Fortunately, I am able
to say that, after making two reconnaissance trips,
MONUC has sent a technical team to Kamina, and I
hope that we will be in a position to begin that practical
work.

With regard to the third issue, I have received
some worrying information about the situation in the
north-eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. According to that information, Uganda and
Rwanda are in the process of reinforcing their military
presence in the area of Kanyabayongo, which is north
of Goma. With the agreement of the two parties
concerned, which has already been obtained, MONUC
will be sending a verification mission in the near
future.

I should like to conclude by thanking the Security
Council for the support that the Council has continued
to provide for MONUC.

