Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala welcomes China's initiative to hold this
important open debate, and we appreciate that Foreign
Minister Wang Yi has personally presided over it. We
are grateful for the concept note (S/2015/87, annex) that
was prepared for this meeting, which certainly invites
reflection. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement.

We are pleased to take part in this debate,
particularly as historical events linked to the creation of
the United Nations are being commemorated. Given the
loss of so many human lives in conflicts at the global
level and the new threats, it is timely for Member States
to ask ourselves whether we are realizing the founding
promise of the Organization to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We would like to
make the following comments in that regard.

First, Guatemala attaches the highest importance
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. This is not a mere listing of values and
general goals. It is the part of the founding instrument
of the Organization that justifies its existence and to
which we should refer to validate the interpretation of
its Articles and to reach a correct political assessment
of the actions taken by its Members. The purposes and
principles of the Charter also show that international
peace and security can be achieved not only through
measures of a political nature, such as diplomacy,
military means or legal measures designed to prevent,
reduce or eliminate conflict. In addition to those, we
must adopt measures to empower cooperative and
unifying relationships among States.

Secondly, we will not find the road to world
peace in the twenty-first century in the principles of
non-intervention and by invoking absolute sovereignty.
The concept note presents as opposing ideas interfering
only when peace and security are truly threatened, and
non-interference in internal affairs. Guatemala has
experienced both sides ofthe argument. Onthe one hand,
we strongly defend the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States. Nevertheless, we lived
through a 36-year internal armed conflict in which
mass atrocities were committed. That is why the
phrase "Never again!" is especially resonant for us.
The principles of sovereignty and non-intervention
should not be used as an excuse for non-compliance
with international obligations. Rather, Governments
have the responsibility to protect their own people. We
cannot forget that sovereignty equals responsibility.

Thirdly, maintaining international peace and
security also requires strengthening the sole global
body responsible for defending them. The Security
Council must respect and fulfil the purposes and
principles that should guide its work. The international
community needs and has the right to an effective
and efficient Security Council. All Members of this
Organization have given a mandate to this body to act
in our name. However, on a number of occasions - for
example, the inaction in Syria and on the question of
Palestine - the purposes and principles of the Charter
and its obligations to the international community have
been diminished.

At this time, when an agreement on proposed
reforms seems distant, the permanent members can act
boldly and make a commitment to the French proposal
to regulate the use of the veto in situations involving
mass atrocities. The use of the veto must be limited
because it has sometimes blocked the prevention or
resolution of conflicts, or even fostered impunity. The
five permanent members must always provide detailed
reasons and motivations behind the use of the veto. This
justification should respect the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Fourthly, in a world that is constantly changing,
and given the need for rapid and effective solutions,
we cannot lose sight of the notion of balance or the
value of that concept. Extreme positions have been
shown not to work effectively or efficiently to resolve
conflict. In many situations, they can create conflicts
that are larger than those they are trying to prevent. In
evaluating a potential course of action and its possible
consequences, two fundamental requirements must be
met. On the one hand, timely action is important; on the
other, a precautionary approach to the measures to be
implemented is also needed.

Guatemala, as a founding Member of the United
Nations and champion of democracy and the rule of
law, is committed to finding lasting solutions to the
scourge of the war. However, in order to ensure that
peace is lasting, we need action not only from the
Security Council, but from all the main organs of
the United Nations and from Member States to build
true multilateralism under equal conditions and in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

