Mr. Pahad (South Africa): Allow us to thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting the African Union
mediation mission to brief the Security Council once
again on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

On 28 March 2005, we informed the Security
Council about the efforts that the African Union (AU)
had undertaken to contribute to the peace process in
Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.5152). On that occasion, we
also informed the Council that the AU mediator,
President Mbeki, was to convene an important meeting
of the Ivorian leaders in Pretoria on 3 April 2005. We
are happy to report that the meeting took place as
scheduled, lasting for three days. Present at the
meeting were President Gbagbo, former President
Bedie, former Prime Minister Ouattara, Secretary-
General Soro of the Forces nouvelles and Prime
Minister Diarra. All of the principals were supported
by their senior leaders, advisers and officials.

The outcome of the three-day meeting was the
Pretoria Agreement, which the mediator has presented
to the Council, requesting that it be endorsed and
circulated as an official document of the Security
Council. Without a doubt, the Pretoria Agreement
represents new hope for the Ivorian people - who
have long been yearning for a return to peace and
stability in their country - and has brought a new
urgency to the implementation of previous
undertakings.

The Pretoria meeting was held in a very cordial
and relaxed atmosphere. President Mbeki chaired the
meeting and participated actively in the discussions. At
times, the Ivorian leaders used the opportunity to have
discussions among themselves on some of the long-
standing and contentious issues. That in itself was a
significant achievement, since these are parties that
have not had the opportunity to exchange views in a
long time.

Some of the key areas addressed by the Pretoria
Agreement include the following. First is the joint
declaration of the end of war, in which the Ivorian
parties that are signatories to the Agreement declare
their immediate and final cessation of all hostilities in
their country. Second is the disarmament and
dismantling of the militia throughout the country. Third
is the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of the armed formations, leading to the creation
of one army for the whole of Cote d'Ivoire. Fourth is
ensuring security in the area under the Forces
nouvelles. Fifth is the acceptance of a plan for the
security of the Forces nouvelles ministers of the
Government of National Reconciliation. Sixth, the
parties that are signatories further committed
themselves to making amendments to the composition,
organization and functioning of the Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure free, fair and
transparent elections by 31 October 2005. Here, we
must note that the parties requested the mediator to
seek the assistance of the United Nations in the
electoral process. Seventh, the agreement recognizes
the important role of the media - particularly the
Ivorian Radio and Television (RTI) - and agrees that
the programming of the radio and television stations
should cover the entire territory of Cote d'Ivoire.
Eighth, the meeting discussed the finalization of the
adoption of article 35 of the Ivorian Constitution. In
that regard, the mediator was asked to make a
determination on the matter after consulting with the
Chairperson of the African Union and with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Let me now briefly indicate some of the progress
that has been made since the signing of the Pretoria
Agreement.

With regard to the very important issue of article
35, the letter setting out the mediator's determination
on the article has also been presented to the Security
Council with a request from the mediator that its
contents also be endorsed and circulated as a document
of the Council. The essence of the determination is that
President Gbagbo would, after consulting with the
President of the National Assembly and the Ivorian
Constitutional Council, use article 48 of the
Constitution, which would allow the Constitutional
Council to accept the eligibility of the candidates who
would be presented by the political parties that were
signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. Once
the mediator communicated the determination to the
Ivorian leaders, President Gbagbo engaged the broader
Ivorian population in order to enlist their support for
the determination. President Mbeki agreed with that
approach.

President Gbagbo undertook a series of
consultations with, among others, youth groups, trade
unions, women's groups, traditional chiefs, members of
Parliament and the military with a view to discussing
the Pretoria Agreement and President Mbeki's
determination. That process was instructive in that it
provided a platform for the airing of different views -
something that can benefit the democratic process in
Cote d'Ivoire. The central message coming from all
those groups is that President Gbagbo should, in the
interests of peace, use article 48 to effect the
amendment of the Constitution as determined by the
mediator. It is expected that President Gbagbo will
make a statement on article 35 soon.

Regarding the issue of the DDR process, the
chiefs of staff of the National Armed Forces of Cote
d'Ivoire (FANCI) and of the Armed Forces of Forces
Nouvelles (FAFN) met on Thursday, 14 April 2005, as
agreed in the Pretoria Agreement. The Prime Minister
was accompanied by several ministers, who witnessed
the event. A communique was issued at the end of the
meeting of 16 April 2005 endorsing Pretoria's decision
to renew contact between the two sides as well as the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front line, and
setting 15 May as the date for the commencement of
the DDR process. The chiefs of staff have since held
several meetings - some in the north and others in the
south - to work out modalities for the implementation
of the commitments made at Bouake. The DDR
programme started with the removal of heavy weapons
from the front line, with effect from 21 April 2005. We
believe that that development - which in itself
symbolizes the beginning of the integration of the
country - has enjoyed widespread support from the
population and has generated new confidence in the
peace process.

As part of our contribution to the peace process,
the South African National Defence Force has invited
the chiefs of staff to Pretoria to share with them our
experience in the integration of armed forces. It is
hoped that that step will consolidate the developing
cooperation between the officers. The chiefs of staff,
accompanied by five senior members from each side,
arrived in Pretoria this morning and will begin their
discussions sometime today.

In relation to the amendments to legislation, the
Council of Ministers has started deliberations on the
amendments necessary to ensure that the laws adopted
comply with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and with
the determination of the mediator in that regard.

Concerning the issue of the participation of
Forces nouvelles ministers in the Government of
National Reconciliation, we are happy to note that an
increasing number of ministers from the Forces
nouvelles have returned to Abidjan to assume their
ministerial responsibilities, including attending
meetings of the Government of National
Reconciliation. The specialized unit of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), in
conjunction with the mediation, is working out
additional measures for Mr. Soro aimed at ensuring his
return to Abidjan so that he can take up his ministerial
responsibilities.

I now turn to the issue of training units to provide
close protection for ministers. In an attempt to
contribute to the resumption of the functioning of the
Government of National Reconciliation, the mediation
has, at its own cost, undertaken to train members of the
close protection units of all Forces nouvelles ministers.
That training will take place in South Africa over a
period of six weeks, starting on 2 May 2005. The
training programme will also be open to protectors
from the south, totalling approximately 135 personnel.
We believe it is important that UNOCI work out
modalities to complement that effort.

Regarding the role of the media, RTI has toned
down its negative reporting and has begun to broadcast
positive reports on the Pretoria Agreement and on its
implementation. It is hoped that the situation will
improve further once the amendments, as envisaged in
the Pretoria Agreement, have been completed. Efforts
are being made to procure technical equipment to
upgrade systems and to ensure coverage of the entire
country by RTI.

Let me now address the progress made with
regard to some of the requests that we would like to
present to the Security Council. There are two main
areas in which the Ivorian leaders have asked the
United Nations, through the Security Council, to
urgently assist them. Those areas cover elections and
security.

As we stated in our March presentation, any
situation of protracted conflict, such as that in Cote
d'Ivoire, invariably results in deep-seated mistrust
among the political players. The request for United
Nations assistance is informed by the need to ensure
confidence as the Ivorians take the final steps towards
the holding of elections in a peaceful and secure
environment. All the Ivorian parties are intent on
holding elections by 31 October 2005. The AU and the
mediator support that view and hope that the United
Nations will be ready to play its part in contributing to
such an outcome.

On the issue of elections, the Ivorian leadership
has, through the Pretoria Agreement, asked the
mediator to request the United Nations to establish an
impartial structure that would assist the Ivorians during
the entire electoral period. It is envisaged that such a
structure would assist the Ivorian Independent
Electoral Commission, as well as the Constitutional
Council, in the discharge of their functions, without
being part of the two structures.

In the context of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, the United Nations impartial structure
would also assist in the process of streamlining the
issuing of nationality documents and identity cards.
The structure, it is hoped, would be empowered to
assist both in the formulation and in the execution of
policies and plans for the elections. It would be set up
immediately and be required to intervene with the
relevant Ivorian authorities where necessary.

On the issue of security, the Ivorian leaders ask
for assistance in three areas that the mediator also
supports.

First, it is necessary to protect the Forces
nouvelles cantonment sites. The Security Council
would need to consider the deployment of a special
force under UNOCI to carry out that function. The
presence of such a force would contribute to building
confidence in the DDR process, which is critical to a
peaceful transition in Cote d'Ivoire.

Secondly, the Ivorians request - and the
mediator concurs - that assistance be made available
for the recruitment, training and deployment of a police
contingent of 600 personnel in the north, in order to
avoid a security vacuum once the Forces nouvelles
forces move into cantonment areas. It is envisaged in
the Pretoria Agreement that the 600 recruits would
undergo abridged training conducted by UNOCI. The
new recruits would be mentored by UNOCI and serve
under the guidance of the United Nations forces. Once
normal policing has been restored in the north, those
recruits would go back to the police and Gendarmerie
academy for further training.

Thirdly, the assistance of the United Nations is
sought with regard to the disarmament of the militias.
The United Nations has the needed expertise to assist
the Prime Minister in carrying out that objective.

Successful outcomes to those requests can be
achieved only if the United Nations and the
international community are ready to act decisively and
urgently in support of the developments by, first,
adjusting the mandate of UNOCI to cater for the
election supervision mechanism and to support the
disarmament of the militia; secondly, increasing the
capacity of UNOCI to carry out the additional tasks
emanating from the Pretoria Agreement; thirdly,
actively participating in the policing functions in the
north during the interim period; and fourthly, providing
adequate and immediate funding for the DDR process.
In conclusion, let me say that once again we
thank the Council for having afforded us the
opportunity to brief it on the peace process in Cote
d'Ivoire. As mediation, we are determined to ensure
that elections take place as agreed, and we implore the
Security Council to take the necessary decisions and
steps to realize that objective.

We are confident that, working together, we can
assist the Ivorian people as they search for an end to
the crisis prevailing in their country. The African
Union stands ready to act together with the Council to
ensure that we realize this outcome for the benefit of
the Ivorian people.

