Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I too want to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Aichatou Mindaoudou for her comprehensive briefing.
Since this is the last briefing on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in this Chamber,
I would like to take this opportunity to convey our
sincere appreciation to the mission's leadership and
personnel for their contribution. Ukraine prides itself
on playing an active role in UNOCI.

On 30 June, the UNOCI mandate will end on a
high note, signifying the successful completion of the
United Nations peacekeeping phase in Cote d'Ivoire.
Many efforts and resources have been invested in the
stabilization of the country. As we can see today, they
have produced encouraging results. The prospects
for Cote d'Ivoire appear promising. Significant

progress has been achieved in restoring State authority
throughout the country, rebuilding the security sector
and promoting national cohesion and reconciliation.

Moreover, we see a country that has been entrusted
by the entire United Nations membership to be in the
Security Council not as a country under its agenda, but
rather as an elected member. I therefore want to take
this opportunity to congratulate Minister Amon-Tanoh
on the successful outcome of Cote d'Ivoire's
campaign in the Security Council. Next month,
Cote d'Ivoire will also host a major international
event - the summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation - which is another sign of the trust and
respect of the international community.

Cote d'Ivoire is now at peace, but many chronic
problems still have to be addressed. That requires a
long-term action plan involving national actors, the
United Nations, the African Union and other relevant
stakeholders. The potential threats to national stability
should be no longer perceived solely in terms of hard
security, but rather in terms of socioeconomic impact.
The recent mutinies in the country therefore require the
country's leadership to redouble its efforts to turn peace
into concrete dividends for all its citizens. Ukraine is
committed to further supporting Cote d'Ivoire along
that road 4 both in the Council and beyond.

