Mr. Meece: It is my honour to appear before the
Council today in association with the second report
presented by the Secretary-General (S/20ll/20) since
the adoption of resolution 1925 (2010). I am pleased to
note progress in several significant areas of the
2

mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), but also note continuing
concerns and issues, particularly in regard to the
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as reflected in the Secretary-General's report.

(spoke in French)

Relations between MONUSCO and the
Congolese Government have seen continual
improvement, as confirmed to us by President Kabila
on the occasion of his meeting with the Deputy
Secretary-General and me in December 2010. The
Mission has thus been able to establish a very
constructive dialogue with civil and military
stakeholders at all levels of Government. One outcome
of this, among others, has been a strengthening of
cooperation in terms of military operational
cooperation, police training programmes, the approach
to stabilization programmes, and the joint assessment
process.

(spoke in English)

The ongoing joint assessment process
incorporates an active review of security conditions,
utilizing input from a variety of sources, including
non-governmental organizations and the United
Nations country team. Findings have validated the
MONUSCO presence and approach to security issues,
helping also to guide our future planning. There are no
recommendations arising to date from this exercise for
a change to the overall MONUSCO presence or its
general approach, although we will continue to make
specific adjustments in response to tactical and threat
conditions.

The protection of civilians clearly remains our
major priority and focus, driven particularly by the
operations of foreign and domestic armed groups in the
eastern portion of the country. These groups continue
to act as predatory forces, often incorporating the use
of rape or other violence as a weapon against civilians,
as recently took place, for example, in the Fizi area of
South Kivu, where 50 to 80 cases of sexual violence
perpetrated by the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (F DLR) were reported during the latter half
of January. MONUSCO continues to respond to these
incidents and to provide all possible support and
protection in this area.
11-2264]

Meanwhile, there have also been too many
reported cases of abuses committed by members of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the Congolese national police.
We have been working closely with Congolese
authorities to address those abuses, and I am
encouraged to note a significant increase in 2010 in the
number of arrests of Government soldiers and police
accused of such abuses. For example, a significant
number of rapes and other abuses were committed by
FARDC troops in the first days of January, also in the
Fizi area, resulting in at least 35 victims of sexual
violence. Following rapid intervention by Government
authorities and MONUSCO, 11 soldiers were arrested,
including their commanding officer and three other
officers. Such action is a welcome step towards ending
the impunity felt by too many for too long.

It is important to note, however, that there are
still significant weaknesses in the capacity of civilian
and military justice systems. MONUSCO has taken
action to bolster military prosecution capabilities with
the establishment of joint prosecution cells, thanks to
support provided by the Government of Canada and the
Peacebuilding Fund. But much greater efforts are
needed. I must also note that programmes to integrate
former members of armed groups create additional
problems. While such programmes are an essential
component of the efforts to address the problem of
independent Congolese armed groups, those
individuals integrated without adequate training tend
too often to be associated with reported abuses.

To address this issue and the great need for the
general professionalization of the security services of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1 strongly
support all efforts to increase to a sufficient level the
amount of training provided to the FARDC. I would
also wish to underscore the importance of increasing
the capabilities of the Congolese national police. While
MONUSCO initiated in September a long-term training
programme for newly integrated police, with financial
support from the Japan International Cooperation
Agency, much more is needed.

The fundamental cause of continuing violence in
the East, of course, rests with the presence and activity
of remaining armed groups. Of these, the Rwandan
FDLR continues to retain the greatest military capacity,
operating primarily in North and South Kivu provinces.
I can report, however, some hopeful signs in the long-
11-22641
standing effort directed against this derivative of the
former Rwandan Army and Interahamwe forces.

Actions taken in Europe against key FDLR
political leaders have clearly had a demoralizing
impact on forces on the ground, which, along with new
Security Council sanctions targeting key F DLR leaders
and more active MONUSCO operations undertaken in
collaboration with the FARDC, have increased pressure
on FDLR and other forces in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Consequently, we have seen
internal FDLR strains and operational problems, and
some increase in the number of more senior officers
who have presented themselves for repatriation.

It is certainly premature to assert that the FDLR
is collapsing, but the group's capacity is diminishing
and under strain. In fact, for the first time in my
experience in the region, I believe that the outlines can
be seen of an eventual resolution of this long-standing
threat to the population of the region. We are not at the
point of success, but there has been clear progress. I
consider it vitally important that the political and
military pressure be maintained to the maximum extent
possible in order to build on this encouraging trend.

Other foreign groups obviously also remain a
significant problem. Notably, the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) is still a major threat, with its brutal
tactics and operations. While the numbers of LRA
fighters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
limited, they operate in very remote areas, and the
cross-border regional dimension renders control
difficult. Efforts continue to increase regional
cooperation, including the establishment in late 2010
of the joint intelligence and operations centre in
Dungu, Orientale province. LRA leader Joseph Kony
has reportedly remained outside the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in recent months, and in my
view, as the key to the LRA as an organization, he
should remain a focus of attention, as a complement to
our and others' ongoing civilian protection efforts.

I would also note that the unfolding situation in
South Sudan in the aftermath of the referendum also
bears careful monitoring regarding possible
opportunities for the LRA and, indeed, the general
security environment in the region. We have been in
consultation with Congolese Government officials
regarding these issues, and have also initiated
contingency planning based on possible scenarios.
3
In recent months, MONSUCO has maintained a
substantially increased level of operations relative to
the threat of armed groups in the East. A variety of
models have been employed, including unilateral
MONUSCO operations and those conducted in
conjunction with related FARDC operations. All,
however, are planned and conducted in full cooperation
with the FARDC and Congolese Government
authorities. I am pleased with how this collaboration
has continued to develop, and I believe that this
approach, while not free of problems, has been
effective, as evidenced in reduced operational
opportunities for armed groups and in pressure to
encourage disarmament and repatriation or
reintegration actions.

All support to the FARDC is, of course,
undertaken in compliance with the conditionality
policy in support of strict standards in observance of
human rights. I am absolutely convinced that this more
active military posture is a necessary component to
achieve the conditions of long-term security that are
the shared goal of MONUSCO and the Congolese
Government.

I am obliged, however, to note resource concerns.
A shortage of military helicopters imposes significant
constraints on operations. The decision of the Indian
Government to extend the use of existing combat
helicopters until July is most welcome and provides
needed breathing room, but we are still facing serious
shortfalls that are projected to increase absent new
timely contributions. To the somewhat limited extent
that these shortfalls can be mitigated through increased
use of civilian helicopters, this also increases strains on
our already very stretched budget, and I am also very
concerned about this.

I would also note that we have been moving
ahead actively with a variety of initiatives to provide
increased protection against imminent threats, as was
outlined to the Council last year. These include the
establishment of community alert networks, the
augmentation of the number of community liaison
interpreters, the utilization of cell phones with pre-set
contact numbers and of UHF radios, and other actions.
I will not claim that all these efforts will achieve
perfect results. I believe, however, that we have made
significant progress in identifying risks and responding
swiftly to cases of violence, and we will continue to
actively review all operations and initiatives in order to
continue to be as effective as possible in this priority
area.

I would also like to note movement to deal with
the illegal exploitation and trade in conflict minerals
supporting armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition to the Congolese
national efforts, including the ongoing establishment of
five trading centres supported by MONUSCO and
several other United Nations agencies, and the
initiatives undertaken in the United Sates and Europe
to control international commerce, an important
regional summit was conducted in Lusaka in December
to address this issue. That summit, with the full
participation of President Kabila and many other
regional leaders, represented an important step
forward. I strongly hope that this momentum at all
levels - national, regional and international - can be
maintained.

As a critical component of the long-term
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would also like to emphasize that good progress has
been made towards the conduct of national elections
this year. While their conduct is obviously challenging,
preparations for general elections have moved forward.
I believe that the importance of the need for
transparent and open conditions to ensure successful
democratic elections is very clear, as is the key
importance of such elections to Congo's continuing
stability. MONUSCO has been actively providing
needed logistical support, with over 2,600 tons of
election-related material transported to date to 190
hubs and sub-hubs. Progress towards ensuring overall
financing of the Congolese election budget also has
been satisfactory.

I must note my concern, however, about
MONUSCO budget levels, as it is not yet clear that we
will have needed funds in the 2011/2012 budget cycle
to ensure the necessary logistical support we are
uniquely positioned to provide. If we face MONUSCO
budget shortfalls, we will be obliged to utilize funds
from other parts of the Mission's budget, potentially
with quite significant negative impact on other
important operations. We are engaged in active
discussions regarding these vitally important questions.
A failure to conduct credible elections would, of
course, represent a major setback to the very
significant progress achieved over many years in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
11-2264]
Finally, I would like to underscore that I believe
we are making important headway in implementing the
overall stabilization agenda, and I would note some
important initiatives in the western Democratic
Republic of the Congo in furtherance of that goal. A
draft integrated peace consolidation programme has
been prepared with the United Nations country team
and international partners, and has been well received
by Congolese Government authorities. In a related
step, in MONUSCO we are moving ahead with an
innovative pilot programme to replace several
traditional head-of-office positions in the western
Democratic Republic of the Congo with area-
coordinator positions drawn from United Nations
agencies. We believe that this step should enhance our
ability to deliver effective results and improve
coordination within the United Nations family,
consistent with a one United Nations approach.

(spoke in French)

Before I conclude, I should like to express my
most sincere gratitude to all the staff of MONUSCO
and United Nations agencies in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who are working tirelessly to
establish lasting stability in the country and to ensure a
better future for the Congolese people.

(spoke in English)

With this support, and while cognizant of the ongoing
challenges and difficulties, I remain optimistic that,
with sustained engagement and support, we are on a
path towards achieving the kind of security and stable
conditions that the people of the Congo and region
richly deserve. I thank the members of the Council for
their attention and continuing support of our Mission.

