Mr. Apakan: I would like to thank the President
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
Ukraine.

A period of relative quiet started on 1 September
and lasted for six weeks, which proved that tranquillity
is possible if all sides exercise maximum restraint.
The ceasefire has largely held, which has brought
about some positive changes for the local population.
However, violations have been concentrated around
several hotspots in the Donetsk region; their number
has also increased in past weeks. Some 70 to 90 per
cent of them are taking place in such locations as
Pisky, Spartak and Horlivka. There, days of intense
localized fighting alternate with days of relative calm.
Ceasefire violations do not seem to reflect the intention
to undertake a military expansion, but they lead to the
return of fire and to armed exchanges, which in turn
leads to a further erosion of trust.

Ceasefire violations can be attributed to both sides,
and mostly involve small arms and light weapons.
However, I should note that proscribed heavy weapons
are still being used. The Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) has reported publicly on that point.
This unpredictable situation presents an obstacle
to a political settlement and normalization. Only a
comprehensive ceasefire along the long line of contact
can lead to trust. It is the basic requirement for peace.
Another important issue is the widespread presence of
mines and unexploded ordnance in the conflict zone.
In that regard, action needs to be taken as a matter of
urgency. The Minsk agreements clearly stipulate the
responsibility of the parties in that matter.

In addition, the humanitarian situation remains a
matter of concern. Access to water, heat and medical
care are urgent problems in many areas. Long
lines at checkpoints expose people to the dangers
of mines and shelling. I wish to reiterate that this
affects people remaining in the vicinity of the line of
contact, especially the elderly, children and internally
displaced. We are monitoring the situation and, in that
respect, we are cooperating closely with the United
Nations and its specialized agencies. We are grateful
to them for their cooperation. I should also mention
that we are cooperating with Ukrainian institutions on
humanitarian issues, and we are also grateful to them.

The Minsk agreements stipulate that the Special
Monitoring Mission should facilitate and monitor the
withdrawal of heavy weapons. That is one focus of our
work. I coordinate the Working Group on Security.
In that context, we also cooperate closely with the
Trilateral Contact Group and other working groups on
political, economic and humanitarian issues.

On 29 September, the Working Group on Security
reached agreement on an addendum concerning the
withdrawal of tanks and certain weapons. The process
of implementing that arrangement has worked to a
large extent, with the withdrawal schedule having been
mostly observed. However, we are still encountering a
number of challenges, shortcomings and discrepancies.
We ask the parties to adhere to the agreements in letter
and spirit. We have also encountered challenges with
regard to the withdrawal of heavy weapons, which
should have been completed in February.

On 16 October, we informed the parties ofa stricter
verification regime. However, substantial progress
since then towards the full withdrawal of heavy
weapons cannot be reported, although I acknowledge
that the signatories have begun to cooperate.

Another aspect of our work in the Working Group
on Security is mine action. To that end, the Special
Monitoring Mission is working towards an agreement
on a set of universal principles. At the nineteenth
meeting ofthe Working Group, participants also agreed
on the prioritization of mine clearance in five areas
related to power, water and railways in the region, but
more progress must be made to agree on a list of 12
priority areas for demining before the end of the year.

The Special Monitoring Mission remains a sensitive
mission in a conflict zone. The main aim of our mandate
is the stabilization and normalization of Ukraine. The
Mission continues to expand geographically in terms of
numbers and the use of technology. We now have 650
monitors from 44 participating States on the ground,
and will expand by eight monitors by March. We
continue to open new bases to increase our presence in
the conflict zone. Just two days ago, we opened a new
permanent presence in Horlivka and Debaltseve, two
areas right on the contact line, and we will open more.
The Special Monitoring Mission is playing its part in
the de-escalation on the ground. We have been present
even under the most difficult circumstances and have
facilitated and negotiated many local ceasefires. We
have undertaken vital consultations to allow for critical
infrastructure and utility repair work and will continue
to do so. Freedom of movement for the Mission is
also important for the verification process. Denials
of access still occur, in particular in some parts of the
Volta region. We need continued political support to
address that problem.

I would now like to look ahead and outline the
main priorities for the upcoming period. First, the
ceasefire needs to be kept by both sides and must be
consolidated. Secondly, we are continuing to work on
reaching consensus on the principles of mine action.
Thirdly, heavy weapons need to be withdrawn; the
sides already have a standing agreement on that issue.
Fourthly, we must continue our work on the ground to
facilitate the repair of critically needed infrastructure.
Fifthly, if the situation on the ground allows, we stand
ready to support the implementation of an eventual
political settlement and will play our role in line with
our mandate.

In conclusion, all activities by the Special
Monitoring Mission are guided by the aim of achieving
normalization and stabilization in Ukraine. As
our numbers expand, those efforts will be further
strengthened. But the political will for a full ceasefire
and a political solution and peace must come from both
sides. The next set of steps is clear and has been agreed
in the Minsk documents. The Mission will continue to
support the implementation of those provisions, in line
with its mandate and with objectivity and impartiality.

