Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and la Francophonie of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2089 (2013), which France
submitted to the Council. The resolution complements
the Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region, signed 24 February, and creates a link between
the commitments of the countries of the region and
the situation on the ground in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The content of the
resolution reflects the recommendations set forth by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2013/119) and
addresses the expectations of the States and regional
organizations of the region.

At the political level, the resolution recalls
the necessity for the signatories to the Framework
agreement to implement the commitments that they
have undertaken. It appoints the new Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, Mary Robinson. France
commends her appointment and calls upon her and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to keep the Security Council informed of the status
of the implementation of the Framework agreement.
The Security Council underlines that, in case of any
violation of the commitments, it will be prepared to
take the necessary measures.

With respect to the situation on the ground, the
resolution sets out measures to reduce the threat posed
by armed groups to civilians. It allows, for the first time,
for the deployment of an Intervention Brigade with an
offensive mandate in order to prevent the armed groups
from expanding and to neutralize and disarm them with
a view to finally bringing about a stabilization of the
situation in eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The resolution also clarifies that MONUSCO
is effectively charged with monitoring the eastern
border of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those
tasks do not change, however, the core of MONUSCO's
mandate, which remains above all a peacekeeping
operation tasked primarily with protecting civilians, a
concern that affects all of the text's provisions.

With respect to the Intervention Brigade's
activities, the resolution stresses that MONUSCO must
seek to contain the threat to civilians before, during
and after all military operations. It will also continue
to guarantee respect for human rights, as that is still at
the core of its mandate. The Intervention Brigade will
necessarily work in full compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law and respect
United Nations human rights policy.

MONUSCO can also help stabilize the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by arresting
those who commit atrocities against civilians and who
are wanted, in particular by international criminal
justice bodies. That is why this new mandate now asks
MONUSCO to support - and, more importantly, work
with - the Congolese authorities and the International
Criminal Court to arrest those criminals.

