Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Ijoin others in
thanking you, Sir, for scheduling today's debate on the
situation in Afghanistan in the context of the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to
congratulate you on your assumptio of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.

Looking ahead at the timelines for the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
and the elections in Afghanistan, it is important that
the commitments flowing from the major international
conferences in Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo, and at the
regional level in Istanbul and Kabul, for peace, security
and development in Afghanistan be implemented in
word and deed. They are also essential for creating
an enabling environment for Afghanistan's fiscal
sustainability and self-reliance.

It is particularly worrying that the overall security
situation remains volatile in the country amidst the
ongoing simultaneous security, political and economic
transitions. Even after over a decade of ISAF's
presence and the concerted efforts of the international
community, Afghanistan continues to face an
existential threat from terrorism. We have yet to isolate
and root out the syndicate of terrorism, which includes
elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba
and other terrorist and extremist groups that operate
with impunity from safe havens across Afghanistan's
borders. As NATO draws down from Afghanistan,
claiming "mission nearly accomplished", there is no
sign, judging by the latest acts ofterrorism and violence,
ofa similar drawdown on the part of the terrorist outfits
across the border. Whatever happens in Afghanistan, it
has affected and will continue to affect security in our
region and the world. We have not forgotten the terrorist
havens that wreaked havoc as Afghanistan descended
into chaos in the 1990s. Obviously, we do not want that
to happen again.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2013/ 133) rightly
notes that Afghanistan will be able to achieve the
stability, growth and prosperity that its people aspire
to and deserve only if there is peace. As Afghanistan
looks forward to holding presidential and provincial
elections in April 2014, we need to bear in mind that
short-sighted approaches and quick-fixes guided by
political expediency could be a recipe for unmitigated
disaster. It is therefore imperative that any political
settlement be driven by Afghans in order to be accepted
by all sections of Afghan society without jeopardizing
the hard-won gains of the past 10 years.

A steady focus on the elections and constitutionalism
would vindicate the 2004 Constitution - which has
been most widely debated, yet enjoys the maximum
consensus to date * consolidate democracy,
institutionalize the elections and provide the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan with the legitimacy and
political and moral strength to negotiate with the
Taliban, the advocates of an Islamic emirate and the
international community from a position of strength
and guarantee the post-2001 gains for younger
and older generations of Afghans. For that reason,
internationally accepted red lines must be respected
in any reconciliation model to be considered. So, too,
actions in support of the political transition should not
undermine Afghan institutions of governance. We will
need a credible Government after 2014 as well.

Most of all, we have yet to see any evidence
to support the notion of a dividing line separating
Al-Qaida from other terrorist and extremist groups,
nor is it clear, indeed, that those groups and those who
support them have either had an epiphany or made a
strategic reassessment of their objectives. To us, it
makes little sense to draw lines of distinction that most
of those groups and their sponsors are not prepared to
accept themselves, either in word or deed.

India remains engaged with like-minded countries
in sharing the goal of peace, security and development
in Afghanistan. In pursuit of that, India has held
dialogues with the United States and Afghanistan in
New Delhi, and with China and Russia in Moscow in
February.

We firmly belief that Afghan ownership and
leadership is critical for cementing the foundations
of lasting peace and stability in the country. The
Afghan people should be able to choose their destiny
in an environment free from coercion and outside
interference. Security is the key ingredient for
accelerated socioeconomic development, which could
also be a catalyst for strengthening the voices of
moderation and tolerance in Afghan society. India has
taken a number of initiatives in that regard.

The Delhi Investment Summit on Afghanistan, held
in June 2012, was an important endeavour in focusing
regional and international attention on investing in
Afghanistan and on the potential to promote economic
development and stability in Afghanistan during the
transition period.

India has also launched initiatives to promote
bilateral trade and investment in Afghanistan, including
measures such as the elimination of baseline customs
duties on virtually all imports from Afghanistan and
investment in the Hajigak iron ore reserves.

Enhanced regional cooperation and regional
integration are imperative for bringing in much
needed foreign investments to Afghanistan, ensuring
its economic viability and spurring economic growth.
Conscious of that imperative need, India has taken the
lead in the commercial confidence-building measures
under the Istanbul Process. Within South Asia, the
South Asian Regional Cooperation programme remains
an important vehicle for strengthening regional
cooperation.

Afghanistan is strategically located as a land bridge
linking South Asia with Central Asia and the Middle
East, and is an important conduit for tapping into the
vast energy resources of Central Asia. Projects such as
the TAPI gas pipeline would benefit all of us and have
the potential to usher in a rapid transformation of our
region.

Afghanistan and India are natural strategic partners
by virtue of geography and a common vision of peace
and cooperation in the region. India remains committed
to supporting Afghanistan during the crucial period
of transition until the end of 2014 and thereafter. The
implementation of the strategic partnership agreement
of October 2011 between our two countries has already
been set in motion, with the convening of the first
meeting of the Partnership Council last year.

India is assisting as best as it can in Afghanistan's
reconstruction and development. India has pledged
up to $2 billion in development and humanitarian
assistance. The projects under consideration are in line
with the projects suggested under the national priority
programmes of the Government of Afghanistan. The
pace and nature of the utilization of the present and
future Indian assistance is being determined by the
preference, comfort level and absorptive capacity of the
Afghan Government.

Afghanistan needs assistance and support to build
its capacity to help it overcome the toll that three
decades of externally inflicted conflict have imposed
on it. India has been assisting Afghanistan in rebuilding
the foundations of its society through scholarships for
its young and training programmes that seek to help
its democratic institutions brace for the multiplicity of
challenges that it faces.

India remains unwavering in its commitment to
assisting the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour
to build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation. As we approach critical timelines for transition
in the near future, the international community must
continue to work with renewed vigour and unity of
purpose towards strengthening the efforts of the Afghan
Government in seeking solutions that are inclusive and
led by the Afghan people themselves.

We believe that the United Nations has a central role
to play in the coordination of international assistance.
There is no substitute for the coordinating role of the
United Nations in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
We appreciate the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General J an Kubis and the good work
done by UNAMA; it must continue to work in close
consultation with the Afghan Government.

