Mr. Sajdik (Austria): At the outset, let me thank
the Jordanian presidency for convening today's open
debate.

We are currently witnessing a dramatic rise of
radicalization and extremism in the name of religion,
particularly in the Middle East and North Africa.
However, violent extremism is not the challenge of
one region alone; it exists everywhere. As Austrian
Foreign Minister Sebastian Kurz stated in the Security
Council on 27 March (see S/PV.7419), it is a dangerous
development that young women and men seem to be the
targets of radicalization by terrorist groups.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
who travel to conflict areas such as Iraq and Syria
constitutes a new security threat. At a time when the
youth population worldwide has reached an all-time
record, extremist groups are globally recruiting ever-
younger foreign fighters, often by using social media.
Young people are attracted to extremist ideologies
because of their marginalization in society. Poverty
and limited educational and employment opportunities
create discontent. Often, young people are also not
heard by decision-makers, and their self-organization in
community-based associations and groups is met with
suspicion. Wherever young people are marginalized,
this is also the result of failed politics.

Today's debate highlights the need for the
international community to redouble its efforts to
counter the recruitment of young people by extremists.
Allow me to make some suggestions on what needs to be
done. We have to continue to support efforts to address
the underlying factors leading to the radicalization of
youth. We need to ensure that all young people have
access to quality education and job opportunities. From
early on, young people need to understand the intrinsic
value of diversity as a factor for the enrichment of
society. Young people need to learn about their human
rights and the human rights of others.

Young people need to know that they have the right
to participate in decision-making processes within
society, and they need to be encouraged to do so. Many
of the freedoms that young people are enjoying today
are being taken for granted. However, we need to
convey the message to young people that the freedom
they are enjoying today is the result of a long and often
arduous process and that they also have a responsibility
to promote freedom as a core value of our society. When
lacking prospects, young people may risk turning to
extremism. We therefore have to show them that they
are an integral part of society by offering them ways of
participation, such as voluntary work.

We need to use innovative mechanisms to reach
young people, using the Internet and social media to
counter messages of hatred with messages of hope. We
need to support civil society organizations in creating
the space for learning opportunities for youth. Civic
engagement, such as volunteering, yields life-long
benefits and strengthens self-worth and resilience
tow extremist ideologies. Religious leaders play an
important role in promoting respect and tolerance
and should therefore be involved in the preparation
of effective prevention campaigns. Equally, we must
strengthen partnerships with the private sector. In order
to thrive, companies need an educated work force.
Public-private partnerships, such as the apprenticeship
programmes we have been employing in Austria, yield
good results both for companies and young people
themselves.

Intercultural dialogue contributes to global trust-
building, supports mutual understanding and promotes
pluralism in our society. Austria actively participates
in the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and
supports its further development. In that regard, I would
like to take the opportunity to thank the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, the Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly for organizing
the important high-level thematic debate on promoting
tolerance and reconciliation that took place earlier this
week.

Austria is taking action to intensify the international
cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts, especially in
the West Balkans. In mid-March, we adopted an action
plan to confront jihadism together with all West Balkans
countries. It includes, for example, closer cooperation
among law enforcement authorities, enhanced border
security and joint efforts to remove terrorist content
from the Internet. Our ultimate goal must be to prevent
a new generation of terrorists from emerging.

We are very concerned about the use of foreign
fighters by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations and
the risks that these foreign fighters may pose upon their
return. We are committed to ensuring the swift and
full implementation of Security Council resolutions
on all measures against extremism and terrorism,
especially resolution 2170 (2014), calling on Member
States to suppress the flow of foreign fighters, as well
as financing and support to Islamist extremist groups
in Iraq and Syria.

As President of the Economic and Social Council,
I have been fortunate to preside over the 2014 and 2015
Youth Forums. The Youth Forum attracts more than 5 00
young people to engage in dialogue among themselves
and with Member States on their priorities and their
vision for the future. This year, young people focused
on ways to participate more in shaping their countries'
development strategies and become active participants
in bringing justice and peace to their communities.
We need to listen to them and take their Views into
account when developing strategies to counter violent
extremism. The Economic and Social Council will
continue providing this platform for youth from around
the world to advance solutions to the challenges they
and their societies face. In that context, I commend
all the tireless efforts undertaken by the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth, Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi.

