Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Since
the peace negotiations ended in April, the situation has
deteriorated and we are dealing with two threats. On the
one hand, the essential two-State solution is on its way
to becoming a mirage. The ongoing illegal settlements
undermine the viability of a Palestinian State on the
ground. In Israel as in Palestine, public opinion has
become radicalized. On the other hand, the cycles of
violence are accelerating from Gaza to the West Bank
viaJerusalem. Conditions are coming together for a
widespread conflagration.

We know the heart of the problem - the absence
of political prospects that respond to the legitimate
demands and needs of both peoples, Israeli and
Palestinian: for the Palestinians, the aspiration to a
sovereign and independent State; for the Israelis, the
guarantee of lasting security. These two legitimate
claims can be resolved only ifthere is movement towards
the well-known solution of a division of territory that
allows for the emergence of two States for two peoples.

France believes in the possibility ofa definitive and
just settlement for the parties. We must give ourselves
the means to achieve it. Those means are collective.
Each successive failure in negotiations over the past
20 years reminds us that the peace process as we have
practiced it must evolve. The parties cannot, largely
for domestic reasons, take on their own the difficult
decisions required to conclude negotiations. The
United States cannot bear the burden alone for seeking
this difficult peace. After more than 25 years of
negotiations, the international community must share
the burden of those negotiations and assume its portion
of the political and historical responsibility.

France is determined to promote the emergence ofa
method that enables closer support for the negotiations
on the part of the relevant international partners,
complementing and supporting the major role played
by Washington, DC, including the European Union,
the League of Arab States and permanent members of
the Council. This collective effort must be based on
the unquestionable foundation that only the Security
Council can offer to lend credibility to the negotiations.
It is incumbent upon us to identify the internationally
recognized parameters for the negotiations and the
settlement of the conflict leading to the satisfaction
of the various claims. That is what the Council and its
members were called upon today to do in fully assuming
their responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

It is from that perspective that we have consistently
called upon the Council to act in order to establish a
credible basis for peace. France wanted to offer, in the
form of a draft resolution, a constructive, reasonable
and consensual alternative for the initial Palestinian
text so that the Security Council can become a positive
actor in the conflict and not the theatre of protestations,
theoretical declarations and successive vetoes.

In reponse to this positive and good-faith approach,
unfortunately no credible negotiation has yet been
engaged, despite the fact that the deterioration of the
situation on the ground demands immediate action.
Moved by the urgent need to act, by the profound
necessity of an adjustment in method, and by the
responsibility incumbent on each member of the
Security Council, we therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Jordan. That does not
mean that the text is ideal. We have reservations on
some of the terminology, as well as on the way the draft
resolution was submitted.

We would have preferred and continue to hope
for a consensual approach to unite all members of the
Council around the clear and well-known vision of an
independent, sovereign and democratic Palestinian
State living in peace and security side by side with
Israel, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. If
the terms of a just solution for Palestinian refugees
and the details of security arrangements, including the
withdrawal of Israeli forces, are part of the agreement
to be concluded between the parties, we can and must
collectively establish the broad parameters of the
negotiations. We also need to set a clear timetable for
their conclusion, because negotiations that never come
to an end can enjoy no credibility. The French proposal
allows just that.

France regrets that it was not possible today to
reach a consensus on these points, which should unite
the international community. But our efforts must not
stop there; our responsibility is to try again before it is
too late. France will therefore pursue its action.

