The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1999/623,
S/1999/635 and S/1999/654, letters dated 21 May and 2 and
4 June 1999, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting,
respectively, a Peace Agreement on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, signed at Sirte, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya; a joint communique issued by the Government
of Uganda and a delegation from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and a joint communique issued by the
Government of Uganda after the conclusion of a
mini-summit in Dar-es-Salaam; and S/1999/683, letter dated
9 June 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a statement on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo issued on 2 June 1999
by the Presidency of the European Union.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statements of
its President of 31 August 1998 (S/PRST/ 1998/26) and
11 December 1998 (S/PRST/ 1998/36). It reaffirms its
resolution 1234 (1999) of 9 April 1999
(S/RES/ 1234/1999) on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and calls on all parties to
comply with this resolution. It expresses its continued
concern at the continuing conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to preserving the national unity, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and all other States in the
region. It further reaffirms its support for the regional

mediation process facilitated by the President of the
Republic of Zambia on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community in cooperation
with the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
with support from the United Nations to find a
peaceful settlement to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council takes note of the
constructive efforts being made to promote a
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the context of
the above-mentioned regional mediation process,
including the meeting and agreement signed at Sirte
on 18 April 1999. It calls on all parties to
demonstrate commitment to the peace process and to
participate with a constructive and flexible spirit in
the forthcoming summit in Lusaka scheduled for 26
June 1999. In this context, the Council calls on the
parties immediately to sign a ceasefire agreement
which includes the appropriate modalities and
mechanisms for its implementation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its readiness to
consider the active involvement of the United
Nations, in coordination with the OAU, including
through concrete sustainable and effective measures,
to assist in the implementation of an effective
ceasefire agreement and in an agreed process for
political settlement of the conflict.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need for
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
permit the economic reconstruction of the country,
so as to enhance development and foster national
reconciliation.

"The Security Council stresses the need for a
continuing process of genuine national reconciliation
and democratization in all States of the Great Lakes
region. It reaffirms the importance of holding, at the
appropriate time, an international conference on
security, stability and development for the Great
Lakes region and encourages the international
community to help facilitate such a conference.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation and full support for the continuing
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy for the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
 

"The Security Council will remain actively seized
of the matter,"

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/l7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda,

The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.
