Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, permit me to thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for the holding of this public debate on a
topic of particular importance to my delegation. We are
confident that your dedication and leadership will
ensure that our deliberations today will have concrete
results that will optimize the Council's work. We also
highlight the Secretary-General's presence at this
debate, which clearly shows the Organization's
commitment to promoting the effectiveness and
efficiency of the Security Council. In addition, I wish
to acknowledge the efforts of the Small Five group, in
particular Ambassador Urbina and the delegation of
Costa Rica, to promote this debate.

The Security Council's working methods are not
an end in themselves, but one of the ways to ensure
that the Council fulfils, as efficiently and effectively as
possible, the obligations and responsibilities entrusted
to it by the Charter of the United Nations.

Before making a few specific comments, we
believe we should point out that the Security Council,
because it is an organ whose membership is limited,
will always have a problem of representativity. What is
more, today it is generally accepted that the Council
does not reflect current socio-political realities. That
lack of representativity means that the Council's
working methods must be aimed at, inter alia,
correcting that deficiency to the extent possible.

From that perspective, we shall analyse a number
of the topics that, concerning the implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507), have been presented in the current
presidency's concept paper (S/2008/528) and that we
believe to be of particular importance.

With regard to the holding of Council meetings, it
is important to note that article 48 of the provisional
rules of procedure states that the Security Council,
unless it decides otherwise, should meet in public. In
Panama's opinion, unless there are important reasons
justifying the opposite, all Member States should be
allowed unconditional access to Council meetings.
That alone would contribute significantly to the
transparency of the Council's work, its interaction with
Member States and, hence, its effectiveness. Likewise,
it is vital that the Secretariat's reports be disseminated
to all Member States in a timely manner.

Furthermore, the Council's effectiveness depends
on the appropriateness of its decisions and on their due
implementation. To that end, it is particularly important
that the Council take its decisions after it has become
thoroughly familiar with the relevant situations and
their consequences. In order to gain such a level of
understanding, it is necessary to know and understand
the views of each and every country that could be
affected by the Council's decisions. Such Council
consultations should be broadened to permit greater
participation in the Council's deliberations by persons
or groups other than Member States. In addition, such
consultations should be held as often as required. In
particular, however, they should be held sufficiently in
advance so that they can achieve the desired goal of
informing the Council's decisions.

In that context, it should be pointed out that the
adoption of the mechanism known as the Arria
Formula meeting was a significant step forward in the
process of enhancing the transparency of the Council's
work. The Arria Formula must now be formalized and
broadened with a view to greater participation. That
principle applies both to the Council and to its
subsidiary bodies. In that connection, Panama wishes
to reaffirm its support for the practice of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict of inviting to
its meetings countries affected by its decisions, as an
example to be followed by all subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council. We believe that that practice has
particular relevance for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee as a subsidiary body.

Finally, Panama would like to reiterate that the
thematic debates of the Security Council should be
aimed principally at discussing matters under the
Council's consideration and informing the Council as
to the positions of Member States in that regard, and
that such debates should not serve as a way for
Member States to air their views on general issues.
There are other, more appropriate forums for that
purpose, in particular the General Assembly.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate our
position that the Security Council's working methods
are not an end in themselves, but one of the ways to
ensure that the Council can carry out the duties and
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter.

