The Secretary-General: I thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
briefing, which reflects a recognition of the importance
of tackling corruption as part of our efforts to maintain
international peace and security.

Corruption is present in all countries, rich and poor,
North and South, developed and developing. Numbers
show the startling scope of the challenge. The World
Economic Forum estimates that the cost of corruption
is at least $2.6 trillion, or 5 per cent, of global gross
domestic product. According to the World Bank,
businesses and individuals pay more than $1 trillion in
bribes each year.

Corruption robs schools, hospitals and others
of vitally needed funds. It rots institutions, as public
officials enrich themselves or turn a blind eye to
criminality. It deprives people of their rights, drives
away foreign investment and despoils the environment.
Corruption breeds disillusion with Government
and governance and is often at the root of political
dysfunction and societal disunity. The poor and
vulnerable suffer disproportionately, and impunity
compounds the problem.

Corruption can be a trigger for conflict. As conflict
rages, corruption prospers. Even if conflict ebbs,
corruption can impede recovery. Corruption drives
and thrives on the breakdown of political and social
institutions. Those institutions are never more in crisis
than in times of conflict. Corruption is linked to many
forms of instability and violence, such as the illicit
trafficking in arms, drugs and people.

The connections among corruption, terrorism and
violent extremism have been repeatedly recognized by
the Security Council and the General Assembly. Assets
stolen through corruption can be used to finance further
crimes, including violent extremist and terrorist acts.

Large-scale corruption surveys conducted by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime found that
bribery of public officials was particularly high in areas
affected by conflict. In conflict situations, stakeholders
such as anti-corruption commissions, civil society
and the media may be weakened or hindered in their
essential work.

The consequences of corruption in times of conflict
can be especially devastating, as they can affect the
most basic needs and exacerbate hunger and poverty.

Member States must be on the front lines in the
fight against corruption. It is especially important
to build up the capacity of national anti-corruption
commissions and prosecutorial efforts. Governments
can also enhance anti-corruption efforts by ensuring
independentjudiciaries, a vibrant civil society, freedom
of the media and effective whistle-blower protections.
The international community can complement those
efforts by working more effectively against money
laundering, tax evasion and the illicit financial flows
that deprive countries of much-needed resources and
fuel further corruption.

As members of the Council know, I have called
for heightened efforts to prevent conflict and to
address risks early, before they escalate. In that spirit,
combating corruption and addressing governance
challenges, which lie at the root of many conflicts,
must be a component of preventive approaches. This
is an opportunity to build a solid foundation of trust
and accountability and increase a society's resilience
to crisis.

In peace operations, our engagement should be
designed and implemented with a clearer anti-corruption
lens to reinforce a culture of accountability and respect
for the rule of law. At its January Summit this year,
the African Union launched the observance of 2018 as
African Anti-Corruption Year. I am pleased to note that
anti-money laundering efforts in Nigeria and Tunisia
have seen funds returned.
As I said to the General Assembly in May in
marking the fifteenth anniversary of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, the role of the
United Nations is crucial. There are several ways the
Organization can support Member States, from sharing
good practices to supporting efforts to strengthen
national anti-corruption institutions. The International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala is a case
in point.

Before the adoption of the Convention, there was
no global instrument to criminalize corruption or to
recover stolen proceeds. Now the Convention has 186
States parties and the crime ofcorruption is on the books
of nearly every country in the world. The Convention's
robust peer review mechanisms have served as a global
framework for international cooperation to strengthen
prevention, disrupt money-laundering schemes, return
stolen proceeds from foreign banks and other necessary
actions. I encourage all Member States to bring greater
resolve to its implementation.

Let us also take profit of advances of technology,
which give us an opportunity to massively expand
public participation in governance and to increase
accountability. At the same time, we know that
conventions and legal measures must be complemented
by strong leadership that elevates corruption as a
concern and makes it a priority for action.

People across the world continue to express outrage
at the corruption of their leaders and at how deeply
corruption is embedded in societies. They are rightly
calling for political establishments to operate with
transparency and accountability or to make way for
those who will. I call on leaders everywhere to listen, to
nurture a culture of integrity and to empower citizens
to do their part at the grass-roots level. We must all
do more to fight corruption, strengthen governance and
build trustworthy institutions that can ensure probity
and progress for all.

