Mr. Fulci (Italy): Only a few months ago, the hopes
for a positive conclusion to the peace process in Liberia
seemed minimal. The numerous agreements signed by the
factions were not respected; nine times a general cease-fire
was agreed upon, and nine times it was violated. The
sufferings of the civilian population were aggravated by the
fact that it was impossible for humanitarian agencies to
intervene in the country. The international community
seemed powerless before the parties' stubborn insistence
continuing the conflict.

Today we are facing a completely different picture.
The desire for peace seems to have finally prevailed over
the logic of war. Dialogue has replaced weapons. This is
what the Security Council had all along repeatedly called
for. It is thus with great, sincere satisfaction that we note
that Liberia is finally moving towards peace.

We must underline the essential role of the African
countries in the peace process. Despite significant financial
obstacles, they persevered in keeping the contingent of
ECOMOG, the Monitoring Group of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), in the
country. The mediation of ECOWAS, with the tireless
encouragement of the President of Ghana, Jerry Rawlings,
was never interrupted, even at the most difficult moments
in the negotiation. Finally, the success of the final, crucial
phase of the negotiation was made possible by Nigeria's
offer to host the peace talks, which led to the Abuja
Agreement.
Moreover, we cannot forget that the firm stance of the
Security Council made it possible to convey to the factions
in conflict that it would not be possible for the international
community to continue its support without a true, sincere,
definite commitment by the parties to achieving peace.

Today the Council is about to adopt a draft resolution
that takes note of these positive developments. The draft
resolution lays the foundation for renewed international
support for the peace process and for the normalization of
Liberia. We fully share its goals. Like other donor
countries, we will carefully assess Liberia's immediate
needs, especially from a humanitarian point of view.

We cannot fail to mention that, in the delicate phase
the country is going through, all the Liberian parties,
particularly the Council of State and the Liberian National
Transitional Government, must show their true, sincere
commitment to peace. They must strictly abide by the terms
of the Abuja Agreement, in particular with regard to the
disengagement, disarmament and demobilization of their
forces. Let us not forget that the end of the conflict
depends on the success of these fundamental operations.
Peace in Liberia, which today seems closer than ever, is
first and foremost the responsibility of the Liberians
themselves.

I must add to the "footnote" of our colleague from
the United Kingdom in his statement of a few moments
ago. I was simply shocked - I was appalled - by the
news the representative of the United Kingdom told us of
the execution in Nigeria today of nine people, of nine
minority rights activists. I think members will recall the
battle that Italy waged last year in the General Assembly
against the death penalty - against the death penalty in
general, because we think it is inhuman. The Council can
therefore imagine the feelings of the delegation I head;
we have no information other than what we have just
heard. Members can imagine our feeling of shock, of
horror, to hear that people have been hanged because they
defended their ideas and their ideals.

Let me say very strongly, very loudly and very
clearly: "You can hang people, but you can never hang
ideas and ideals".

