Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian leadership is seriously
concerned by the course of events in the Middle East.
Palestinian-Israeli relations are growing ever more
tense. Recently, a real danger of the expansion of the
geographic framework of confrontation has emerged,
threatening to draw other countries into it. All of this
can lead to even more tragic consequences for the
already strained circumstances in the region and
international security as a whole.

Russia firmly condemns terrorism in all of its
forms and manifestations. We call upon the leaders of
the Palestinian Authority to make every effort to put an
end to terrorist acts against the civilian population of
Israel. Terrorism is obstructing a solution to the
objective of providing security for Israel and
undermining the prospects for the establishment of a
Palestinian State.

We are convinced that an important component
for the exit strategy from the confrontation is the
cessation of unilateral steps by the leadership of Israel.
The unlawful settlement activity on the Palestinian
territories and the construction of the so-called
separation wall, which has resulted in the seizure of
Palestinian lands, must be immediately halted. Such
actions run counter to the concept of the establishment
of two independent States, Palestine and Israel.

Both the Palestinians and the Israelis must reject
actions that contradict the spirit and letter of the road
map of the Quartet of international mediators. We are
all convinced it is precisely this document, adopted by
both sides, that is a unique and sole basis for achieving
a Middle East settlement. By the way, President Putin
brought this matter up today in a telephone
conversation with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.

We believe that if the road map is not made
binding in nature, it may remain on paper and the
region will ultimately be swept up in a wave of
violence. This is why, during the meeting of the
Quartet in New York this September, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Russia, Igor Ivanov, put forward an
initiative for the adoption of a special Security Council
resolution that would approve the road map. This
proposal not only remains valid, it is becoming ever
more urgent.

We also believe that it is necessary to establish an
international monitoring mechanism to strengthen
oversight over the implementation by the parties of
their mutual obligations. There is also the need to
consider the possibility of holding an international
conference on the Middle East, which would make it
possible to work out a formula for a comprehensive
regional settlement. These Russian proposals have one
objective: to stop the spiral of violence and open
prospects for peaceful development in the Middle East.

