Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all, let me
welcome the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo, Skender
Hyseni.

I also wish to welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Zannier, who can count on our support, and I wish him
well in this important and challenging task at this very
early juncture.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/458), it has been a challenging time for the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). As the report states, UNMIK's
ability to operate as before and perform functions as an
interim administration has been fundamentally
challenged due to the actions of both the authorities in
Pristina and the Kosovo Serbs. The operational aspects
related to the international civilian presence must
therefore be adjusted to the new circumstances.

The international presence in Kosovo will
continue to operate under resolution 1244 (1999), with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
under a United Nations umbrella guided by the Special
Representative, Lamberto Zannier. The EULEX
Mission must perform its expanded responsibilities, as
expected, throughout Kosovo, namely, as regards the
rule of law. That is in essence the goal that we believe
should be pursued.

Dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on the
six areas of mutual concern is key to achieving our
goals. We are particularly pleased to note that a few
days after the new Government was established in
Belgrade, the Special Representative was invited to
Belgrade to launch and to activate the dialogue. We are
confident that Pristina will also participate in that
effort and that solutions will be found.

We consider Kosovo a European issue in essence
that requires European solutions. An enhanced role for
the European Union in Kosovo is fully consistent with
our plans to move the country forward towards future
membership of the European Union. EULEX is the
cornerstone of our strategy. However, let me express
our concern about the delays on the reconfiguration of
the international presence, which is long overdue and
which is affecting EULEX's capacity to perform its
duties.

The report states clearly that while the general
security situation remains calm on the surface,
Pristina's declaration of independence and the entry

into force of the Kosovo Constitution and reactions by
Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade have increased tensions
between Kosovo Albanians and the Kosovo Serb
community. To overcome the present situation, we
must therefore promptly move forward to enable the
European Union, within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999), to play an enhanced role through the
EULEX Mission.

UNMIK will continue to preserve its significant
functions. I am please to note that the report clearly
stated that UNMIK will continue its efforts to
consolidate democratic government institutions in
Kosovo, advance economic growth and moved towards
a future in Europe as part of the Western Balkans. In
that context, I also wish to emphasize the crucial role
to be played by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe as well.

Italy reaffirms its full commitment to
contributing to the international effort in Kosovo, to
regional stability and to the European future of all the
countries in the West Balkans, including Serbia.

