Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Madam President, we
would like to congratulate you on presiding over the
work of the Council this month and to wish you every
success in your work. We would also like to greet the
Chairs of the subsidiary committees of this Council
who today have given us their valuable briefings on the
subject at hand.

Approximately 2,500 years ago, the classical
Chinese writer Sun Tzu, in the The Art of War, wrote
that "war is of vital importance to the State; it is a
matter of life and death, a road either to safety or to
ruin". Today, that sentence is just as relevant in the
face of attempts to reimpose a new imperial rule on the
world.

One of the central topics addressed here is the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. It is a matter of great
concern to my country, Venezuela, which has acted in
keeping with the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly
in September 2006 in resolution 60/288.

We wish to recall that, at our country's request,
on 28 May 2007 the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States adopted the
Declaration on Strengthening Cooperation in the Fight
Against Terrorism and the Impunity of its Perpetrators,
based on Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). The
Declaration underscores that terrorism is inimical to
the full enjoyment and exercise of human rights and
peace, and reaffirms that all States should deny safe
haven to those who finance, plan, support or commit
terrorist acts. We also note with great interest the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's programme of work
for the period 1 January to 30 June 2010, which seeks
to monitor and promote the implementation by States
ofresolution 1373 (2001).

However, the effectiveness and implementation
of such measures may be weakened when imperial
Powers impose privileges which they absolve
themselves from implementing. The fight against
terrorism, whatever its manifestations and by
whomever committed, be it persons, organizations or
States, gives rise to situations of great concern. We
have seen with alarm how State terrorism is practiced
with impunity under false slogans of peace and
security. Such is the case with the warmongering
Government of Israel, which slaughters defenceless
people, including the Palestinians in Gaza. The Council
has endlessly considered this issue without even
adopting the necessary remedies to put an end to
genocide.

We also recall that, in 2002, the former President
of the United States, George W. Bush, affirmed that
Iraq was amassing weapons of mass destruction. That
is why the country was invaded. Hundreds of
thousands have died. One of the most precious cultural
heritages of humankind has been destroyed and, to
date, no weapon of mass destruction has been found.

One issue that must be urgently addressed by the
Security Council is that of the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles. This organ knows myriad details of this case,
which has been submitted by both my country and the
sister Republic of Cuba.

The serious crimes committed in 1976 by
terrorists led by Luis Posada Carriles - killing 73
people, for the most part sportsmen, in the fateful
blowing-up of a Cuban aircraft over Barbados -
remain an issue that the Council is obliged to examine.
That terrible act is considered to be one of the worst
terrorist attacks in the history of civil aviation. Ample
information can be found in the classified archives of
the United States Department of State, and the
declassification of some official documents, now
published and distributed in various media, show that
Luis Posada Carriles is responsible for that flagrant
terrorist act.
It has been irrefutably demonstrated that the
brains behind the attack were Luis Posada Carriles and
Orlando Bosch and that those who planted the bombs
in the Cubana de Aviacion aircraft were Venezuelans
Hernan Ricardo Lozano and Freddy Lugo. Having
escaped from prison in Venezuela, Luis Posada Carriles
lived freely in Miami, despite not being a United States
citizen. The authorities of that country knew of his
whereabouts, but they did not arrest him.

Having learned of this situation, in May 2005
Venezuela asked the United States Government to
arrest Luis Posada Carriles so as to try him on 73
counts of first-degree murder in relation to the
sabotage of the Cuban aircraft. Venezuela's extradition
request to the United States Government is based on
three specific instruments: the extradition treaty
between the United States and Venezuela, the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation, the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.

Once Posada Carriles called a news conference in
Miami on 16 May 2005, at which he boasted that the
State Department was not even looking for him
because he was an agent of the Central Intelligence
Agency, the United States Government had no other
option than to arrest him. On 11 January 2007, the
United States Government indicted Posada Carriles on
seven counts of immigration fraud, rather than charge
him with murder and terrorism.

From then on, a series of delays and legal
obstacles, enveloped in mystery, have obstructed the
possibility of trying that dreadful terrorist. Recently, in
a new rigging of the system, the judge in the
proceedings indefinitely postponed consideration of the
case. It would seem that the strategy being followed is
to protract, defer and delay the case of Luis Posada
Carriles. This particular situation raises questions
about the commitment of the United States
Government and its vow to fight terrorism.

We take this opportunity to repeat Venezuela's
call for the release of the five anti-terrorist Cuban
heroes who have been held prisoner in United States
jails for 11 years. It must be recalled that resolution
1373 (2001), adopted by the Security Council at its
meeting of 28 September 2001 (see S/PV.4385), enjoins
States from providing safe havens to those who commit
terrorist acts and from recognizing as valid any political
motive for refusing a request to extradite terrorists.
I conclude by reiterating my Government's
request to the Security Council and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to enforce the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which would allow the terrorist
Luis Posada Carriles to be extradited to Venezuela or
tried as a terrorist in the United States.

