Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See thanks the Italian presidency for
convening today's debate and for keeping the issue of
trafficking in persons in conflict situations high on the
Security Council's agenda.

Resolution 2331 (2016), which was adopted a year
after the landmark presidential statement contained
in document S/PRST/2015/25, issued at the Council's
first-ever meeting on trafficking in persons (see S/PV.7585), refers to a correlation between trafficking
in persons, sexual violence, armed conflict, terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The Council has
underscored that acts or offences associated with
trafficking in persons in conflict may constitute
war crimes.

However, the full potential of international criminal
justice needs to be utilized exhaustively if we are to
be effective in our fight against that heinous crime.
In order to eradicate trafficking in persons, we must
confront all of its economic, environmental, political
and ethical causes, and it is particularly important to
prevent and end the wars and conflicts that make people
especially vulnerable to being trafficked.

Wars and violent conflicts have become the biggest
driving force behind forced human displacement. The
state of war provides an enabling environment for
human traffickers, who increasingly exploit a tragic
humanitarian situation to target refugees, forced
migrants and internally displaced persons in their
criminal enterprises. In that regard, the Holy See would
like to highlight the importance of the implementation
of the responsibility to protect in the context of
the migration and refugee crises, which facilitate
trafficking in persons.

When States and the international community fail
to protect people from war and atrocities to such an
extent that people feel compelled to flee their homes,
we all have a great and urgent responsibility to protect
them from further harm, including from falling into
the hands of human traffickers. The criminalization
of forced migrants and undocumented and irregular
migrants in general exacerbates their vulnerabilities,
drives them further into the clutches of traffickers
and other extreme forms of exploitation, and renders
them less likely to collaborate with law-enforcement
authorities in efforts to catch and punish traffickers.

Achieving the specific targets of the Sustainable
Development Goals aimed at ending trafficking in
persons is an integral part of our efforts. Like the
Sustainable Development agenda as a whole, those
targets present immense challenges that no individual,
organization or State can deal with alone. Despite
significant progress and efforts, such as the high-level
meeting on the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons, held on 27 and
28 September, much more still needs to be done to
achieve better coordination among Governments, the
judiciary, law-enforcement officials and civil society.

Likewise, leaders and followers of the various
religions around the world must do everything in their
power to save the millions of children, women and men
who are forced to live in slave-like conditions. In that
context, my delegation wishes to thank all faith-based
organizations and religious communities, in particular
women's organizations, which have long been at the
forefront of the fight against trafficking in persons
and have shown their commitment by accompanying
survivors with loving concern on the long journey back
to living a life in freedom and dignity.

On the World Day against Trafficking in Persons
this July, Pope Francis warned us all against getting
used to trafficking in persons or treating it as if it
were a normal thing, when in reality it is, as he said,
ugly, cruel, criminal, an aberrant plague, a modern
form of slavery and a crime against humanity. In his
name, my delegation renews the appeal for a universal
commitment to ending that heinous crime.

