Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank the Security
Council for convening this briefing on the role of
United Nations policing in peace operations. I would
also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
adoption of resolution 2382 (2017), which builds on
the milestone resolution 2185 (2014) and reflects the
increasingly central role of United Nations police
(UNPOL) in peacekeeping.

I am particularly pleased that we are joined today
by the Heads of the police components of our missions
in Haiti, Mali and Darfur. They will share stories of
accomplishments and challenges in the many areas of
United Nations police work, including host-State police
capacity-building and development, the protection of
civilians, gender-sensitive policing and countering
transnational organized crime.

Last month here in the Chamber, the Secretary-
General made it clear that he wants more efficient and
cost-effective peace operations. The aim is for a more
coherent approach to peace and security, development
and human rights. What that means for United Nations
police is a continued vital role in bridging United
Nations work, from prevention to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. From the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the Central African Republic
and from South Sudan to Haiti, United Nations police
provide operational support, assist in the reform of
police services and, where appropriately mandated,
undertake interim policing functions. I am pleased to
share a few examples of how we achieve our mandates.

First, United Nations police now operate on
a solid foundation of police doctrine, that is, the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping, which was developed in close
partnership with Member States, regional organizations
and police professionals worldwide. That has allowed,
for example, for the adoption of comprehensive
approaches to police operations, capacity-building and
development. United Nations police now focus not only
on the transfer of basic skills but also on strengthening
host-State police institutions. They mentor and advise
at the command level, informed by close consultations
with the host State. Commissioner Monchotte will brief
the Council further in that regard. That work translates
into improved management of human resources and
recruitment, fleet and procurement systems, rigorous
internal oversight mechanisms and increased outreach
to communities. In addition, the Strategic Guidance
Framework also allows us to improve efficiency in
police generation and performance measurement.
Streamlined recruitment processes enable us to better
respond to host-State and mission needs and to identify
specific skill sets needed in the field. The Police
Division is also finalizing an accountability framework
for United Nations policing, as called for in last year's
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/952).

Secondly, UnitedNationspolice play anincreasingly
vital and unique role in the protection of civilians,
through community-oriented and intelligence-led
policing. When our police officers walk the beat, they
interact with local communities, establish trust, collect
early warning signs and help our missions to better
respond to imminent threats.

Equally important is UNPOL's work with host-State
counterparts in prioritizing the protection of civilians
and training them in their tasks. UNPOL also provide
physical protection to civilians when the host State
is unable or unwilling to do so. That multi-pronged
approach - which is now included in departmental
guidance on the protection of civilians - ranges from
prevention and information collection to training,
advocacy and physical protection.

Thirdly, United Nations police components are
increasingly called upon to assist their host-State
counterparts in fighting serious and organized crime.
Commissioner Yacouba will share more details on
UNPOL's support for the Malian authorities in that
regard. Our police components assist the host State
in setting up criminal intelligence systems and using
modern technology to prevent and investigate serious and
organized crime. They also help to improve the police's
interactions and relationships with the communities in
the host State, through better information sharing and
partnerships to fight crime.

Fourthly, improving our effectiveness means
recruiting more women to our police ranks. As Police
Commissioner Makotose will tell us, women police
officers perform all the tasks that their male colleagues
perform. In addition, they mentor and inspire future
women police leaders, increase access to justice for
women and children at risk and improve information
gathering and analysis by reaching vulnerable groups.
Unfortunately, few of our police leadership positions
are occupied by women. We need more nominations
of qualified women police executives from Member
States. In December in Addis Ababa, the Secretariat
will co-host, with the African Union, the first of four
female senior police officer command development
courses to prepare the next generation of female police
leaders to take up international command positions.

Finally, on the issue of conduct and discipline,
United Nations police have received operational
guidance on the implementation of resolution 2272
(2016). If needed, the Department will not hesitate to
replace police units from countries that have failed to
hold perpetrators accountable.

As we demand more from our police officers, we
also need to go the extra mile to ensure their welfare,
safety and security in the field. We need to supply
our police peacekeepers with up-to-date equipment to
increase their situational awareness and to be in a better
position to respond to threats to mission personnel. I
believe we must also tackle disparities in conditions
of service among different types of police personnel,
which negatively impact morale.

Today's discussion will not resolve all police
peacekeeping challenges. Nevertheless, my hope is
that it will help us to further mobilize international
support for the United Nations police and build on the
momentum generated by the first-ever Security Council
resolution on the United Nations police in 2014, as well
as resolution 2382 (2017), adopted today, and the first
United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit. I look forward
to hearing the Council's views how we can together
strengthen United Nations police.

