Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her
comprehensive briefing and ongoing efforts as Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also thank
Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of the National
Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and Ms. Solange Furaha, Spokesperson of
civil society organization Rien Sans les Femmes, for
their respective updates on the current situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
preparations for the December elections.

I am honoured to make this statement on behalf
of the three African countries represented on the
Security Council, whose group Equatorial Guinea is
currently coordinating.

We all agree that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a critical juncture. While reaffirming the
sovereignty of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, its institutions, leadership of
the electoral process and ultimate responsibility to
conduct the process effectively, the Security Council
must closely follow developments in the country with a
view to preparing for successful elections in December.
We welcome the recent milestones and successes,
including the peaceful completion of voter registration,
the appointment of members of the Constitutional
Court and the establishment of additional provincial
appellate courts where they did not previously exist.
The finalization of the registration of candidates for
the next presidential elections is already a historic
achievement. In that regard, we would like to express
our appreciation to President Joseph Kabila Kabange
for his contribution to the successful conclusion of
the registration of candidates for the presidential
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We recommend that the remaining challenges related
to confidence-building measures be addressed by the
relevant institutions and authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as soon as possible.

We note with concern the small number ofregistered
female candidates - only 12 per cent - and hope that
they will receive the necessary support in the run-up
to the elections to ensure meaningful participation by
women in the country's political system. As we all know,
the success of the elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will depend upon the inclusiveness of the
electoral process and on the commitment of all political
stakeholders, whom we urge to reject all forms of
violence and exercise the utmost restraint and refrain
from provocative actions to avoid escalating tensions.
We therefore recommend that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all relevant
actors work in a spirit of cooperation and commitment
to ensure a historic moment that leads to the first
peaceful transfer of political power in the country.
Congolese actors must set common and well-deserved
goals to move the country forward.

In that spirit, the ability of the Independent
National Electoral Commission to meet the electoral
calendar will remain a priority to ensure a peaceful,
credible and transparent electoral process. That is a
critical and determining factor in ensuring positive
results that will lead to a democratic transfer ofpolitical
power in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and no
efforts should be spared in implementing the electoral
calendar. Measures, including by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), will need to be
taken against all spoilers or negative forces whose
actions threaten the implementation of the New Year's
Eve agreement and the holding of elections. In the
meantime, the most important factor in preparing for
the elections is the implementation of the agreement,
which is the only viable means of easing tensions.
We therefore once again call on the Government,
stakeholders and national actors to continue their
efforts to create conditions conducive to the holding
of credible and peaceful elections on the basis of the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the New Year's Eve agreement.

With regard to funding and logistical and technical
support for the elections, all needs must be met through
actions by the institutions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, the doubts about the use
of the voting machines and all related issues, including
transport, staff training and energy supplies, must be
laid to rest at the appropriate time. We hope that will
include the timely use of logistical support available
from MONUSCO scheduled for 26 July 2018. We hope
that the Congolese authorities will make use of the
appropriate facilities that can contribute to the successful
organization of credible and transparent elections.

We emphasize that an appropriate environment
must be in place in order for the elections to be
held successfully. Therefore, the adoption and
implementation of confidence-building measures are
essential. In that regard, we are concerned about the
continuing discrepancies with regard to the operation
and use of voting machines and electoral lists. Those
and other differences could undermine and seriously
damage the credibility of the whole electoral process,
if those issues are not addressed properly with due
seriousness during the pre-election period. The
consequences could be catastrophic given the possible
post-electoral scenarios. It is therefore imperative to
adopt preventive and support measures to ensure the
building and strengthening of lasting peace in the
country. The Commission must carry out awareness-
raising campaigns aimed at all stakeholders and public
opinion in order to build confidence with regard to
those machines.

Addressing the problem of the a lack of tangible
progress in the implementation of confidence-building
measures, as reflected in the Secretary-General's
update (S/2018/762, annex), is a necessary condition for
the success ofthe elections. There is already a precedent
in which the Commission and the political parties have
engaged in a constructive dialogue. While we commend
those initiatives, we would like to encourage all actors
to follow the same path in addressing future challenges.

Activities in the coming months will be of crucial
importance for the final preparations for the 2018
elections. It is essential that all Congolese parties make
the necessary commitments to preserve the ongoing
dialogue and consensus to facilitate the peaceful
holding of elections. In that regard, it is important that
the Council send a clear and unified message to all
Congolese political actors.

It is also imperative that we emphasize the need
for better coordination among the United Nations, the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and other international and regional
partners to ensure more coherent and effective support
to the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. The Council's
next visit to the country, which is scheduled for October
is a very welcome initiative. We trust that the African
Union Peace and Security Council will participate in
that visit.

Peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will not be possible if we do not examine the reasons
that have led to this situation, such as the thorny issue
of the financing of different armed groups active in the
country, which has led this immense, beautiful and rich
country to go through very difficult situations. The
country's resources must be used for the development
ofits immense potential and for the benefit of its people.

With regard to Ebola, approximately six weeks ago,
we were relieved to hear that the most recent pandemic
had been brought under control. A new outbreak has
just been announced, and we therefore express our
concern and wish that it will be quickly and effectively
brought under control and that this situation does
not have an impact on either the preparations or the
elections themselves.

