Mr. Taha (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me
great pleasure to begin by welcoming you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council, to Africa for these important extraordinary
meetings. This is only the second time that such
extraordinary meetings of the Council have been held
in Africa. The first was at Addis Ababa, at a time
when the Sudan held the presidency of the Security
Council - perhaps that is a propitious sign. These
meetings send an important message that reflects the
interest of the international community, represented by
the Council, in the peace process in the Sudan and in
African issues in general.

There can be no doubt that the international
community as a whole, in particular the African
peoples, including the people of the Sudan, have been
looking forward to this historic event, which we hope
will bring a new era of peace and stability to Africa,
and thence to the world, so that we can begin a new
chapter of history that opens up horizons for prosperity
and peace.

It also gives me great pleasure to extend to
Council members the best wishes and greetings of the
people of the Sudan. We recall the committed and
sincere efforts that the United Nations has made so far
by sending a Special Representative to the Sudan to
oversee the peace process there. We greatly value the
importance accorded by the Council and its members
to the issues currently before it regarding the Sudan.
We hope that the Council will play the role of a
genuine partner in achieving peace and stability in the
Sudan.

The Council must recognize all the genuine
efforts that the Government of the Sudan has made so
far in search of peace. We believe that peaceful
negotiations are the only means to that end, and we
have embarked on the path towards peace with full,
national determination, with the support of our partners
and brothers.

We have taken part in serious negotiations
without any preconditions. We have agreed to discuss
all the important issues through the mediation of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in proof of our good intentions and sincere willingness
to achieve peace and national harmony. The Naivasha
agreement on six peace protocols was a clear
demonstration of our belief in the seriousness and
validity of that process and we reiterate again today
our full commitment to finalizing those negotiations as
soon as possible in order to achieve comprehensive
peace in the southern Sudan and throughout the
country.

We have been negotiating for a long time,
perhaps because there have been serious concerns
among the partners and the brothers. However, the
arduous process of negotiation has been successful and
productive, enabling us, together with our brothers in
the Sudanese People's Liberation Movement (SPLM),
to reach finely-detailed agreements on all the various
issues and to agree on means of implementation and
guarantees leading to lasting peace. The extended
process of negotiation has definitely been productive
and fruitful and has acquired special importance
because of our agreement with our SPLM. brothers on
the absolute necessity of implementing all that has
been agreed for the transitional period.

We look forward to a genuine partnership with
the international community in the implementation of
those agreements. We believe that the pending issues
can be resolved, particularly since they relate merely to
procedural aspects of the implementation of the
agreements concluded. I should like once again to
reiterate our firm commitment to concluding the
negotiations as soon as possible, and I am pleased to
say that we have reached an understanding with our
brothers in the SPLM. and the IGAD secretariat, as
reflected in the common memorandum of
understanding to be signed in the presence of Council
members and committed to by both parties for the
conclusion of the negotiations within the agreed
framework contained in the memorandum.

Since peace is an integral whole, the Government
of the Sudan has not limited its efforts to reaching a
peaceful settlement, but has complemented them by
launching a serious and constructive dialogue with all
political forces with a view to laying a solid foundation
for peace. Here, I concur with the Secretary-General's
statement that the peace agreement opens the door to
conducting a national dialogue to form a popular,
broad-based Government that includes other parties
that were not party to the Naivasha negotiations. Such
a dialogue would provide the basis for a broader
popular consensus on the peace agreements to be
reached.

On the other hand, the Government of the Sudan
has conducted sincere negotiations; without
preconditions, in N'Djamena, Addis Ababa and Abuja
with those who have borne arms in Darfur. I reiterate
our commitment to all agreements reached in Abuja.
My only reservation concerns the Secretary-General's
statement regarding the Government of the Sudan's
violation of the agreements signed in Abuja. The fact is
that violations have been recorded as having been
committed by the other parties. We call for the
implementation of a common mechanism with the
United Nations to investigate such alleged violations
and for the deployment of African Union observers.

We commend the efforts of all parties that have
participated in and contributed to the efforts to reach
the agreements in Naivasha and N'Djamena. We also
salute IGAD and its partners, as well as the
international community for its sincere efforts to date.
We welcome the efforts of the African Union and of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria in particular.

In the context of the situation in Darfur, our clear
policy is based on addressing the humanitarian
situation. Alongside the international community, we
have come a long way in that regard and remain
committed to improving the humanitarian situation
there, in cooperation with the international community.
The signing of the last security agreement in Abuja
will enhance the joint efforts of the Sudanese
Government and the international community to
alleviate the impact of the disputes and conflicts on the
civilian population.

The second important pillar of our efforts to solve
the Darfur problem would be ending the fighting and
all forms of hostility. We therefore reiterate yet again
that the security agreement to be signed in Abuja is
extremely important to us and we shall be fully
committed to its implementation.

A third important point in addressing the Darfur
problem is highlighted by our political dialogue with
the armed groups, with the cooperation and support of
the African Union, Chad and the Federal Republic of
Nigeria. We are determined to conclude that political
dialogue, with a view to reaching a comprehensive
peace agreement in Darfur. We believe the important
issues of a nation can be resolved only through
peaceful negotiations, not through confrontation and
hostility.

Our vision of a peaceful political resolution in
Darfur - in particular in the case of the Nuba
Mountains and the Blue Nile region - is based on the
provisions of the Naivasha Agreements and on the
establishment of a foundation for decentralized
government within a federal framework that provides
the citizens of Darfur and the other peoples of Sudan's
governorates the ability to participate and to have
additional authority in managing their own affairs. We
also envision that a resolution of this matter would
include an agreement on the sharing of national
resources and wealth in a manner that provides every
governorate, state and region in the Sudan with a
proportionate share so that the aspirations of the people
can be met.

With regard to development, I would like to
inform the Security Council that the fourth pillar of our
policy for dealing with the Darfur problem aims at
normalizing the situation after a political agreement
has been reached and at bringing about sustainable
development in the region. The Government of the
Sudan has prepared a development plan to be
implemented after the signing of a peace agreement on
Darfur that will promote the Government's other
current efforts. That development plan consists of two
parts.

First, we would address the issue of providing
urgent assistance to displaced persons in order to
facilitate their return to their villages, as well as the
return of refugees from neighbouring countries. That
will require a disarmament programme that includes
the rehabilitation of those currently bearing arms so
that they may once again be integrated into civilian
life. It will also require giving special attention to the
rehabilitation of the areas destroyed during the
fighting, particularly with regard to infrastructure,
education and drinking water. We have prepared
specific estimates of the costs of those urgent
programmes and would be pleased to share those
estimates with the international community so that a
common effort to cover the costs can be deployed as
soon as a peace agreement is signed.

The second part of that plan, which will cover a
medium-term period of three years, is based on a
policy of carrying out studies and projects to develop
the agricultural and other income-generating sectors in
the region, including animal husbandry and small- and
medium-size industries. The plan will also focus on
providing clean water for industry and for people in
both cities and villages. Feasibility studies and
estimates have been prepared for this three-year plan.
Preliminary estimates indicate that we will need $1.8
billion to implement projects such as the ones I have
described.

Once again, we are pleased to say that we look
forward to the participation of the international
community in planning, financing and implementing
further studies. Improving services and attaining
development will complement the political efforts
being made to resolve this issue and help to promote
peaceful coexistence and social harmony among the
various groups in Darfur.

The Government of the Sudan, which has made
great efforts to establish peace in the south of the
country through the Naivasha Agreements, cannot be
seen as willing to allow fighting to break out once
again in other regions of the country. The war in Darfur
is political in nature and was instigated by local groups
with the support of foreign parties. Those foreign
elements benefited from the historic tension and
conflict among the various tribes living in Darfur. That
situation was exacerbated by the severe drought that
has afflicted that part of Africa.

The outbreak of the war in Darfur was supposed
to be a hurdle to the peace agreements in Naivasha. We
would like to stress again before the Council that the
Government's political determination to solve all
conflicts in the south and establish peace through the
Naivasha Protocols will remain steadfast. We are
equally committed to deploying the political efforts
necessary to end the problems in Darfur.

The Government of the Sudan is determined to
change the situation in our country and to establish
peace and stability based on justice, political
participation and cooperation with the international
community, regionally and internationally. Once again,
I would like to renew our sincere thanks to those who
have participated and have contributed to the peace
process, particularly the Government of Kenya through
the sincere efforts of President Kibaki. We highly value
their patience and cooperation during all those years of
negotiation on the Naivasha Agreements, and we
would like to reiterate before President Kibaki and the
Council that the time has come to provide you with the
gift of peace in the Sudan for its peoples and for the
international community.

