Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Envoy de Mistura and the
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Markram, for their briefings. China takes
note of the reports alleging that chemical weapons were
once again used in Syria and caused civilian casualties.
That is of great concern to China.

China's position on chemical-weapons has been
consistent and clear. We are firmly opposed to the
use of chemical weapons by any State, organization
or individual under any circumstances. Any use of
chemical weapons, whenever and wherever, must not be
tolerated. China supports a comprehensive, objective
and impartial investigation of the incident concerned
so that it can reach a conclusion based on substantiated
evidence that can stand the test of history and facts so
that the perpetrators and responsible parties can be
brought to justice.

The Syrian chemical-weapons issue is closely linked
to to a political settlement ofthe Syrian situation. China
supports the ongoing important role of the Security
Council and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) as the main channels for
dealing with the Syrian chemical-weapons issue. We
hope that the parties concerned will take a constructive
approach so as to seek a solution through consultations,
establish the facts, prevent any further use of chemical
weapons, preserve the unity of the Security Council
and cooperate with the efforts by the parties concerned
to advance the political process in Syria.

The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year
and is inflicting tremendous suffering on the Syrian
people. A political settlement is the only solution to
the Syrian issue. The international community must
remain committed to a political settlement of the
question of Syria, while fully respecting its sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.

China has always opposed the use or threat of force
in international affairs. We always advocate adherence
to the Charter of the United Nations. All parties should
increase their support for the United Nations mediation
efforts and compel the parties in Syria to seek a political
settlement under the principle of Syrian leadership and
ownership in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

The fight against terrorism is an important
and urgent issue in the political settlement of the
Syrian question. The international community must
strengthen its coordination, uphold uniform standards
and combat all terrorist groups identified as such by the
Security Council.

At a recent Security Council meeting, China set
out its principled position with regard to the Skripal
incident (see S/PV.8224). China believes that the parties
concerned should strictly comply with their obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and, in
line with the relevant provisions of the Convention,
carry out a comprehensive, impartial and objective
investigation and deal with the issues concerned
within the framework of the OPCW. China hopes that
the parties concerned will work in accordance with
the principles of mutual respect and equality, engage
in consultations, cooperate, avoid politicization and
measures that might further exacerbate tensions and
resolve their differences properly through dialogue.

