Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his elaborate briefing
on the situation in Kosovo.

Last week Mr. Kouchner handed over his charge
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
That concluded his 18-month-long responsibility in one
of the most difficult areas where the United Nations is
involved in peacekeeping, with the added responsibility
of governance. In this year and a half, Mr. Kouchner
was able to reach out to the victims of a damaged and
divided society with courage, compassion and urgency.
That was critical in addressing the priorities of a
population devastated by war.

We heartily welcome Mr. Hans Haekkerup as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo and as the head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). His
predecessor has left behind a firm foundation on which
to build. Still, the task ahead is huge and by no means
an easy one. We are convinced that with his
experience, wisdom and dedication, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will give the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo new dynamism.
I will mention some of the immediate priorities
that the new Special Representative will need to focus
on. The first is curbing violence. That will be one of
the main issues on his agenda. Violence and killing
must stop, irrespective of the ethnicity of the
population. It is true that the ethnic hatred is now
scaled down substantially, compared to a year before.
But it is still smouldering. Wounds are raw, and
untoward incidents could easily flare up and quickly
get out of control. Careful attention should be given to
ensure arrangements that will make all people feel safe.
With the number of police now approaching the target
level, and with much better functional administration,
there is now a brighter prospect that an end can be
brought to violence.

Second is the matter of elections. One of the
remarkable achievements in Kosovo was the holding of
municipal elections last October. The process
demonstrated the desire to exercise democratic rights
and move towards self-governance. The outcome also
points to how the majority of the people view their
future. It was reassuring for the world to see that the
Kosovars inclined towards the moderate leadership and
their aspiration to live in peace. The logical next step
would be to hold Kosovo-wide general elections.
Participation by all the population of Kosovo, all ethnic
groups, is important.

Third is the judiciary. A greater level of judicial
activity has been seen, particularly recently, with the
increase in the number of persons and material
resources. The addition of about a dozen international
judges, seized mainly with war crimes and ethnically
related crimes, has contributed to significant
improvement in the area. An effective judiciary is,
needless to say, important for establishment of the rule
of law.

Fourth is the issue of refugee return. The return
of nearly a million refugees from June 1999 to date,
both spontaneously and through organized efforts, is a
great success. Although the rate of return was expected
to fall in winter, it is conceivable that the flow will go
up with the approach of spring. It is necessary at this
point to enhance the facilities necessary to handle
large-scale returns. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has a special role to play.

The fifth priority is missing persons and
detainees. The uncertainty regarding the fate of the
missing persons remains a matter of great anxiety and
torment for various ethnic communities in Kosovo.
This continues to be a major source of tension in inter-
ethnic relations and an obstacle to the return to
normalcy.

We welcomed the decision to appoint
Ambassador Henrik Amneus as Special Envoy, as his
mandate covers all persons deprived of liberty,
including prisoners, detainees and missing persons in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We expect a
comprehensive solution to the missing and the
detained, rather than intervention in individual cases,
which would take a long time. The prospect has
significantly brightened with the establishment of
democratic government in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. It is unfortunate that we have yet to see
any breakthrough in this regard, in this politically
sensitive and at the same time humanitarian issue. We
would urge the Kostunica Government to take urgent
initiatives in this regard. We would like to hear a report
on the outcome of the mandate of Ambassador
Amneus.

Sixthly, there is the matter of development and
reconstruction. The effort to construct a vibrant,
market-oriented economy in Kosovo with a view to
building institutions for eventual integration with the
rest of Europe should continue. It must take into
account the essential inputs for a well-functioning
economy, including housing, utilities and employment.
While there is an ongoing effort to address the
immediate needs, investment must at the same time be
made to lay the foundations for a long-term solution.

Before concluding, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for briefing the Council
on the situation arising from reported depleted uranium
contamination in Kosovo. It will be our responsibility
to keep the matter under close watch.

Kosovo has come a long way in a relatively short
span of time, from a war-ravaged inter-ethnic hotbed to
a society with cautious optimism for a peaceful future.
The task of building a self-governing society from the
ruins of war is enormous. It is particularly so when the
hangover from the past contributes little to the
transition into a modern society. We should give the
Kosovars at least some time before inferring that
progress is not fast enough. During all that time, they
need our constant support and encouragement. We wish
the new Special Representative all success in his
onerous undertaking of leading the United Nations
Mission to a successful conclusion.

