Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on South Africa's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am
confident that your leadership of the work of the
Council will lead to success in its deliberations. By the
same token, I would like to express our appreciation
and respect for the outgoing non-permanent members,
as well as to congratulate the friendly and brotherly
new States members of the Council, namely, Morocco,
Pakistan, Azerbaijan, Togo and Guatemala. By the
same token, I would like to thank Mr. Fernandez-
Taranco for presenting his briefing on the situation in
the Middle East.

I should like to express my country's support for
the statements made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the League of Arab States.

This debate comes at a time of critical economic
and political circumstances, the most salient features of
which are the following.

First, Israel, the occupying Power, still practises
in the occupied Palestinian territory a policy that aims
at increasing settlements, which reached a record level
in 2011. Further expropriation of Palestinian land,
particularly in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, has thwarted the
aspirations of the Palestinian people for freedom and
independence in accordance with relevant international
resolutions.

Secondly, it seems that Israel is turning a blind
eye to the renewed situation in the Middle East. While
it views the aspirations of the peoples of the region for
freedom with disrespect and arrogance, it also thinks
that it can deny the Palestinian people their legitimate
rights to self-determination and the establishment of
their independent State on their national soil, within
the borders of 4 June 1967 and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.

Thirdly, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has
the honour of being the Custodian of the two Holy
Sites, views with considerable concern the Israeli
practices in Al-Quds Al-Sharif that are designed to
efface its Arab and Islamic identity and to undermine
the rights of the Christians and Muslims in the Holy
City. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
vis-a-vis Israeli actions in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, including
settlement activities, the confiscation of Palestinian
land and homes, the eviction of Palestinians and
endangering the Holy Shrine.

Fourthly, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon
the international community to take a courageous and
decisive position by fully recognizing the Palestinian
State, within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, by responding
positively to the application transmitted to the Security
Council for Palestine's membership in the United
Nations. It should also call upon Israel to end the
occupation, lift the blockade of Gaza, dismantle
settlements and release Palestinian detainees. Any
procrastination will constitute an abandonment of the
moral responsibility that must be shouldered by the
international community and the Security Council.

My country presented a comprehensive Peace
Initiative to the international community to end all
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, including an end to
Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan and the
remaining Lebanese territory and the establishment of
the State of Palestine. That Initiative has been endorsed
by all Arab States. It is a source of pain that Israel
continues to disregard that initiative, as if it believes
that it can be kept on the table forever. Israel's
settlement policy uproots the two-State concept and
therefore undermines the bases and principles around
which the Arab Initiative revolves.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is deeply pained
by the suffering of the brotherly Syrian people. We call
on the Syrian authorities to cease repelling the
legitimate aspirations of their citizens with violence
and bullets. We hope that the Syrian Government will
heed the voice of reason and wisdom and abide by the
proposals of the Arab League to find a balanced
political solution that achieves the aspirations of the
Syrian people, preserves the unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, halts the cycle of violence, and
spares the country from foreign interference in its
internal affairs.

My country decided to withdraw its observers
from the Arab observer mission to Syria because we
did not feel that the Syrian authorities were serious in
responding to the Arab initiative. We want to be more
than mere witnesses and supporters of the killing and
persecution of the great Syrian people. It is high time
for the international community to shoulder its
responsibilities towards Syria. The Security Council
should hasten to take the necessary decisions in

support of the Arab initiative, and to adopt the
political, economic and security measures that are
designed to implement all its aspects.

My country views with concern Iran's threats to
the security of the Arabian Gulf and the safety of its
waterways. We call on Iran to refrain from any actions
that threaten the security of the region. In that regard,
we hope that Iran will swiftly respond to the appeals of
the international community with respect to its nuclear
programme and the need to subject it to international
supervision in order to ensure that it does not go
beyond the peaceful uses of energy. At the same time,
we call for making the entire Middle East, without
exception, an area free of nuclear and all other
weapons of mass destruction. The new Middle East
needs more prosperity, not more nuclear weapons;
more reconstruction, not more settlements; more
freedoms, not more killings; more justice, and not
more injustice, persecution and despotism. Those are
the hopes of the Middle East and the aspirations of its
peoples. Those are the Council's responsibilities and
duties.

