Mr. Mutaboba: It is a privilege to present to the
Security Council the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) (S/2011/370). I also
welcome this opportunity to have an exchange of views
with Council members on the most recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau, where, despite
positive developments contributing to an improved
political and security environment, a great deal remains
to be done by the national authorities to consolidate the
gains made since the end of 2010 in terms of political
dialogue, economic reforms and improving civil-
military relations at the highest level.

Since we last met (see S/PV.6489), several
encouraging developments have taken place in the
country, in particular with regard to the reform of the
security sector and regional efforts to stabilize State
institutions. The progress report before the Council is
self-explanatory with regard to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)-
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
road map for security sector reform, which was
adopted by the Guinea-Bissau Council of Ministers on
15 March and endorsed by the heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS on 24 March. In addition,
the report of the joint security sector reform assessment
mission conducted in close collaboration with the
CPLP and ECOWAS, as well as national and
international partners in Guinea-Bissau, as requested
by the Security Council in resolution 1949 (2010), was
presented last week to the Security Council at the
expert level. I will therefore limit my observations on
this issue to new developments that have taken place
recently.

Immediately after the conclusion of the
assessment mission, the Government convened a
meeting in Bissau, from 28 April to 3 May, to prepare a
memorandum of understanding to govern the
implementation of the partnership between the three
entities on the ground. The next step will be the signing
of the memorandum of understanding between the
CPLP, ECOWAS and the Government of
Guinea-Bissau in the coming weeks. Meanwhile,
following the selection of the Banco da Africa
Ocidental to host and manage the pension fund for the
retirement and reintegration of members of the defence
and security forces, the Government has opened a bank
account with the bank. A first list of up to 1,400
11-39059
elements to be retrenched on the basis of age limit or
voluntary departure criteria was being finalized when I
left Bissau last week. I trust that the Minister of
Defence, who is here with us today, will elaborate
further on that effort. It is expected that, with these
steps concluded by the national authorities in
consultation with the CPLP and ECOWAS partners, the
process for jump-starting the implementation of the
pension fund will be launched through the
disbursement of the $63 million pledged by ECOWAS
heads of State in March, including some $45 million
for the fund.

Significant progress has also been made in recent
weeks with regard to the coordination of international
partners involved in the security sector reform process.
In that regard, the deployment of the Angolan technical
mission in the first quarter of 2011 was complemented
by the recent deployment of a military assistance
mission from Brazil, which intends to refurbish the
former army headquarters, where an academy for the
training of army officers will be set up during the
course of 2012. For its part, the Angolan mission is
already improving the working and living conditions of
the military through the refurbishment of barracks and
police training, notably on protective operations. These
developments have undoubtedly contributed to the
increased stability that we have felt in the country in
recent months. At the same time, of course, we believe
that the earlier ECOWAS can be on the ground, the
more sustained the international support to key reforms
will be.

UNIOGBIS will continue to enhance its support
for strengthening the capacities of national partners to
ensure proper coordination of the efforts in the area of
security sector reform. It will also pursue its work in
the area of police reform, in particular for the
establishment of model police stations - the first one
was launched on 24 June - and the ongoing vetting,
certification and training of police personnel.

Moving on to the issue of political dialogue, our
efforts have focused on preparations for the national
conference and high-level dialogue involving the
political leadership and paving the way for a
consensual revision of the Constitution. Following the
recent conferences held in Dakar and Lisbon in May
for the Guinea-Bissau diaspora living in Africa and
Europe, the regional conferences, which are the final
leg of the preparatory phase, were launched on 24 June
11-39059
in Buba, in the south, and are expected to conclude at
the end of July.

The preparatory conferences will culminate in a
national conference, which the organizing committee
believes will take place in late November or early
December. Let me stress here that the conferences with
the diaspora were important in obtaining significant
support for the process from the Guinea-Bissau
communities abroad, in particular the diaspora
professionals, with a view to advancing ongoing
institutional reforms, including the constitutional
review process, which the Parliament aims to
undertake before the next legislative elections, in 2012,
with the continued support of UNIOGBIS and other
partners.

The focus of UNIOGBIS, in coordination with
partners, is to ensure that the national conference is
more than just an event and lives up to its promise of
bringing about change, reconciliation and national
consensus on critical changes in society. The mission is
working with the national organizing commission to
design an appropriate process for the national
conference and follow-up. It is also working to foster a
common understanding among all State institutions of
the implications of such a process and the imperative
necessity to take on board the findings from the
diaspora and the regional conferences, and to mobilize
the commitment of State institutions to the national
conference and post-conference processes.

In particular, the follow-up mechanisms will be
required to ensure that the results of the conference are
consolidated and acted upon. UNIOGBIS is also
working with the committee to correct gender-related
participation weaknesses, as were noted during the
Dakar and Lisbon diaspora sessions, and to guarantee
the widest possible participation of all stakeholders,
including women, in the regional conferences.

Regarding the political dialogue at the top level
of Guinea-Bissau's leadership, while there have indeed
been signs of improvement in recent months, it has yet
to be established if the President, the Prime Minister
and their respective advisers and teams have reached a
sufficient level of confidence to address critical aspects
of stability, such as how to handle the issue of the
military leadership and how to fight impunity through
decisive measures. These latter issues are not only
critical for the rule of law but are among the
benchmarks set by the European Union (EU) for the
3
full resumption of assistance within the framework of
the consultations under article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement, which were launched in March this year. In
this regard, we look forward to the results of the new
round of consultations with the EU held on 24 June in
Bissau. We understand that the two parties will meet
again soon in Brussels to further review progress on
major aspects.

With regard to impunity, I wish to recall that the
Government recently accepted and pledged to comply
with the Geneva universal periodic review
recommendations, including those referring
specifically to the need to conduct credible and
transparent investigations into the March and June
2009 political assassinations. Regrettably, and despite
significant interactions among the Prosecutor-General,
several key ambassadors in Bissau and Dakar and
myself, on ways of ensuring a credible and transparent
investigation process consistent with the provisions of
resolutions 1876 (2009) and 1949 (2010), the
Prosecutor-General recently rushed a decision to
transfer the case of the June 2009 killings to the
military court. That decision appeared to most
observers to be an attempt to contravene the relevant
Security Council resolutions, since the investigation
team had not exhausted all avenues for interviewing
some witnesses. The decision also constituted a setback
given the serious challenges posed to the constitutional
order by the military in recent years, and the major
concerns about the independence and ability of the
military justice system to oversee and complete this
process in a credible fashion.

Drug trafficking also continues to pose a major
challenge to the country's stability. There is a need for
the national authorities to demonstrate a firmer
commitment and determination to mobilize national
resources to address this scourge. Recent progress on
the establishment of police coordination mechanisms
and the launching of the Transnational Crime Unit
project are positive signals that must be built upon and
complemented by additional support from international
partners. The adoption on 15 June by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau of the 2011-2014 national
operational plan to combat drug trafficking, organized
crime and drug abuse in Guinea-Bissau, established by
the Government with the assistance of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), is yet another encouraging step in the
context of the increased commitment by the national
authorities to fight this phenomenon as a matter of
priority.

The United Nations structures in Guinea-Bissau
will continue their support for national authorities for
the implementation of such plans. I wish to commend
recent initiatives, such as the G8+ meeting held in May
in France and the transatlantic partnership meeting held
in Lisbon, which are forums that could help support
subregional and national plans to fight transnational
crime, drug trafficking and money laundering.
However, we believe that additional efforts could be
made by expert agencies in the area of appropriate
information-sharing, including trend analyses and
comparative studies among countries in the subregion.
Currently, the debate swings between the national
authorities claiming that this phenomenon is not as
widespread as depicted, with qualified sources stating
the opposite, without, however, providing concrete
evidence to the authorities.

Here I would like to inform the Council that
Ambassador Fedotov, the head of UNODC, will be
joining us in Bissau, in the region, in October to be
able to work together on this exercise.

In conclusion, the increased stability and the
more positive political climate in the country remain
fragile. Consolidating them must continue to be the
focus of our concerted efforts. The context in Guinea-
Bissau is mixed: on the one hand, the political and
security situation is improving; but on the other hand,
the economic reforms have yet to be sustained by other
key reforms, notably in the defense and justice sectors.
Without justice reform, we will always have problems;
and without a functioning justice system, we cannot
carry out proper investigations. Therefore, we have to
direct our efforts at justice reform.

In addition, serious concerns remain regarding
the lack of commitment by the national authorities to
address impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime,
despite the potential devastating impact of those
phenomena on the country's stability.

The country is indeed at a crossroads. With the
support of international partners, all basic conditions
are in place for genuinely advancing the national
dialogue, the security sector reform programme and
other key socio-economic reforms. Nonetheless, the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau should remain mindful of
their obligations, with a view to sustaining a longer-
term commitment on the part of their international
11-39059
partners in support of the initial, timid steps taken so
far, and to demonstrate their ownership of the process
by addressing the key outstanding issues that still
render the progress made vulnerable and reversible.

We believe that only a firm commitment at this
stage by the national authorities to address key issues
such as the rejuvenation and restructuring of the army,
including its leadership, as well as the fight against
impunity, will result in a more flexible stance on the
part of all international partners and help jump-start
major aspects of the reforms, including with respect to
the crucial issue of the pension fund for the retirement
and reintegration of elements of the defence and
security forces.

