Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French):
The French Government immediately welcomed the
initiative announced by the authorities of the United States
and of the United Kingdom to hold the Lockerbie trial in a
third country, in this instance the Netherlands. France takes
this opportunity to pay tribute to the Netherlands authorities
for their readiness to cooperate.

 

France, the United Kingdom and the United States
were all hit by acts of terrorism in the air in 1988 and
1989, and appealed to the Security Council to support
their request that the Libyan Government should permit
the investigation to be carried out and that justice should
be done. Since then, the three countries have shown
unfailing solidarity, and this is now being reaffirmed.

The French Government takes note with satisfaction
of the decision by the United Kingdom and the United
States to accept one of the proposals made by a number
of regional organizations and officially accepted by the
Libyan Government: to try the two suspects in the
Lockerbie attack in the Netherlands before a Scottish
court and in accordance with Scottish law. My
Government expects the Libyan Government to fulfil the
commitments it has made in the past and to act upon the
positive reaction the Libyan authorities gave yesterday,
which was reaffirmed this evening before the Council.

The French authorities have regularly kept the
Security Council and the Secretary-General informed
about developments in the investigation into the attack on
UTA flight 772, most recently on 6 November 1997.
Naturally, we shall continue to transmit to the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General new information
that should be brought to their attention.

We recall that the draft resolution to be put to the
vote this evening modifies the conditions for suspending
sanctions as regards the holding of the trial in the attack
of Pan Am flight 103. The other provisions of resolution
883 (1993), relating to cooperation with the French
judicial authorities and to the final lifting of sanctions
against Libya, are not affected by the text before us
today, in favour of which my delegation will be voting.

