Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for responding to our request to convene
today's meeting. I would also like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your successful presidency of the Security
Council this month and to thank for your constructive
and effective work. My only regret is that this meeting
could not be held on Friday so that my Minister could
make it to New York from Beijing, which he is currently
visiting, to address the Council.

I am pleased to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations and its States Members that took part in
the General Assembly meeting held a few days ago (see A/70/PV.92) to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary
of the sad day when the Chernobyl disaster occurred.
Our prayers go to the families of those who died or who
were otherwise affected by the tragedy in Ukraine,
Belarus, Russia and far beyond our borders.

Two days ago, I was at the Chernobyl station and
witnessed the signing by the representative of the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) and our Ministry of Energy, in the presence of
the President of Ukraine, of the additional agreement
to permit the international community to gather the
resources needed to finalize the Chernobyl project. I am
happy to report that the new confinement - the biggest
moving structure ever built by humankind - is close
to completion. In November, it will start rolling over
the station, thereby effectively sealing off the remnants
of the reactor and preventing further radioactive
contamination. Ukrainians are deeply grateful to all
donor nations, the five permanent members of the
Security Council, the Group of Seven, the European
Union, the EBRD, industry and international
organizations for bringing efforts and resources
together and striving to turn the page on the biggest
technological disaster in our history. This is a great
achievement, and we do believe that, by such concerted
efforts, we will be able to resolve all outstanding issues,
regardless of how impossibly complicated they might
seem at the moment.

Unfortunately, this is not the only issue that brought
me here today. As if the land of Ukraine had not suffered
enough already, as Council members know, we have
been struggling for more than two years against the

aggression of our neighbour and our formerly brotherly
nation, the Russian Federation. As we have heard today
from the briefers - and I am grateful to the Secretariat,
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine for familiarizing
the Council with the state of affairs on the ground - over
30,000 Ukrainians have fallen victim to the hostilities
in Donbas, with approximately 10,000 killed and 21,000
wounded. More than 1.7 million Ukrainians have had to
leave their homes and have become internally displaced
persons. Every day Ukrainian families lose a son, a
father, a husband, a brother. Every day Ukrainian men
and women are wounded, often becoming physically and
psychologically handicapped for the rest of their lives.

On 23 April, just the other day, four Ukrainian
soldiers were killed and five were wounded as a result
of shelling by militants. Last night, we witnessed the
tragic deaths of three civilians. There were also seven
wounded; they were probably caught in cross-fire. That
incident will have to be properly investigated. Ukraine
has already invited OSCE monitors to the site.

This war is very hybrid in nature, but it is very real in
terms of spilled blood. It is claiming victims regardless
of their ethnicity or the languages they speak. They are
Ukrainians, Russians, Greeks, Germans, Poles, Jews;
all of us are the victims.

But there is one particular nation whose fate is
again at stake - the Crimean Tatars. This indigenous
population of the Crimean peninsula is again suffering,
as it did 60 years ago, from Moscow's brutal grip.
Then it was Stalin, now it is the new Great Leader.
People are disappearing. The only representative
body - the Mejlis - was banned by occupation forces
under the false pretext - one that has become very
widespread - that it was engaged in extremist activity.

Incidentally, a couple of days ago, a Russian citizen
and resident of Moscow had her time in jail extended
for having been so extremist as to have Ukrainian
books in her possession. That is a serious crime indeed,
given that the detainee is a director of the only official
Ukrainian library in Moscow.

But back to Crimean Tatars, whose homes are being

raided and whose unique culture and language are being
endangered once again. Tatar leaders warn that the
ban potentially threatens more than 2,000 members of
some 250 central and local Mejlis structures, which are
traditionally elected by Crimean Tatars. At any time,
they can be accused of conducting extremist activity,
prosecuted and re-expelled from Crimea. More than
130 criminal trials against Crimean Tatars have been
held, and 21 Crimean Tatar representatives have been
kidnapped - 9 are still missing and 3 were recently
found dead.

I am calling today on the Security Council to
demand that the Russian Federation restore the rights of
the Crimean Tatars, ensure that the sham justice meted
out by the Crimean courts and Prosecutor's Office be
halted, abrogate its decision to ban Mejlis, and, in a
broader sense, just get off our lands in Crimea and the
east of Ukraine.

I would like to be absolutely clear: I am humbled
by the sheer magnitude of the attention given by the
Security Council to the Ukrainian issue. As a matter
of fact, we do not want the Russian aggression against
Ukraine to be transformed into yet another item on the
Council's agenda where, despite regular debates, we
see no tangible progress towards a settlement. Since
taking our seat in the Council, the Ukrainian delegation
has demonstrated the utmost restraint in bringing up
this subject. But as has already been mentioned by the
briefers today, the security situation is not improving,
and the Minsk agreements are not being implemented.
I am here today to provide the international community
with the relevant information on the actual state
of affairs on the ground and help to create impetus
for a genuine political process aimed at finding a
sustainable, peaceful solution to the conflict. Ukraine
is convinced that it can be settled only on the basis of
the Minsk agreements. I would like to emphasize a
couple of the most important points.

Since all sides, including Russia, committed to the
ceasefire, after some ups and downs the situation along
the line of contact has recently deteriorated, as we have
heard. Only this week, between 19 and 26 April, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission reported about 500
cases of ceasefire violations by illegal armed groups,
indicating that the intensity of fighting was at a level
that had not been seen since August 2014, a time when
Russian troops massively invaded Ukrainian territory.

Russia's proxies in Donbas are still presenting
major obstacles to the ability of the Special Monitoring
Mission to access all the areas under their control and
to verify the ceasefire and withdrawal of weapons. I
would like to remind the Council that full and safe
access for the Monitoring Mission throughout Ukraine,
including along the Ukrainian-Russian State border,
and the creation of a security area along that border,
were stipulated in the original Minsk agreement of

September 2014, something that our Russian colleagues
have tended to forget recently. The Special Monitoring
Mission reported that 95 per cent of all the freedom-of-
movement incidents during this period were instigated
by militants. Specifically, on 7 April, a Monitoring
Mission vehicle was hit by bullets near Snizhne and
Mission observers were threatened at gunpoint in the
village of Smile. On 9 April, a Monitoring Mission
patrol came under militant fire in Zhovanka. On
18 April, in the city of Donetsk, militants threatened to
fire on OSCE monitors and detain them, and that is the
least of the problems. On 25 April Mr. Zakharchenko,
the leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's
Republic, publicly threatened to shoot OSCE observers
ifa police mission were deployed in certain areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

We are extremely concerned about the fact that
illegal armed groups have continued to shell Ukrainian
armed forces' positions and civilian sites, especially
in places located near the agreed areas for demining.
Despite such provocations, we are fully committed to
completing the demining of all the agreed-on priority
areas, and we are grateful to the United Nations
demining experts planning to help. On a personal
note, I recently saw an 11-year-old boy from the small
Ukrainian town of Mariupol, in southern Ukraine, who
is currently being treated in a Montreal hospital and
taken care of by Canada's Ukrainian community. He
was on a walk with his brother and a couple of friends
and picked up a strange object that cost him three limbs.
He is not just recovering in hospital, he does not know
yet that he now has no younger brother.

Another serious matter is the restoration of
damaged economic and social infrastructure in order
to provide livable conditions for local civilians on both
sides of the contact line. The repairs of the damaged
facilities, including water pipelines, can be done only
after we have ensured that the security situation has
genuinely de-escalated and provided personal safety
guarantees for the repairer personnel. Along with that,
we remain deeply concerned about the continuing
exacerbation of the humanitarian situation owing to the
unwillingness of the illegal armed groups in Donbas to
lift their blockade of the activities of the international
humanitarian organizations in the region.

After months of negotiations, there are still 120
Ukrainians being held captive in Donbas whom we
cannot get out, regardless of the all-for-all formula that
appeared to have been agreed on by everybody. Even
the International Committee of the Red Cross has not
been allowed to visit them, nor has it been permitted
to search for some 800 missing persons. Me'decins
Sans Frontieres has been accused of espionage and
banned from the region by the Russian proxies, despite
the Russian Federation's promise to put additional
pressure on the illegal groups to let that international
humanitarian organization into the region. Yesterday,
we barely managed to get our Vice-Speaker of
Parliament into Minsk; she was leading a working group
on humanitarian issues of the Trilateral Contact Group
in Minsk but was banned by Russia for five years, a
ban that Belarus supported. And this despite the fact
that Belarus offered its capital for peace talks. We are
carefully collecting the evidence of these crimes, and
we will use it later on. One of these collections makes
for very bad reading, with a lot of bad pictures, but our
delegation will circulate the information.

There are no signs of positive change in the
difficult security front, either. Russia has organized
and deployed in Donbas a 34,000-strong hybrid
military force consisting of regular Russian troops as
well as foreign and local militants. Russian generals
and military officers are providing direct command-
and-control of that illegal military entity, which is
impressively heavily armed. Specifically, as of now
the terrorists have at least 470 tanks, 870 armoured
combat vehicles, 450 tube artillery systems and 190
multiple launch rocket systems, operated by so-called
disgruntled miners. That is more than most NATO
members have in their regular armed forces, and yet
it was allegedly acquired in local hardware stores.
The last time I checked, one could hardly buy a decent
knife in a hardware store, let alone multiple launch
rocket systems and jet flamethrowers - which, by the
way, are not to be found in the stores of the Ukrainian
armed forces.

We would greatly appreciate it if the Russian
Federation would take the lead and kindly offer to safely
store their beloved separatists' deadly toys on Russian
territory, verifiable by the OSCE, thereby removing
another stumbling block in the way of a long-awaited
peace, with the aim of showing real interest in the
Minsk process and bringing a lifting of the sanctions
closer. I do not want take up too much of the Council's
precious time, so our Permanent Mission will be happy
to provide members with the information I have here,
which will be made available later.

The Russian proxies are systematically ruining the
social and economic infrastructure of Donbas, once
Ukraine's industrial powerhouse. They are dismantling
entire factories and taking them to Russia. Vast reserves
of coal in Donbas are also being stolen and transported
to Russia. Ukraine has lost more than 20 per cent of
its gross domestic product as a result of the Russian
aggression. And that is on top of the economic war that
the Russian Federation has effectively waged on us by
blocking our exports as well as the transit of goods to
Central Asian States and China. All of this, I should
remind the Council, is in contravention of the Budapest
Memorandum on Security Assurances, signed in 1994,
whereby the signatories promised not to exert economic
pressure on Ukraine.

We are totally committed to a political settlement.
Our experts have been to Minsk more than 30 times
in order to clarify how a political resolution can be
achieved and how we can rebuild our ruined economy,
revive the region and decentralize our political system.
I have no time today to discuss those issues, but I would
like to touch on one very key point, the elections, which
are not only essential to the peace process but are
becoming a reality. We have prepared every piece of
the necessary legislation and are ready to discuss their
modalities, as our leaders agreed on in Minsk.

What we need, in order to kick-start the election
process, in accordance with OSCE standards and in
conformity with Ukrainian law, as agreed to by our
leaders, is a better security situation on the ground. Let
us be reasonable. If there is no security, nobody will
hold or observe the elections. President Poroshenko
recently proposed deploying a police mission in Donbas,
which we believe would help to ensure a safe and secure
environment in Donbas, particularly in the context of
local elections. The status and mandate of the mission,
and its umbrella and composition, can be discussed
later. We are open to negotiations and will continue
to call on the international community, including the
United Nations and OSCE member States, to engage
constructively in putting the initiative into practice.

In conclusion, I would again like to draw the
Council's attention to the issue ofhuman rights. At least
11 Ukrainian citizens have become political prisoners
in Russia. They include a member of the Ukrainian
Parliament and of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe, Nadiya Savchenko, a Ukrainian
film-director and native Crimean-Ukrainian citizens.
We approved a sanctions list against individuals
who took part in mock trials of Ukrainian political
prisoners in Russia, the so-called Savchenko-Sentsov
list. We expect that our international partners will join
that initiative.

The only thing we are interested in is achieving a
lasting, just and fair peaceful solution. That will not
be an easy task to accomplish, we know, but anything
short of it would be unacceptable to the Ukrainian
people, whose best sons and daughters already paid
the ultimate price in defending their homeland. We are
ready to do our part of the job, but I am afraid that the
keys to sustainable de-escalation and a subsequent long-
lasting settlement reside in Moscow. It is Moscow that
has to produce those keys and open the door to a better,
peaceful future without death, hatred or sanctions.

