Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): May I begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of February.
We are confident that, with your wide experience,
diplomatic skills and commitment, you will successfully
lead the work of this body. Let me assure you of the full
cooperation and support of the Polish delegation.

I should also like to pay tribute to Ambassador Sir
John Weston for the remarkably efficient and effective
manner in which he presided over the Council in the month
of January.

I wish to point out that Poland fully supports the
statement made by the representative of Italy on behalf of
the European Union.

The Polish delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive and detailed report on
Angola. Our thanks go also to his Special Representative,
Mr. Blondin Beye.

We have to note with regret that the information on
the situation in Angola contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and in what you, Madam President,
brought back to the Council from your visit to Angola,
increases our concern and calls for deepened and serious
reflection on the future of the United Nations involvement
in Angola.

A year ago, in its resolution 976 (1995), the Council
declared its intention to conclude the mission of UNAVEM
III once the objectives of the Lusaka Protocol had been
achieved in accordance with the schedule attached to it. The
Council also expressed its expectation that this process
would be completed by February 1997. As a consequence
of the recent serious setbacks in the peace process, the
parties have changed the original schedule. The January
1996 agreement on a new timetable is in our View a
welcome development, although, given the parties' past
performance, much more than mere declarations are
needed now. Indeed, the very future of the peace process
in Angola, as well as the continuing involvement of the
international community, are contingent upon the parties'
willingness and ability to resume the implementation of
their obligations.

In the first place, the serious delay in the process of
troop-quartering has to be made up for and the relevant
agreements have to be fully implemented. UNITA is the
primary addressee in this regard.

Since the quartering of UNITA troops constitutes
one of the central elements of the peace process, we are
particularly concerned at the protracted delays on the part
of UNITA in seriously embarking on a large-scale,
uninterrupted and verifiable quartering of its troops in
accordance with the newly agreed timetable. According to
current UNAVEM. III reports, as of yesterday morning
there were only about 3,600 UNITA troops registered -
rather than the 16,500 declared by Mr. Savimbi - to
report to the quartering areas by 8 February. We are
alarmed by the failure of UNITA to extend its full
cooperation to UNAVEM. III in the Mission's task of
assisting the quartering process. The reported illegal
removal by UNITA of 800 tents from the quartering
centres only adds to this picture. Let me also stress that
the credibility of UNITA will not be enhanced by its
providing unarmed civilians instead of soldiers to the
quartering areas.

We also notice that UNITA has failed to release all
prisoners registered by the International Committee of the
Red Cross, as stipulated by relevant agreements.

In falling so significantly behind the agreed
schedule, UNITA jeopardizes the whole peace process in
Angola and in fact the future of that country. We must
not lose sight of the fact that the enduring tensions in
Angola have been increasingly threatening the civilian
population and have seriously limited the possibilities of
humanitarian assistance.

We expect the Security Council to closely monitor
the implementation of the understandings reached at the
meeting of a government delegation with UNITA leaders
in Bailundo on 21 December, 1995, as well as the
fulfilment of the promises to resume UNITA troop-
quartering made recently by Mr. Savimbi. Further delay
in taking appropriate action will certainly affect the
position of the international community on the situation

 

in Angola and consequently may lead to consideration of
United Nations withdrawal from that country.

Having said this, the Polish delegation is still of the
view that at this particular juncture the international
community should continue its support for the peace
process in Angola. However, the outcome of that process
depends on the attitude of, and action by, the Angolans
themselves, and in particular the UNITA members. All the
outside world can do is to facilitate their endeavours. We
expect that the current debate in the Security Council will
provide us with the necessary guidance to address the
situation in Angola in the most effective manner.

