Mr. Yel'Chenko (Ukraine): Mr. President, at the
outset, let me join previous speakers in congratulating you
on Namibia's timely initiative to convene today's open
debate of the Security Council on this most important
matter. The lengthy list of participants vividly
demonstrates the acuteness of the agenda item before the
Council. I would also like to express our appreciation to
the Special Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his
informative briefing earlier today and to extend Ukraine's
strong support for his strenuous efforts in protecting
children affected by armed conflict.

 

The phenomenon of participation of children in armed
conflicts and hostilities is a very old one. It has been in
existence since the human race began to wage wars. But it
is most unfortunate that this phenomenon continues to exist,
as do wars.

It is very clear that in the last resort the reason why
children are suffering from being involved in armed
conflicts is the conflicts themselves. In concentrating so far
on this very simple fact, I do not mean to imply that the
measures aimed at protection of children in armed conflicts
are the palliatives.

I would like to stress, as has already been pointed out
by a number of previous speakers, how important it is to
realize that the present-day conflicts, even when they
involve regular armed forces, are mostly of a civil, inter-
ethnic or internal nature. So far, the main purpose of the
warring sides is not to subdue the rival group but rather to
exterminate or banish it. In this event, children are not
simply collateral victims of atrocities committed by either
side but are the direct target thereof. The same is true for
involvement of children in fighting.

Undoubtedly, there is no single remedy to resolve the
problem. However, in our opinion, the best solution would
certainly be to eliminate altogether such internal warfare, as
it constitutes the most significant cause of crimes against
children in armed conflicts. But it is rather a long-term task
of a general nature. What is important and, in principle,
attainable for us today is, first, to create a universal
mechanism which would effectively and inevitably penalize
the perpetrators of crimes against children in armed
conflicts. In this respect, I cannot help but mention a clear
signal sent by the Diplomatic Conference in Rome that laid
a firm foundation of a strong, effective and universal
international criminal court, which would have jurisdiction
over crimes against children, including the crime of
conscripting or enlisting children into armed forces, as the
most heinous war crime.

Secondly, we must seek to promote regional
mechanisms and arrangements for the prompt and impartial
investigation and prosecution of persons responsible for
crimes against children. Thirdly, we need to establish a
global "search and capture" system which would create
conditions that would prevent the perpetrators from finding
safe havens for themselves anywhere in the world.

It cannot be denied that the international community
has always been, and remains, greatly concerned about this
and has taken a number of steps in an effort to put an end
to continuing child abuse in armed conflicts. International
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, its two
Additional Protocols, the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict,
the Declaration of the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child recognize the right
of children to the necessary protection. In addition,
various regional and national instruments provide specific
protection for children in armed conflicts.

All these instruments constitute a sufficient legal
basis for the adequate protection of the rights of children.
They also enjoy the practically universal participation and
support of States. Therefore, high international standards
for the protection of children in armed conflicts have been
set up. The main task now is to ensure their consistent
implementation, and this task requires that greater efforts
should be made jointly by Governments and the relevant
international organizations.

At the previous meeting of the Security Council on
this subject, last year, many constructive suggestions were
made on how to promote the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts. We have also heard a number
of very interesting practical proposals today. The
delegation of Ukraine is particularly pleased that the
Council is about to adopt, for the first time in its history,
a draft resolution relating specifically to this matter. We
consider its scope quite comprehensive. At the same time,
allow me to emphasize several additional points.

In our opinion, the Security Council, as the organ
primarily responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, could focus further on the roots of the
suffering of children in armed conflicts. There is also a
need for the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and other bodies to work together in a more
integrated fashion in order to shift the emphasis beyond
humanitarian assistance and towards the areas of
economic and social development. As we all know, the
growing number of armed conflicts, as well as their brutal
character, is to a large extent the result of poverty and
decreasing resources that lead to extensive population
migrations, unemployment and the growth of crime.
Sometimes a mere spark can kindle the flame of long and
bloody warfare, especially in areas with a population of
mixed ethnic or religious composition. In this connection,
it is important not to overlook the role of sustainable
economic development, the preservation and strengthening
of the fabric of societies, and education.

 

Another problem that requires urgent consideration is
how to monitor and control arms flows into the areas where
children are systematically brutalized and abused. Thus, the
Security Council could take a more differentiated approach
in recommending to the Member States specific actions in
order to ensure the implementation of arms embargoes. I
recently had an opportunity to submit to the Council
consolidated information about the national policy and
practice of Ukraine in this area. This information was
circulated as a document of the Council, S/1999/706.

As to the economic sanctions imposed by the Security
Council, my country strongly supports the idea that they
must be used appropriately to target those responsible in
order to prevent suffering by the most vulnerable part of
the population: women and children.

The issue of the demobilization of all active soldiers
younger than 18 years old also requires immediate
attention. In this connection, we support the current efforts
to promote the adoption, at the earliest possible date, of an
optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

Ukraine is actively participating in the efforts aimed
at preventing the Victimization of children in armed
conflicts all around the world and the rehabilitation of those
who have suffered physically or mentally from the cruelties
of war. On invitation from the Government of Ukraine, a
group of children from Kosovo is currently housed in
children's recreation areas in our country. With the
assistance of the United Nations Children's Fund, a special
project to establish an international children's rehabilitation
centre in Crimea, in southern Ukraine, is now under
preparation and will be launched very soon.

Finally, we look forward to continued focus and
follow-up by the Security Council on this important issue.
Children have the right to life, to peace and to respect. Let
us work together to help them.

