Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic. As always, I have remained in
contact with the Director General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to discuss matters related to this file. In anticipation
of this briefing, I spoke to him yesterday. I have also
received a written update from the Permanent Mission
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations.

With re gardto progress relatedto the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), there is one new development
to report. As the Council is aware, two of the 27
chemical weapons production facilities declared by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic remain to
be destroyed. Following a long-standing delay due to
the security situation at the site, those two stationary
above-ground facilities can now be accessed. The
OPCW is currently conducting a visit to those two
facilities in order to confirm their condition. That is the
first step in the process of OPCW verification of the
destruction of those facilities.

I regret to note that the long-standing issue related
to Syria's declaration and subsequent amendments
remains, in spite of the fourth round of high-level
consultations that took place in The Hague in September.
As the Director General stated in his most recent note to
the OPCW Executive Council, neither the information
provided during the consultations nor the latest
submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic have enabled
the resolution of all identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies in Syria's declaration.

Efforts to resolve those issues have been hampered
by a lack of original historical records, as well as what
the Director General has described as an

"ongoing lack of access to and engagement with
senior leaders/officials who have an overarching
knowledge of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme" (S/2017/916, para. 10).

While it is a positive step that the Government of Syria
has chosen to declare additional laboratories in their
rooms in the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre, the OPCW assessment remains that the
declaration of the Centre is incomplete.

On 2 November, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) submitted its
report on the alleged incident of the use of chemical
weapons at Ltamenah on 30 March. Last month, the
Director General informed that environmental samples
provided to the FFM. team, and reportedly connected
to the 30 March incident at Ltamenah, showed the
presence of sarin. The report of the FFM. stated that,
given the limitations in some evidence, the FFM. was
not able to determine with absolute certainty the use of
a chemical weapon.

However, the FFM. was able to determine the
presence of sarin on samples that came from the
alleged site of the incident; that causalities from that
site and time period displayed symptoms and received
treatment consistent with exposure to sarin; and that
munition parts from the alleged site of the incident
were consistent with the application of a chemical
weapon. As a result, the FFM. was able to conclude
that sarin was more than likely used at that incident.
The FFM. is continuing its work on looking into other
allegations ofthe use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic.

These most recent findings of the FFM. are deeply
concerning, all the more so in view of the fact that
the mandate of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is set to end on 16 November.
Allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
have not ceased and therefore nor has the need to
identify and to hold accountable those responsible for
their use. The unity of the Council will be necessary in
order to prevent impunity for the use of those abhorrent
weapons. As always, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs remains ready to provide any
support and assistance that it can as we work together
to restore the universal norm against chemical weapons
and to strengthen the broader non-proliferation regime.

