Mr. Baja (Philippines): I would like to
congratulate your delegation, Madam President, for
organizing this debate on a very timely topic and for
organizing an Arria formula debate on the same topic
last week. We are again honoured by your presence and
by your presiding over this meeting on the eve of your
much-awaited visit to my country. We are also grateful
for the very informative briefings given by the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator.

The issue of national reconciliation has touched
every nation in one form or another, some in the distant
past while others more recently, if not even at the
present time. No country has ever been homogenous in
all respects. All are liable to be challenged by fissures
in the fabric of their societies, some more acutely than
others.

There are diverse sources of the division of
societies and communities, and experience has shown
that they run the gamut of racial, ethnic, political,
ideological and religious factors. Unfortunately, such
conflict sometimes leads to violent confrontation and
the breakdown of the body politic. If this happens, the
easier task is to stop the violence. The harder challenge
is to begin the process of reconciliation and reverse the
dynamics of conflict that ruptured the society. Winning
the war is easier than winning the peace.

My delegation would like to add further emphasis
to some general propositions referred to previously by
members of the Council that have enriched our
discussion of the topic at hand.

First, there are no quick fixes to achieve
reconciliation in post-conflict societies. National
reconciliation generally takes place through a long-
term process, aided by policies and actions that
confront the conflict head-on. It requires serious efforts
to take stock of, assess and analyse the conditions
under which reconciliation can take place. While there
are no easy solutions, the process of reconciliation is
indispensable to ensure the long-lasting stability of
post-conflict societies.

Secondly, national reconciliation is essentially an
internal process and cannot be imposed externally on
communities in conflict. I think the delegations of
Brazil and the United Kingdom have eloquently
observed that. The context of each post-conflict society
is unique. The parameters of the process of
reconciliation must grow out of the specific
experiences of the society concerned. No external body
or organ can decree reconciliation from the outside.
That would invite disaster. Stakeholders in post-
conflict societies must have the sense of having
ownership of the process if it is to bring about the
emergence of institutions and practices capable of
creatively resolving the kind of social and political
tensions that led to past violent conflict.

This is not to say, however, that the expertise and
the guidance that could be provided by outside groups
such as the United Nations have no place in national
reconciliation processes. In many instances, the
traumas of violent conflicts are so deep that conflicting
groups require the even-handedness of objective
outsiders to overcome emotional, cultural, political and
other hurdles to mount a successful reconciliation
process. But such an intervention, while desirable in
certain instances, must be pursued carefully to maintain
the integrity of the reconciliation process. One danger
that could undermine such integrity would be for the
interveners to yield, wittingly or unwittingly, to the
temptation of supplanting the goals and values of the
stakeholders with their own.

Thirdly, reconciliation should delve into a
conflict's dynamics, which span the entire political,
physical, cultural and psycho-social dimensions of the
society concerned. The physical and political ravages
of war and violence are clearly felt and observed and,
more often than not, become the focus of attention in
the reconstruction of societies in transition. While this
is an important consideration, those ravages do not
represent the totality of the negative impact of conflict.
Healing the hearts and minds of victims in post-conflict
societies is sometimes more critical than the
reconstruction of burned villages or the salving of
maimed bodies. The violent rupturing of a society
sometimes necessitates the search for new social
identity, meaning and values, which cannot be
downplayed or smoothed over with political niceties
and rhetoric.

Post-conflict societies face a multitude of
challenges. Let me at this time discuss one of the
shared, perennial dilemmas in transitional societies that
weigh heavily on the issue of reconciliation: how to
balance the legitimate demands for justice against the
perpetrators of heinous crimes with the vital need for
peace and stability. It is difficult to measure the
legitimate interest in punishing perpetrators against the
imperative for national reconciliation in a society
recently torn by conflict. Should post-conflict societies
pursue truth and justice above all else, or should they
focus on the attainment of political stability and not put
in jeopardy their fragile new democracies under the
pressure of truth commissions and prosecutions?

In our View, the correct approach would be
somewhere in between those two positions. While
justice should figure out in the process of national
reconciliation, it must be recognized that in many
instances the attainment of retributive justice is not
feasible at the onset of the reconciliation process
because of the inability of transitional institutions to
provide justice through conventional means. This is
why one of the most important needs in post-conflict
societies is the strengthening of the rule of law and its
institutions.

This does not mean, however, that contrition and
restitution by wrongdoers are not possible during the
reconciliation process. Those goals could be pursued
through truth-telling alternatives such as truth
commissions, which have been tried in various post-
conflict societies over the last few decades.
Reconciliation, in this case, can lay the path from a
past where justice was denied, to a present where it is
not yet fully attainable and to a future where it will be
an integral part of the social order.

Finally, let us not lose sight of one of the most
important functions of national reconciliation: to lay
the foundation for preventing future conflicts and
atrocities. This is one of the dimensions of the process
that must be carefully considered by the parties to the
conflict. National reconciliation should not focus
narrowly on reacting to overt violence associated with
the widespread abuse of human rights. It must include
proactive social and political strategies for the removal
of political and social conditions that made
discrimination and abuse acceptable in the society. This
is not a simple task, as it could require the
transformation of post-conflict societies from the
culture of violence to the culture of peace.

In the end, the goal of national reconciliation is to
enhance justice based on recognizing and completely
accepting the supreme value of the human person, as
guaranteed by institutions providing its fullest
expression. It creates a society that would have a
capacity to deal creatively and equitably with the threat
or eruption of conflict based on the values of truth,
justice, mercy and dignity.

With those considerations in mind, the United
Nations has a key role in achieving national
reconciliation in post-conflict situations. In playing
such a role, security and development offices within
the United Nations system should maintain their core
roles as they work for greater synergy, which will
integrate political strategies with development policies.
As the delegation of Germany has observed, the real
challenge for the United Nations will be its ability to
deliver it expertise and its assistance in a coherent,
coordinated and effective manner. Here, the Security
Council should have a leading role in generating the
political will among the parties in conflict areas, the
countries in the region and the subregion and the
international community to adopt strategies and
frameworks that will heal the wounds of conflict and
promote the reconciliation process.

