Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you our
thanks for presiding over the work of the Council. I
wish you every success in your work.

I should like also to express our gratitude to you
for having convened this meeting, in order to consider
the very dangerous situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. Indeed, the
Zionist entity, in its military actions and acts of
aggression, has exceeded all limits. Its acts should be
described as terrorism, with all that implies in terms of
great loss of human life and of property. Everyone is
fully aware of these acts, which cannot be compared
with acts of general terrorism perpetrated by
individuals.

Once more the Security Council is undergoing a
test with respect to the maintenance of international
peace and security: its credibility and effectiveness are
being put to the test, along with those of its member
States. Here, I would recall that as of 15 February 2002
the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine has sent
97 messages to the Security Council calling on it to
intervene and to put a stop to Zionist terrorism and
massacres in Palestine. But, unfortunately, the Council
has been unable to take action to put an end to the
tragedy. This, we believe regretfully, will continue
because of United States hegemony. That State
provides military, political and media cover for the
crimes perpetrated by the Zionist entity against the
people of Palestine.

International relations are now going through a
very difficult and complex negative phase because of
the negative concept of force and the effects of that
concept on law, and because of flagrant disrespect for
international law on the part of certain permanent
members of the Security Council. This results in a
departure from the laws of justice and equity when the
Council considers a situation. The international legal
underpinning of human civilization is threatened with
destruction; there is a trend towards rapidly enshrining
the law of the jungle.

We have noted a number of negative phenomena
that have always been part of the international legal
system represented by the Security Council. Let me
describe the most flagrant of these. The international
system has been dominated by a policy of force and
opportunism, in spite of the checks and balances and
the joint responsibility set out in the Charter and in
international law. The second is the political double
standard that is applied and pursued as a matter of
policy. The third is the undermining of the stability of
international law and the introduction of aberrant and
alien interpretations of international rules and laws to
further the policies of certain influential States
members of the Security Council. The result is a set of
dangerous realities that have a negative affect on
international relations in general and that, because of
recent world developments, have created dangerous,
impossible situations.

This leads, first of all, to erroneous
interpretations that are not based on any legal concept
of self-defence as set out in the Charter and that do not
accord with the interpretations of the International Court
of Justice or with the conditions under which States,
individually or collectively, may have recourse to that
concept in order to defend themselves. The principle of
self-defence is a noble one; it is one of the vital
foundations of international law. But it has been made
into a political tool to justify acts of aggression, which
is insolently used by the Zionist entity every day in the
face of the world community: it claims self-defence as
it seeks to bring down the Palestinian people through
killing, starvation and siege. Thus it destroys legal
principles that are the basis of the Charter and other
stable principles of international law.

Secondly, we see flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law and the principles of
human rights, along with military actions and
occupation. That was mentioned by the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, in his statement to the
Council on 18 January 2002, and was reaffirmed by
Ms. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in a 19 February
2002 statement to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The Zionist entity's daily practices in the occupied
Arab territories and its acts of aggression against the
Palestinian people are a flagrant violation of all four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and pose a dangerous
threat to the very foundations of international law and
the principles of human rights.

Thirdly, it leads to a distortion of the right of
peoples to self-determination and of their inalienable
right to resist occupation and to defend themselves,
their territorial integrity and the integrity of their
people, as set out in the Charter and reaffirmed by
many Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and by the International Court of Justice.
That premeditated, intentional distortion of these rights
is being carried out with help from the vast power that
a major Power holds over information; that Power
places all its resources at the service of the Zionist
entity, dangerously distorting the distinction between
the victim and the aggressor. The crimes perpetrated by
the Zionist entity's forces of occupation against
unarmed Palestinians go beyond the cruellest crimes in
the history of colonialism, including the use of
sophisticated warplanes against Palestinian civilians in
their homes, towns and villages. Since the beginning of
the occupation in 1948, the sadism and brutality of the
Zionist occupation have caused the deportation of 68
per cent of the Palestinian people: 4.5 million Palestinian
refugees are waiting to return to their homeland. The
Zionists have also uprooted more than 150,000 olive
trees. The millions of Palestinians who remain in
Palestine are in places where children and pregnant
women are killed every day and where gravely ill
civilians perish daily because of the many checkpoints
and the inhuman conditions they must constantly
endure.

The cities and towns of Palestine have become a
huge prison in which the Palestinian people are
confined. As with the apartheid system in South Africa,
this is State aggression and State terrorism. When the
Palestinian people attempt to resist this occupation and
terrorism and to claim their inalienable rights and their
land, they are forced to pay the price: the United States
and the Zionist entity claim that their acts are terrorist
acts. Can there be any more flagrant attempt to portray
the victim as an aggressor? Most people throughout the
world would reject this. These practices cannot be used
as a pretext for violating stable international laws,
which grant peoples the right to self-determination and
the right to resist occupation. In the final analysis, one
cannot solve problems by military means, by weapons,
bombs and missiles, but by applying the rules and
norms of international law.

In conclusion, today world Governments and
States, the United Nations Organization and the
Security Council must adopt a position defending the
rights of the Palestinian people: the right to recover all
their land, the right of return of refugees and the right
to the return of all other occupied Arab territories. Now
and in the future, the Security Council must fully
assume its responsibilities and take the proper
measures in accordance with the Charter and the
foundations of international law in order to put an end
to this terrorism and to compel the occupying force to
fully comply with international humanitarian law. It
must do so immediately, taking measures to protect the
Palestinian people. Otherwise, everyone will, without
exception, bear the historic responsibility for the
deterioration of the international legal system, and the
ship that carries us all will simply sink.

