Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and, in particular,
all our briefers from the field for their insightful
briefings. We are very grateful and sincerely thank
them for the invaluable contribution they are making
to United Nations missions. The many thousands of
police peacekeepers deserve our deepest gratitude
and recognition, and we would be very happy for the
briefers to convey that to all those who work with them.

The briefings have once again underlined the
multifaceted role that the police play in peace operations.
Police are indispensable in stabilizing fragile States and
building security structures. Germany is convinced that
the need for United Nations police is growing. Germany
remains a steadfast advocate of strengthening United
Nations police. Germany currently deploys police
personnel to various peace operations, including, as
mentionedjust a few minutes ago, to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), where we provide a specialist
police team. We also gladly support United Nations
police beyond contributing personnel - for instance,
through financing the recent United Nations police
commanders course in Berlin and the United Nations
Standing Police Capacity in Brindisi. We are also very
proud to chair the Group of Friends of United Nations
Police here in New York City.

We heard in all the briefings about the importance of
United Nations police and how they play a tremendously
crucial role in United Nations peacekeeping, which is
almost a truism. However, if the Security Council were
to ask whether we have exhausted the full potential of
United Nations police, then the answer probably must be
no. I think that we can do better and that we still have not
tapped into the full potential of United Nations police
across the board. Police have many unique advantages.
United Nations police play a crucial role in all conflict
phases, which I think is very important to underline.
They play an important role in prevention, stabilization
and post-conflict peacebuilding. Therefore, United
Nations police need to be ready to advise Governments
and the United Nations system in non-mission contexts
as well. I think that is also a very important point. Let
me offer a few ideas on where we could think about
improving and strengthening United Nations police.

First, strengthening United Nations police advisory
capabilities and services is important with regard to
prevention. United Nations police offer a first-class
prevention tool that remains underutilized and should
be used more systematically and strategically.

Secondly, police commissioners play an important
role that should be further strengthened. It is crucial
that we integrate that into mandates as early and as
comprehensively as possible.

Thirdly, the level of police advice should be
raised within the United Nations system. The Police
Division must be adequately placed within the system.
Police are not just an appendix; they are essential to
sustaining peace, which must be duly reflected in
United Nations structures. Significant steps in that
direction have been taken, but we think that much more
should and could be done.

Fourthly, as many others have already said, the
number of women police peacekeepers should be
increased. It is particularly important for community
policing and peacekeeping operations. Agenda-
sensitive policing is crucial in order to address the
different security needs of women and men, girls and
boys. The current rate of 18 per cent is good, but not
good enough. We can certainly all do better. We very
much welcome the ambitious goals of the Secretary-
General in that regard.

Fifthly, police play an essential role during
transition phases of peace operations. It is important
that police advice be taken on board more strategically
by the Council from the very outset.

Before concluding, let me ask Mr. Yacouba, from
MINUSMA, one question. We have already heard
a couple of insights and recommendations, but I am
particularly interested in the following issue. We have
unfortunately seen a very steep increase in terrorist
attacks in Mali in recent months. So far, I think the
issue has been dealt with primarily by the military. I
would be very interested in his views on whether he
sees or recommends a stronger role for United Nations
police in combating terrorism in Mali.

