Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Special Representative Tanin back to
New York and to the Security Council in his new role
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I congratulate him
again on his appointment and thank him for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs Dacie
and the representative of the Government of Kosovo,
Ambassador Citaku, back to the Council. The United
States commends both of their Governments for their
ongoing efforts to normalize relations through the
European Union-led dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade.
During this reporting period, we were encouraged
to see the Government of Kosovo reach a number
of milestones in the continued strengthening of its
institutions and in establishing constructive working
relationships with its neighbours. I would like to note a
few of them.

First, Kosovo took the very important step of
signing a Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union on 27 October in Strasbourg. This
is progress, and it is a very important step for Kosovo
on its path towards European integration.

Secondly, earlier this month, the Kosovo police
adeptly facilitated the visits of hundreds of displaced
Kosovo Serbs to pay their respects to family members
in cemeteries across Kosovo. The professionalism
demonstrated by the Kosovo police during these
events is further evidence of Kosovo's progress as a
welcoming, tolerant and multicultural society. As the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) noted in its quarterly report,
the Kosovo police were fully in charge of security and
required no intervention on the part of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo or KFOR
during the annual Serbian festival of Saint Vitus and
the accompanying religious services at the Gracanice/
Gracanica Monastery.

In addition, the Governments of Serbia and
Kosovo should be praised for the important agreements
reached in August on the general principles/main
elements for establishing the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities and on energy,
telecommunications and freedom of movement on the
Mitrovica bridge. It is important that both Serbia and
Kosovo reinforce their commitment to the dialogue by
implementing those hard-won agreements from August,
even as they begin to tackle new areas for future
progress that were discussed in Brussels this week.

These achievements were, naturally, significant,
but we are also encouraged by lesser-publicized
initiatives, such as the 13-14 November conference
between Kosovo's and Serbia's Chambers of Commerce
in Pristina. Business leaders met for two days to discuss
opportunities in the construction sector. Kosovo's
Chamber invited its Serbian counterpart and more
than 30 Serbian business representatives to exchange
knowledge, establish contacts and explore potential
joint production with Kosovo businesses. Initiatives of
this type were unimaginable a few years ago and are
the important outcome of the steady progress towards
normalization.

There is, of course, work that remains to be done.
Speedy and comprehensive implementation of Kosovo's
national countering-violent-extremism strategy is
critical. At the same time, Kosovo needs to continue
to pursue anti-corruption measures, including an
e-procurement law, better information-sharing about
indicted civil servants to facilitate suspensions, and
amendments to the law to ensure the suspension of
criminal political appointees. All of this will contribute
to strengthening a democratic Kosovo free from
corruption.

The ongoing situation in the Kosovo Parliament is
worrying. To say that violence, including the use of tear
gas, inside the Assembly chamber is incompatible with
a modern democratic State is a gross understatement. It
must stop. We request that the Government of Kosovo
address the situation and not tolerate any criminal
activity within its democratic institutions. The people
of Kosovo expect their elected representatives to return
to work immediately to resolve the important political,
economic and social issues facing their country, and
they deserve no less.

The Kosovo Assembly's approval of legislation
to set up a specialist court outside the country is a
critically important step. Kosovo has enacted the right
legislation; now it must finalize a host State agreement
with the Netherlands without delay. That step will
ensure justice for crimes that may have been committed
and will build confidence in Kosovo's commitment to
the rule of law. The United States has been a steadfast
supporter of accountability throughout the countries of
the former Yugoslavia, including through assistance to
the Special Investigative Task Force and our support
for the development of Kosovo's judicial and rule-of-
law capacity. We will continue to support justice for
all those who became victims during or following the
Balkan wars.

Finally, I would like to commend Kosovo for
conducting a dignified UNESCO membership
campaign, and applaud the high level of support given
by so many United Nations Member States. The United
States will continue to strongly support Kosovo's
international integration and recognition. We know and
believe that the only future for Kosovo is one that is
securely within the community of nations, including as
a constructive member of multilateral organizations.

In closing, I would like to once again emphasize
that while the United States believes that the situation
in Kosovo remains an important issue, these meetings
are unnecessarily frequent. We repeat our request that
the Security Council extend the Secretary-General's
reporting period on UNMIK to every six months.
