The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.

I would like to start by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, for his briefing. I would also like
to thank Mr. Ivica Dacic', Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci of Kosovo for their statements.
Today, the Security Council meets for the third time
since the historic Agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina of 19 April 2013. Much has happened during
that period. With regard to the 15-point Agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina, many elements of the
implementation plan have already been addressed.
Lithuania encourages the political leaders on both sides
to continue pursuing the path of reconciliation and to
sustain progress in resolving outstanding issues.

Last December, under the Lithuanian presidency,
the Council of the European Union approved the
negotiation mandate for accession negotiations with
Serbia, with accession negotiations having started on
21 January of this year. Negotiations on a stabilization
and association agreement with Kosovo have also
started. The mediation efforts of the European Union
and the transformative impact of the prospects of
European integration are having a clear effect on
both parties to the Agreement. Last year's mayoral
and municipal elections in Kosovo were the first to
be held in all municipalities in Kosovo under a single
legislative framework. The upcoming by-elections in
North Mitrovica on 23 February should conclude that
crucial electoral process. We appreciate the role of
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other relevant actors in the facilitation of
those elections. At the same time, we would like to note
that a broader electoral reform in Kosovo needs to be
completed before the legislative elections later this year.

Besides creating opportunities, progress in
European integration and the 15-point Agreement
require concrete efforts and results to be delivered
in a reasonable time frame. Exchanges of liaison
officers, progress in the area of integrated border
management, police and customs collections are a few
good examples. The integration of the judiciary, the
proper implementation of the agreements on energy
and telecommunications and the uniform application of
Kosovar law throughout the territory are some of the
areas where further progress is needed. In that regard,
the continued assistance of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) is indispensable. We
acknowledge the important role that EULEX continues
to play in strengthening the rule of law. Specific focus
should now be given to the full integration of the rule
of law and municipal institutions in the north under a
single Kosovo jurisdiction.

Five months ago, during an ambush attack on
a vehicle carrying EULEX Kosovo staff members,
the first of the kind since its deployment in 2008, a
Lithuanian customs officer was killed. Lithuania calls
on all the relevant authorities to cooperate with a view
to bringing the perpetrators of that act to justice.

Lithuania welcomes the role that EULEX continues
to play in the fight against organized crime and
corruption, the prosecution of war crimes and the fight
against impunity.

The final objectives of the 19 April Agreement are
still to be met, but the political landscape has changed
fundamentally. The new realities need to be taken into
account, and that has already been done by the European
Union and NATO. We encourage the two sides and their
leaders to continue showing the decisiveness necessary
to bring about that common European future and to
contribute to the stability in the region. The progress
in the normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo can trigger positive spillover effects on the
neighbouring countries.

In view of important progress on the ground, we
would be favourable to reviewing the reporting cycles
at the Council 4 as has already been mentioned by the
representatives of the United States, Luxembourg, the
United Kingdom, Jordan and France - with a view to
reducing the frequency of such meetings.

I would also stress the importance of strengthened
coordination among international actors on the ground,
in particular the United Nations, the European Union
and the OSCE.

Broad support from all communities in Kosovo and
Serbia for all actions taken by their leaders towards the
normalization of relations and the European perspective
is vital to success. The international community should
remain fully engaged and supportive of the efforts by
the parties to sustain the progress achieved so far.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Mr. Thaci has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.

