Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for holding this open debate on the maintenance of
international peace and security, and more specifically
on the theme"War, its lessons and the search for a
permanent peace". This enables the Security Council to
consider in-depth a matter that touches the very heart of
the Organization's work and that, despite its complexity
and importance, has not yet enjoyed due analysis and
understanding.

I should also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his
briefing.

Recognition of the substantive role of the historical
narrative in post-conflict national reconciliation and
preventive diplomacy reflects a transformation in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
one of the main factors of conflict, and heals wounds
in an artificial and irreversible manner. The disputed
historical narrative bears the seeds of prospective
civil war, lies at the heart of the suffering experienced
in many parts of the world, perpetuates war and
undermines peace processes.

The historical narrative is one ofthe most important
components of identity. It is an error to believe that it is
not affected by ongoing developments. It has a concrete
impact on perspectives on present and future events.
Whether or not it is correct, the historic proposition
is not confined to the past but extends to the present
and the future. The failure to establish an environment
conducive to finding a shared historical perspective for
addressing post-conflict situations can be very serious
and may threaten international peace and security.

In that regard, security transcends but does not
nullify the traditional maintenance of international
peace and security, democratic transformation and
economic activity. It is strongly linked to basic
historical events. In addition to the need to defining
such a shared historic proposition, it is vital that efforts
to settle disputes be tempered by justice; if they are
not, they may endanger the future. It may be difficult
or even impossible to resolve certain disputes, but their
settlement should be based on credible propositions.

Saudi Arabia has sought to contribute to the
settlement of regional and international conflicts by
bringing the parties together. We have undertaken
numerous initiatives, including the Arab Peace
Initiative for a just and comprehensive peace between
Israel and the Arab States. Any derogation from the
elements of the Initiative - such as the failure to
recognize the State of Palestine within the borders of
4 June 1967, with its capital in Al-Quds Al-Sharif;
questioning the right of the Palestinian refugees to
return, in accordance with the resolutions of the United
Nations; or actions to weaken the full sovereignty of the
State of Palestine - will undermine the foundations
ofjustice and equity on which the final settlement will
rest.

Any just settlement in Syria should start with the
departure of those who have shed the blood of Syrian
and are guilty of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. They should have no role in formulating
the future of the new Syria.Saudi Arabia has listened
assiduously to the demands of all parties to the conflicts
in Yemen, Lebanon, Somalia and elsewhere, and sought
to achieve a settlement among them, including at the
Taif conference that ended the civil war in Lebanon and
through the Gulf initiative that helped Yemen transition
from conflict to peace. We have also met with councils
of elders in Somalia.

In all these initiatives, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabi has been well aware of the historical background
of the conflicts. We have sought to resolve them
in a manner that would allow us to benefit from
their lessons. If settlement incorporates elements of
amnesty or immunity, it should do so with the consent
of all parties. The prevention of bloodshed must take
precedence over vengeance. Justice can be achieved
through amnesty and tolerance without detracting from
historical realities. That principle was enshrined by the
founder of our Kingdom, King Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and
espoused by President Mandela of South Africa.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia seeks to prevent
conflict through dialogue. To that end, we have presented
initatives of His Majesty King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud, Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, in an
attempt to reach out to all religions and sects, including
at the Conference of Group of Eight in 2008 and at a
global forum on dialogue at the King Abdullah bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue, in cooperation with Spain and
Austria. The dialogue included experts and well-known
personalities, as well as political leaders, to enhance
and promote peaceful coexistence in cultural and
religious diversity, which will lead to permanent peace.

I wish to share with the Council some thoughts
that I hope will be discussed at a level commensurate
with their importance to the concept of the historical
narrative and the quest for sustainable development.
Achieving a shared historical narrative that uncovers
both the truth and violations of human rights is one
of the main pillars of justice and strengthens stability
and peace. There is a pressing need to strike a balance
between uncovering the truth and achieving justice and
national reconciliation when striving for peace among
the citizens of a shared homeland in a way that will
lead to consensus and avoid repeating the mistakes of
the past.

Every situation is unique. That does not mean
that we cannot benefit from the experiences of others.
It simply stresses the dangers of generalizing and
the imposition of inappropriate scenarios that could
complicate the chances of achieving peace. The
participation of the United Nations and its agencies
should not bypass the will of stakeholders. It should
help local parties to settle their disputes pursuant to
their own aspirations, cultures and history. Therein
lies the significance of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security, particularly with respect to
peacekeeping operations.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, are morally responsible for preventing the
exacerbation of conflicts and achieving sustainable
peace. We welcome the creative ideas put forward
by Jordan, and express particular support for the
establishment of a United Nations historical advisory
team to cooperate with the authorities of States in
conflict in order to restore and protect important
archives, record eyewitness testimonials, collect
statistics and establish national archival committees.

