Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): It is an
honour and a welcome duty to speak before the Security
Council today. I look forward to taking part with the
other important Central African Republic partners here
at this meeting, in particular my colleague and brother
Ambassador Nebie, Special Representative of the
African Union to the Central African Republic, who,
as you mentioned, Mr. President, will be speaking later
via video-teleconference from Bouar, where, together
with other members of the panel of facilitators of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, he is pursuing his noble
mission in the search for lasting peace in that country.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2018/125)
has already been submitted to the Security Council. I
shall simply make a few additional remarks.

I am here today to address the issue of the violence
and atrocities that continue to affect a large swath of the
Central African civilian population. The unacceptable
violence and human rights violations are the work
of armed groups that have not yet renounced armed
violence and are slow to engage in dialogue with the
Government. The result of that obstinacy reminds us
that in spite of our efforts, the path to peace, stability
and reconciliation in Central Africa remains long
and arduous. Returning refugees and the internally
displaced to their homes remains a challenge. This
veritable human tragedy is exacerbating an already dire
humanitarian situation, in which life for nearly half of
the Central African population is unimaginable, given
the lack of emergency humanitarian assistance.

I should like to pay tribute once again to
humanitarian workers in the Central African Republic,
in particular those who have lost their lives in an
attempt to save millions of others. It is because of such
acts of heroism, and in particular the daily sacrifices
and tireless efforts of the staff of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), who often
risk their lives, that we have been able to mitigate the
impact of armed conflicts and prevent so many others.

Nonetheless, their sacrifice is not in vain. Despite
great adversity, peace lies ahead in the Central African
Republic. Every day we regain some of the legitimacy
once lost. The Government is working assiduously
to restore the authority of the State and to strengthen
newly established democratic institutions. The inclusive
political process initiated by President Touadera is
gradually gaining ground and now has the full support
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation,
backed by the United Nations and all of Central Africa's
other strategic partners.

The ongoing dialogue and political process
involving the main actors and partners now underpin
multidimensional efforts under way to emerge from
the crisis, such as the Government's attempts to better
represent contemporary society and the tangible
progress made in enhancing the authority of the State
by appointing prefects in the 16 prefectures and in the
majority of sub-prefectures. The new prefect of Ndele,
in the north-east, hasjust assumed office. It is hoped that
the success of the pilot disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration project will enable it to be launched
on a wider scale, thanks financial and technical support
provided by the World Bank.

All elements of MINUSCA are involved in the
process, as it is vital to stability in Central Africa.
That shift in the right direction is also demonstrated
in the strengthening of national judicial institutions. In
addition, preparations for the start of the work of the
Special Criminal Court are well under way. Two days
ago, the Government issued a decree confirming the
appointment of judicial police officers, which would
allow the Court to start its investigations. The message
is clear: the fight against persistent impunity, which
has been the source of recurring conflict in Central
Africa, has begun. This formal judicial institution
will very soon be complemented by new transitional
justice mechanisms, which will lead to an improved
balance betweenjustice and national reconciliation and
guarantee lasting peace.

Thanks to the multifaceted efforts under way,
security and defence structures are now undergoing
far-reaching reforms. The central role played by the
European Union Training Mission to reform the Forces
armees centrafricaines (FACA), is commendable. For its
part, MINUSCA is strengthening its support of Central
African security forces by recruiting gendarmerie and
police officers at the technical level and by supporting
the implementation of various strategic frameworks.
Every effort must now be made to sustain the gains
made and to marshal considerable resources for the next
five years. The support of key partners, such as France,
the United States of America, China and the Russian
Federation, should be underscored. Not long ago, the
mere idea of a joint MINUSCA-FACA endeavour was
unimaginable. We are now partners in field operations,
such as in Paoua and Obo, in the south-east. At the
request of the Security Council, the Central African
authorities and MINUSCA have agreed on a plan for
the use and deployment of the Central African defence
and security forces. In May, the Secretary-General will
submit to the Council a detailed plan to ensure more
effective collaboration and support.

(Spoke in English)

As we contemplate ways and means to strengthen
the support that we provide to the national defence and
security forces, we remain dedicated to optimizing
our own performance. Moreover, our commitment to
performance is as strong as our resolve to abide by
the highest standards of conduct and discipline. Let
it be clear that sexual exploitation and abuse have no
place in peacekeeping. The Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy will remain an integral part of our duty
to protect.

Efforts are under way to more effectively protect
civilian populations, while ensuring the safety and
security of our own peacekeepers. Because of the
nature of the threats we face in the Central African
Republic, unless MINUSCA has the capacity to apply
meaningful military pressure on armed groups that
remain reluctant to embrace peace, no peace process
will have the chance to succeed. That is why I am highly
appreciative of the ongoing outreach by the Secretary-
General and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix to
secure the 900 additional troops that the Security
Council authorized in the renewed mandate. I would
like to thank the troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and their sacrifice for the cause of peace in
the Central African Republic.

But the work is not over yet. More will be required
from us all. The fate of millions of civilians hinges on
the commitment of well-equipped, well-trained and
determined troops who use all the power bestowed upon
them by the Council to protect populations from harm.
I am grateful to our military and police forces for their
hard work and robust posture, which we observed in
Bambari early last year, and in Bocaranga and Bang in
late 2017. That is the current situation in Paoua, where
the MINUSCA force is engaged in a military operation
to create a safe and secure area for the people of Paoua
and the entire prefecture of Ouham-Pende, and we are
determined to do even more.

Together with the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, the Mission continues to work towards
the sustainable reduction of the presence of and the
threat posed by armed groups through a comprehensive
and proactive approach. The additional 900 troops will
boost those efforts by enhancing our flexibility and our
capacity to react. As highlighted in the new mandate,
MINUSCA is supporting Government-led processes
to reduce conflict at the local level to complement and
support the African initiative.

I must emphasize that the success of our collective
effort will require the delivery of tangible peace
dividends for the people of the Central African
Republic. Urgent efforts are needed to translate the
country's recovery and peacebuilding plan into an
effective programme for change that can be used in both
governance and people's livelihoods. As just briefly
outlined, and as challenging as things are, the picture
in the Central African Republic is not as hopeless as the
raw numbers and media reports make it appear. With
the continuous support of the Council and everyone's
sacrifice and dedication - first and foremost, those of
the Central Africans themselves - there are reasons
to remain hopeful and to believe that an era of peace,
stability and prosperity will soon be within reach.

(Spoke in French)

In my remarks today, I have endeavoured to give a
brief overview of the challenges in the Central African
Republic, but I have also tried to highlight the many
windows of opportunity to a more stable future. The
region and the international community have a vital
role to play in helping the Government of the Central
African Republic build on its accomplishments. It
is essential that the country remain a priority for the
Security Council and continue to receive international
support commensurate with its strategic priorities.
In so doing, we will help create the conditions for
inclusive socioeconomic recovery and long-term peace
and stability in the Central African Republic.

