Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate and for
having hosted the London conference on Somalia on
23 February. I also express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing. And I thank
Mr. Mahiga for his briefing and commend his work as
Special Representative.

Brazil welcomes the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2012/4).

As many have been saying, we are indeed at a
turning point in Somali history. As we approach the
end of the transitional period in August, the outlines of
a new governmental and parliamentary structure are
beginning to appear. We are encouraged by the
agreements reached at the Garowe meetings and by the
steady advance towards political progress and
reconciliation.

As Brazil stated during the London conference,
the efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and of neighbouring countries are
weakening Al-Shabaab. We expect Somali authorities
to consolidate their presence and stability in the
recovered areas, through the provision of basic services
and security. That will also be important to enable
hundreds of thousands of refugees located in Kenya
and Ethiopia to return to their homeland.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2036
(2012), which authorized the expansion of AMISOM
contingents and increased the support package for the
Mission. As AMISOM. strengthens its operations, it
should redouble efforts to protect civilians from the
consequences of conflict and avoid deepening
humanitarian problems in the affected areas.

It would also be useful for a path to be opened for
those who want to reject extremism and help rebuild
their war-torn country through constructive political
engagement. Making Al-Shabaab unattractive,
especially to the young, will be easier if Somalis are
given enhanced social and economic conditions to
improve their lives.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains a
source of major concern. Although famine has ended,
Somalia continues to need assistance. As the Director-
General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations reminds us, the crisis is not over.

Progress in Somalia depends on a commitment on
the part of the Somali transitional institutions to uphold
the agreements reached among the stakeholders. The
successful completion of the transitional period this
August depends on such a commitment.

Brazil is also convinced that a stable Somalia will
require a comprehensive strategy that combines
security and development. Whatever progress is
achieved on the political, military and humanitarian
fronts will need to be consolidated through the creation
of conditions for long-term development and resilience
against further crises.

Generating economic opportunities for the
Somali people is an issue that must be urgently
addressed. The fact that Somalis have begun to exploit
their natural resources is to be commended. It is of the
utmost importance that the resulting wealth be used to
foster development, stability and unity. The adequate
management of resources is key to generating
prosperity for current and future generations.

Brazil has provided significant humanitarian
assistance, through food donations and financial
support. We will continue to follow the situation
closely so as to provide further cooperation to the best
of our ability. The people of Somalia can continue to
count on Brazil, as they progress towards a more stable
and inclusive nation.

