Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): It gives me great
pleasure to appear before the Security Council today
for the third time since I took office, in November of
last year. During my two previous appearances (see S/PV.6467 and S/PV.6494), I reported to the Council
on the achievements made by the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs), the challenges we face and the way
forward. I am delighted to continue that trend and to
once more provide the Council the latest updates on the
challenges we face at this critical time. However, I am
also here to listen to the constructive views of Security
11-33181
Council members on how we can make progress
beyond the transition phase, which ends in August.

As I mentioned in January and in March, my
Government's five main priorities have been to
improve security, enhance reconciliation, complete the
transitional tasks - including the completion of our
constitutional process - address the humanitarian
crisis and promote good governance.

Let me begin by expressing once again my
heartfelt gratitude and sincere appreciation for the
ongoing support of the United Nations, the African
Union and the international community to Somalia. In
particular, we are exceptionally grateful to the young
men and women from Uganda and Burundi who make
up the African Union troops and who make the ultimate
sacrifice for the safety and security of the Somali
people. We salute and mourn those soldiers who have
died in Somalia. We extend our condolences to their
friends and families and assure them that their loss will
not be in vain. Our nation will be eternally grateful.

I am fully aware that the Secretary-General
recently reported to the Security Council on the key
developments in Somalia; however, let me share with
the Council recent developments in the area of security.

My Government continues to place the highest
priority on security. As a result, our troops and the
forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) are currently making tangible progress in
reclaiming significant territory from extremist groups
in Mogadishu. Our troops are currently making visible
progress in regions near the borders of Kenya and
Ethiopia. They are gradually recapturing key districts
and towns in the Gedo and Jubba regions. In addition,
the military offensive in the capital city has been
successful. The centrepiece was the taking of the
former Ministry of Defence from the extremists - a
strategic objective and one that will prove to be a
pivotal moment in this campaign. Ground is now being
taken at an increasing rate, especially around Bondere
and immediately south of the Bakara market, in
Howlwadag.

Together, the Transitional Federal Government
(TF G) and AMISOM. forces continue to push the
extremists further back each and every week. Such an
offensive must be properly sustained and logistically
supported, and we implore the international community
to step up its efforts in this area so that the gains can be
consolidated and sustained.

11-3318]
We hope that the efforts of AMISOM. forces in
Somalia will show the world that African countries can
solve their problems regionally. We are immensely
grateful for the leadership of the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi and we hope that other African
leaders will also contribute to the cause of bringing
peace and stability to Somalia.

Let me now update the Council on the political
developments in Somalia, as well as to once more say,
in no uncertain terms, that my Government is the
Council's committed and credible partner in our efforts
to stabilize Somalia. As all members are aware, the
Transitional Federal Parliament has unilaterally
decided to extend its term for three years. The
Transitional Federal Government believes that the
Parliament rushed to its decision without proper
consultation among the other TFIs, particularly
considering that the transitional period for the TFIs it
to end by August. The international community has
also rejected the Parliament's decision and raised both
the legitimacy and the political wisdom of the
legislature's approach. From the TFG's perspective, a
question of more practical importance is raised by the
juridical relationships that bind the Transitional
Federal Institutions to both the Transitional Federal
Charter and the 1960 Constitution. This has already
occasioned differences of opinion between the
Parliament and the executive branch of the
Government.

It is the opinion of my Government that under the
simul stabnnt vel simul cadent principle, the
Transitional Federal Institutions shall cease to exist as
of August 2011. In other words, both institutions are
indissolubly connected from a constitutional
perspective. We would have wished to avoid the
current political crisis within the Transitional Federal
Institutions. It is true that my Government considers
the behaviour of the Parliament in extending its
mandate for an additional three years to be
unconstitutional. The legislature's action is inconsistent
with, and in contravention of, the Transitional Federal
Charter and the 1960 Constitution. Both state that the
term of the Transitional Federal Parliament shall not be
extended and that any amendment with regard to the
term shall not have effect with the tenure of the current
legislature. My Government therefore believes that,
from the constitutional and legal perspectives, the
current Parliament does not have the constitutional
mandate to elect a new President of the Republic. A
post-August legally elected legislature will be the
legitimate Parliament to elect a President.

We believe that it is the responsibility of the
executive branch of the Government to coordinate
efforts to achieve inclusive pre- and post-transitional
arrangements, which we were in the process of
concluding. The President of Somalia, Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, has asked the Parliament to reconsider
its decision. The Speaker has so far rejected the
President's proposal for a decision with regard to the
extension of Parliament's tenure.

The most disturbing consequence of this situation
is the descent into political instability at precisely the
time when the security situation is on the verge of a
breakthrough and governance is making effective
strides forward. I and my Government believe that,
with such visible progress on the ground, this is the
worst possible time to be distracted by untenable
election processes and the divisive campaigning that
will inevitably take place. The TFG also believes that
the diversion of focus from governance and security to
election campaigning will provide the Al-Shabaab an
opportunity of which it will take full advantage. We
cannot offer these extremists such an open goal. It is
our people, especially our youth, who will suffer the
most.

Having considered the state of war envisioned in
article 68 of the 1960 Somali Constitution, the TFG has
discussed the issue at great length with all
stakeholders, and we have therefore proposed to the
Parliament and to our international partners to consider
extending the mandate of the transitional federal
institutions for an additional 12 months. The nation is
at war with internal and external extremist forces and
with the debilitating issue of piracy. The state of war
envisioned in article 68 clearly provides an
extraordinary legal mandate for the legislature and the
executive branch to collectively manage war efforts
with exceptional powers and thereby allow the recent
progress to take hold and develop.

We believe that a further 12 months of progress
in terms of political stability and security will create a
chance for real and fair elections. That is our ambition
and must surely be that of the Council as well. We
believe that this is in the wider interests of the Somali
people. The question is, how can the transitional
federal institutions secure legitimacy without
undermining the current progress with regard to
security, stability and war efforts? We believe that the
Security Council has a role to play by upholding
international legality. The Somali people and the
international community cannot accept an Act of
Parliament that is clearly in violation of the Somali
Constitution, that is, a unilateral extension of its
tenure.

In order to move forward, I have appointed a
ministerial committee, of which I am the Chair, and I
have requested that the Parliament meet with us in
order to settle our differences amicably and find an
acceptable and mutually agreed consensus on the way
forward. We are still hoping that the Parliament will
agree to a consultative meeting between the two
institutions. The TFG has always believed that the best
way to resolve our issues is to hold a dialogue among
Somalis, and we ask for the Council's support in giving
us the space and time to reach our own political
settlement.

As all here are aware, the TFG did not participate
in the consultative meeting organized by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, in Nairobi last month. The TFG
greatly values the role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the United Nations as a whole
and our key international partners. However, we
believe that consultative meetings should be held
inside Somalia and that Somalis should take the lead.
We simply wish our voice to be heard.

The TF G has long intended to hold a consultative
meeting among all our stakeholders in Mogadishu; it is
scheduled to take place from 11 to 16 June 2011. I am
very pleased to report that Mr. Mahiga has welcomed
this meeting and has agreed that the United Nations
will sponsor it. I have assigned a ministerial-level
committee to organize the meeting in consultation with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and all key stakeholders. We are very grateful for
Mr. Mahiga's commitment and the excellent work he
has done to bring peace and stability to Somalia.

I would also like to report that support from the
Somali people is growing and that they are fully behind
these security successes. We are very grateful for this,
as this is the first time in decades that a Somali
Government has received such support from the
people. This is due to my Government's steady efforts
in the areas of the delivery of services and good
governance. We also know that civil society groups are
beginning to mobilize and gaining the confidence to
make their voices heard.

I would offer three tangible examples of
improved service delivery from the past two months.
My Government, with donor support and assistance
from AMISOM, has opened a new hospital, Martini
hospital. It has a total capacity of around 500 beds and
is already starting to treat and care for injured TFG
soldiers and civilians with a range of illnesses and
injuries.

My Government has taken over the running of a
school attached to the newly established Al-Jazzira
military training camp on the outskirts of Mogadishu.
Again, with AMISOM's assistance, that school was
established for local children and those of soldiers in
training.

My Government has also established two other
schools in Mogadishu to care for orphans and those
whose parents are too poor to care for them
themselves. We have around 400 children who are
receiving food, shelter and elementary education.

The most exciting symbol of change, however, is
the emergence of private-property renovation and
property investment. It may for now be confined to the
road between Kilometre 4 and the airport, but a new,
five-floor hotel is being built and houses are being
repaired, windows restored and roadwork undertaken.
That is the surest sign of public confidence, as no
private individuals would spend their money if they
thought their efforts would turn to rubble. In addition,
as I previously reported to the Council, my
Government continues to provide service delivery to its
people, such as street-cleaning, road repair and street
lighting, as well as improving the justice system,
promoting human rights and giving a sense of hope to
our citizens. We have recently relaunched our first
national television station in 20 years and our national
newspaper, Dalka.

As I mentioned earlier, we are the first line of
defence against two evils: the scourge of piracy and the
plague of terrorism. We feel that the pressure and the
war against terrorism must be intensified until we have
eliminated all extremists from our soil. In the light of
the killing of Osama Bin Laden, my Government has
declared a state of high alert as a result of credible
information that Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab are planning
revenge attacks, which could endanger or kill innocent
people. On 7 May, an Al-Shabaab spokesperson

11-3318]
confirmed that the group was planning revenge attacks
and stated that it would intensify its terrorist activities.
We need to defeat those aggressors at their source; that
will require strong political will, cooperation and
collaboration on our part, and resilient commitment
and support on the part of the international community.
We have to understand that the root cause and the
breeding ground of both terrorism and piracy is
lawlessness, coupled with poverty and unemployment.

As I have previously reported, the scourge of
piracy cannot be defeated on the high seas. The
solution is to bring back the rule of law on land in
Somalia. We are very grateful for the work carried out
by Jack Lang, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, which has highlighted the urgent need to
establish an effective judicial capacity for piracy trials.
My Government believes that such courts should be in
Somalia. My Government strongly welcomes this
proposal and believes that, if the country has a strong
national Government with an effective coast guard
within a secure exclusive economic zone, we can help
to reduce or even stop piracy. The Transitional Federal
Government is grateful for the operations of the
European Union Naval Force and many other
international navies in our seas.

My Government has started to work with the
United Nations with regard to the stabilization and
reconstruction of new areas coming under the control
of the TFG, both in Mogadishu and in the regions. This
is very important and requires urgent support and
attention from the international community.

Another area in which we desperately need
assistance is disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We have witnessed a high number of
young people defecting from Al-Shabaab. We do not
have the resources to provide the array of facilities,
training and care necessary to help them recover,
resettle and rehabilitate their lives. The stories we are
hearing from those young people are shocking. Not
only commitment but leadership will be required from
the international community so that we can win the war
on terror, not only by force but also by educating our
young people and providing them with the hope that
they have long been waiting for.

In conclusion, we are gradually, but effectively,
winning the support of the Somali population. My
Government is determined to help our people, and I
can affirm our commitment to them and to the Council.
The interests of our nation and our people must come
first. We know that we, the Government, must work
tirelessly to meet the expectations of us and to lead by
example with transparent and effective governance.
Defeating extremists in Somalia requires the same
level of commitment as that of Afghanistan and Iraq.
We will do everything that it takes to regain our status
as a functioning State that protects its citizens, ends all
forms of international piracy and extremism, promotes
good governance, and produces a nation at peace with
itself and its neighbours.

I would like to conclude with the Secretary-
General's comments on Somalia in his recent report:

"The international community must keep its end
of the bargain. The Transitional Federal
Government urgently needs assistance for
Mogadishu's stabilization, recovery and
reconstruction. If we reinforce the military gains,
provide humanitarian relief and achieve political
progress, we can set Somalia on course to greater
stability and peace. If we fail, we risk a growing
humanitarian crisis, a deteriorating security
situation and a worsening threat to regional peace
and stability." (S/ZOZZ/Z 77, para. 109)

