Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing. I
appreciate his efforts and those of his team to advance
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). China welcomes the on-schedule
entry into force of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) as an important milestone in the
comprehensive, enduring and appropriate settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue. The fact that the P5+1 and
Iran have acted in accordance with the time frame
specified in the JCPOA is a practical demonstration of
their political support for the agreement.

As the JCPOA implementation day fast approaches,
the Council's work on the Iranian nuclear issue will
enter a new phase. In that context, China wishes to
make a few comments.

First, all concerned parties should prepare well
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In
accordance with the resolution's requirements and on
the basis of the agreements reached among the parties,
the Council should thoroughly prepare its mechanisms,
procedures and tasks so as to exercise its authority and
ensure the smooth implementation of the resolution.

Secondly, all sides should accurately interpret the
contents of the resolution with a view to fostering positive
synergy towards the comprehensive, enduring and
appropriate settlement of the Iranian nuclear question.
On implementation day, the Council's sanctions will be
lifted and replaced by restrictive measures. The Council
should work in a balanced and objective manner so as
to ensure the comprehensive implementation of its own
resolutions, properly address sensitive issues and lend
support to and coordinate with the implementation of
the J CPOA, which is the paramount task.

Thirdly, the various parties need to maintain their
political will, effectively implement their commitments
and promote the steady implementation of the JCPOA.
The Iranian nuclear question is extremely complex
and the implementation of the JCPOA has many
unprecedented elements. As the implementation
process unfolds, various problems, difficulties and
even challenges are expected to emerge. China hopes
that all concerned parties will seek tomeet each other
half way, uphold the principles of synchronization and
reciprocity, accommodate each other's concerns and
ensure fairness and balance.

Fourthly, China has noted the final assessment
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme. We appreciate
the constructive cooperation between the IAEA and
Iran towards implementing the road map. The related
resolution adopted today by the IAEA Board of
Governors is conducive to ensuring the smooth start
of the implementation of the JCPOA, for which China
wishes to place its appreciation on record.

China has actively mediated the negotiation
process on the Iranian nuclear question, while playing a
constructive role in such key issues as the modification
of the Arak heavy-water reactor. Going forward, China
will engage closely with all the parties and contribute
to promoting the smooth implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.

