Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): We thank
the French delegation in its capacity as penholder
for its tireless efforts and commitment in facilitating
resolution 2463 (2019), which we adopted today.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is a significant
undertaking by the Security Council in support of the
Government. The renewal of the mandate takes place
against the backdrop of the peaceful elections and
peaceful transfer of power from former President Kabila
Kabange to President Tshisekedi Tshilombo. South
Africa notes the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate
for another nine months as a significant demonstration
of the Council's commitment in addressing perennial
instability, in particular in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We join others in expressing concern about the
security situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the illegal exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources. In that regard, there is
an urgent need for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to strengthen the capacity of
State institutions, with the support of MONUSCO. In
addition, there is a need for the protection of civilians
and the establishment of an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, as well as
financial support as requested by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As we extend the mandate of MONUSCO, it is
appropriate to underscore the vital role that the Mission
has played since its deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo almost two decades ago. It is
equally important to express our gratitude to all troop-
and police-contributing countries, including Tanzania
and Malawi, which, with us, are part of the Force
Intervention Brigade, for their commitment to ensuring
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, we pay tribute to all our brothers
and sisters who have sacrificed their lives in the quest
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

In conclusion, the development and prosperity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is paramount not
only for that country but for the region and continent at
large. We therefore reiterate our commitment to peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to ensure that the Congolese people finally reap the
rewards of the abundant natural resources with which
that country is endowed. Furthermore, we call upon
the Council, as well as the international community,
to support the new Government to ensure peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

