Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French):
Mr. Minister, I want to warmly welcome you to the
Council and to thank the Beninese presidency for the
initiative of organizing this public debate on this urgent
and complex agenda item. We are also very pleased at
the large number of ministers who have joined us
today.

I would like to state that the delegation of
Romania fully associates itself with the statement that
will be made by the Luxembourg presidency of the
Council of the European Union. My comments will
therefore be brief and to the point.

We have considered with great interest the recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2005/72). We have heard the statement of
Under-Secretary-General Olara Otunnu, which
measured up to that remarkable document. They
describe an ongoing, disheartening modern-day
situation: the recruitment and use of large numbers of
children as combatants in a number of conflict zones.

In the face of this terrible challenge, it is
imperative that the international community act
without delay by adopting the measures necessary to
ensure that the legal framework that already exists is
actually implemented. To do this, we need first to
activate the instruments provided for in successive
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
1379 (2001), which introduced the concept of the black
list, and 1539 (2004), which refers to the possible
imposition of sanctions against parties that do not
respect the obligations incumbent upon them or that do
not honour their commitments.

With regard to these two elements, the report of
the Secretary-General specifically recommends that
targeted and concrete measures be taken where
insufficient or no progress has been made by parties
named in the black list. That recommendation is of
particular relevance. Romania will provide strong
support for any initiative leading to the adoption of the
kinds of measures proposed by the Secretary-General.
We shall thus mark the beginning of an "era of
application" and, at the same time, move towards the
end of an era of impunity.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism
represents another part of the active commitment to
ensure that the standards established are ultimately
respected by those they refer to. This system should be
comprehensive and inclusive; that will enable it to
ensure the systematic transmission of specific,
complete and verifiable information, which is
indispensable for a timely and appropriate response.

The action plan proposed by the Secretary-
General for setting up such a mechanism has made an
excellent impression on us; we hope to see it put in
place as soon as possible. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF should pool
their efforts in order to ensure that the system works
with the effectiveness expected of it. At the same time,
non-governmental organizations and civil society
should perhaps be given a clearer role in the
preparation of the final products of the mechanism.

My delegation would like to express its extreme
gratitude for the work done by the Special
Representative, who, in the implementation of his
mandate, has been acting pragmatically and in a
cooperative fashion to provide broad and effective
protection for children exposed to situations of unrest
anywhere in the world. It is in this spirit that we would
like to draw attention to the possibility of including in
the scope of the work of the Special Representative the
particular situation of children that are victims of
physical and psychological violence practised in the
so-called no rights zones. Those areas are very often
the result of frozen armed conflict where self-
proclaimed illegitimate authorities have seized power
by force and proceed with all impunity to massively
violate human rights, including the rights of the child.
This is an intolerable situation - an example can be
seen in the area of Transdniestria on the borders of
Europe - that must not escape the attention of the
international community in its efforts to bring
protection to children in armed conflicts.

In his report, the Secretary-General mentions
with grave concern the problems related to sexual
mistreatment and exploitation on the part of staff of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and the fact that
the situation is more serious and widespread than we
initially thought. We note with satisfaction his
conclusion that the current approach to that issue will
be entirely revised for all operations. In our opinion,
this translates into an alarm bell for those who have the
duty to respond - given the scope of the phenomenon,
which affects the various peacekeeping missions
deployed throughout the world. Romania, as a country
that provides significant contingents to those missions,
is prepared at all times to take part in analysis and
consultations in order to find joint solutions that we
can apply generally to peacekeeping operations.

The Security Council will shortly begin
consultations on a draft resolution that would provide
new guidelines for further steps to be taken in order to
protect children in situations of armed conflict. I
remain convinced that, with determination and in a
spirit of compromise amongst members of the Council,
the text of the resolution will be rapidly agreed to and
can be adopted in short order.

I would like to conclude by quoting an African
proverb that says that when you take a child's hand,
you warm the heart of the mother. I would ask the
Council to warm the hearts of mothers everywhere.

