Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
indicated in informal Council consultations, I should
like to make a brief statement.

The existence of unwritten standards whose
interpretation remains at the discretion of the
Secretariat does not contribute to orderliness or
productivity in the work of the Security Council. No
Member of the Organization is unaware of how Costa
Rica, as well as Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and
Switzerland - the so-called Small Five group - have
worked to improve the Security Council and its
methods of work. The circumstances that compel me to
take the floor at this meeting relate to working
methods, transparency in the decisions that affect the
practical work of the Council and, in particular, the
legal equality of the rights and obligations of Council
members.

With regard to the recent Council mission to four
African countries, I wish to comment briefly on two
circumstances that, in our opinion, should be changed.
The first relates to the right that every delegation
should have to obtain the expertise it deems necessary
to better carry out its work in the Council, and the
second to the process of negotiating the terms of
reference of the mission. In both cases, I am sorry to
say, there are double standards vis-a-vis the members
of the Council: the permanent members on the one
hand and the elected members on the other.
I shall briefly describe the circumstances that
lead to that conclusion. With all due prior notice, my
delegation indicated to the Secretariat its interest in
taking an expert on the mission, fully paying all
expenses. Initially, the Secretariat replied that it could
not agree to that request because the presence of our
expert would diminish the space allocated to members
of the press. We considered that argument
unacceptable. The basic purpose of the Council
missions is to contribute to the work of the Council,
and it is the delegation that ensure the quality of the
Council's work, not the press.

In a second instance, the same staff member also
rejected the inclusion of our expert and those of at least
two other delegations that wanted to take experts,
invoking an unwritten rule according to which only the
heads of delegation for each of the visited countries
would have the right to bring in experts and would, of
course, have to cover the costs involved.

Given the rationale provided for the second
response, my delegation and the other two interested
delegations agreed not to take our experts.
Nevertheless, to our surprise, during the mission to
Africa, we were able to note the presence of security
officers for a specific delegation. In order to avoid a
misunderstanding and unnecessary discussion, I would
like to say that my delegation understands the need for
some delegations to take security staff on Council
missions. Not only do we understand that necessity, but
we support the inclusion of such security personnel in
the travelling group. We also understand the need for
members of the media to accompany us. What we do
not understand is the exclusion of experts of missions
that work in the Council. What we find unacceptable is
the denial of room for experts while there seem to be
no apparent restrictions on security staff and
journalists, or worse yet, that they participate at the
discretion of the Secretariat. Again, the quality and the
work of the Council are ensured by the delegations, not
by security personnel or members of the press. All
discrimination in that respect should cease.

The second issue on which I would like to
comment has to do with the double standards, again,
applied by the Secretariat to the members of the
Council. As the Council knows, my delegation led the
mission to Haiti this year. The preparation for that
mission required intensive work by my delegation,
with unwavering support from the Secretariat, for
which we are grateful. They resulted in a transparent
process of early negotiation of the terms of reference,
which were agreed upon by all the delegations through
broad participation and with adequate time for
discussion. In our view, all missions of the Council
should be prepared in this fashion.

But that was not the case for Africa. For that
mission, some of the terms of reference were adopted
very shortly before the departure date and, although
most of the suggestions were ultimately accepted, the
process did not benefit from the transparency or the
necessary time for reflection enjoyed by the earlier
mission.

The two situations to which I have referred arose
because both were ruled by unwritten regulations that
can be interpreted arbitrarily, to say the least. That
should end. The Council should adopt clear standards
guiding everything related to Council missions. In
order to help the work of the Council and the
establishment of objective rules that will enable all of
us to grasp the situation, my delegation will address a
letter to the President of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions so
that the Working Group can prepare a set of standards
to be circulated to the members.

