Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his briefing, which gives us a comprehensive overview
of the most recent events in South Sudan.

I would like to underscore a few points that I believe
are important.

First, we continue to support the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and commend
its work. It seeks tirelessly to contribute to fostering
dialogue at the political level, which is the only way
to rekindle the peace process in South Sudan and to
pave the way for democratic elections to be held at
the end of the transition period. It is essential that
all parties involved in the quest for a solution to the
conflict, in particular the United Nations and the
African Union, support the IGAD initiative on the
high-level revitalization forum and speak with one
voice in sending a clear and unequivocal message to the
parties to the conflict on the importance of seizing this
opportunity to make progress in resolving the conflict.

As we have said in the past, regardless of how
united the United Nations, the African Union and
IGAD may be in terms of the expectations they pin on
the high-level revitalization forum, this initiative will
not amount to anything if the parties to the conflict do
not demonstrate an unwavering commitment to making
headway in seeking a solution to the crisis. We therefore
reiterate our appeal to all parties to immediately stop
their armed confrontations, commit to a ceasefire and
participate in good faith in the forum.

We are saddened to learn from the 30-day report
of the Secretary-General that restrictions of all sorts
are again being imposed on the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan by the Government,
and that only 20 per cent of the Regional Protection
Force, which was approved by the Council more than
a year ago, is currently deployed. Throughout the past
year, we have continued to insist that no State has the
right to block or interfere in the standard operations
of a mission established by the Security Council. In
looking at the Secretary-General's report, in just 30
days we have 17 recorded cases of lack of compliance
or refusal by the Government of South Sudan to fulfil
the obligations established in the status-of-forces
agreement. There have been all types of repeated
obstructions of the status of forces agreement, including
requests for documents and special permits, and that is
only the tip of the iceberg. We have also heard reports
of Government security forces aiming their weapons at
United Nations staff.
All of this is absolutely unacceptable, and there
are only two possible reasons for it. It is the result
either of a clear policy of hostility or, barring that,
of the Government's complete inability to maintain
proper control over its own armed forces. Either of
those excuses is completely unacceptable and the
Security Council must speak to this. Status-of-forces
agreements are not merely United Nations documents,
but, as we have said thousands of times, they are also a
safeguard to protect the forces provided by the troop-
and police-contributing countries to peacekeeping
operations. These status-of-forces agreements are the
guarantees offered to all peacekeepers they are deployed
in the field. Therefore, we cannot allow violations of
the status-of-forces agreement.

