The President (spoke in Chinese): The list of
speakers is still very long. In order for the meeting to
proceed smoothly, with the consent of Council
members, I intend to suspend the meeting at 1.15 p.m.
and resume it at 3.00 p.m.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of China.

At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Holbrooke for his briefing. My thanks also go to the
Security Council's mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for the comprehensive report it has
submitted so promptly. My colleagues who spoke
before me have all highly commended the work of the
mission. I wholeheartedly endorse those comments.

I would like to emphasize the following. First,
speeding up and completing the deployment of phase II
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should
be the priority in the current efforts of the Security
Council in dealing with the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The report reflects the strong
desire of the people of that country for peace and their
expectations of the United Nations. Despite the
differences among the parties to the conflict on many
issues, they all share the desire for the early
deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping
mission. The five heads of State of the region
expressed the same desire when they met the mission.
It is our hope that phase II of MONUC will be
deployed smoothly and promptly, with a view to
maintaining and consolidating the ceasefire and
creating conditions for the implementation of other
provisions of the Lusaka Agreement. In its
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the United Nations should pay attention to
the lessons of Sierra Leone and avoid the same
mistake.

Secondly, during its visit the mission succeeded
in bringing Uganda and Rwanda to an agreement on the
withdrawal of their respective forces from Kisangani
and the demilitarization of that city. We have noted the
fact that the parties concerned are engaged in
consultations on ways to implement the agreement. It is
hoped that the agreement will be implemented
effectively.

Thirdly, we have noted the fact that the Joint
Military Commission (JMC) still faces enormous
difficulties in the lack of financial resources and
logistical support. The neutral facilitator for the
national dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo also faces a lack of financial resources. If this
matter cannot be resolved in a timely manner, the
smooth proceeding of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be affected. We
hope that countries with the capacity to do so will
continue to provide support to the JMC and the
facilitator.

Fourthly, the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo still faces such enormous tasks
as the complete withdrawal of forces, national dialogue
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of armed groups. In addition to the promotion and
support provided by the international community, the
political will of the parties concerned is imperative.
Therefore, we favour the comments contained in
paragraph 72 of the report to the effect that the ultimate
responsibility for achieving peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains with the leaders of this
region. The leaders of the parties concerned must
honour their respective commitments to the Peace
Agreement. Therefore, we welcome the proposal by
Ambassador Levitte and expect the Security Council to
invite the Political Committee of the parties to the
conflict to meet in New York under his presidency and
to discuss the difficult issues concerning the resolution
of the conflict, so as to promote the peace process.

I now resume my capacity as the President.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

