Mr. Doss: I do not think that I have many
comments to make. I think that the comments of the
various delegations were very clear and largely go in
the same sense.

As regards the remarks of the representative of
C6te d'Ivoire, I have taken note of the various points
he made. I think that some of them result from,
perhaps, a reading of the report that would not be mine
and that perhaps some areas need to be clarified - for
example, as concerns Logouale and the relationship
with the National Armed Forces. In fact, in that
incident and in one or two other incidents, there have
actually been serving members of the National Armed
Forces among those who were detained who were
involved in those incidents, so there has been some
relationship with those groups that have been
conducting armed activities.

The issue of the delegation of powers, I think,
referred to the fact that the report referred to the decree
that was signed by the President but which has not
been translated into actual effect. I think that there is
still some confusion between what was envisaged and
what has actually happened. We are simply noting that
fact; we are not commenting on it. I think the report
simply notes it.

As concerns article 35, I will not go into that
further. I believe that the mediation is dealing with this
issue, and I am sure that it will be at the centre of the
discussions in Pretoria.

As regards the legislation, I think that both the
mediation and the Linas-Marcoussis group, the
Monitoring Committee, felt that, in some respects, the
legislation adopted and promulgated was not in
conformity with the spirit and letter of the Agreement.
Specific references were made and conveyed to the
President of the Republic, the Speaker of the National
Assembly and the Prime Minister. Our point was only
to indicate that there was a difference between what
was intended, as we understood it, and what was
actually enacted. We, of course, have left it to the
Ivorian authorities to decide whether they wish to take
that any further. We have simply presented views based
on our reading of the legislation.

I think that those are the specific points that I
would like to make at this stage. As I said earlier, most
of the remarks made were very supportive, and we
would like to thank the members of the Council for
that support.

