Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Ijoin the previous speakers
in welcoming the decision of Malaysia organize this
important and timely debate on challenges in addressing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs).

Slovenia aligns itself with statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make
some additional comments in my national capacity.

Resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the
most important instruments of the international
non-proliferation architecture. Let me express the firm
determination of the Government of Slovenia to support
the efforts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to strengthen global capacity
to prevent, detect and respond to WMD terrorism.
In order to neutralize those threats, there should be
ongoing and relentless engagement by the relevant
national structures in the area of security, while also
effectively addressing safety issues.

Slovenia is fully committed to the resolution 1540
(2004) and has joined the Group of Friends of resolution
1540 (2004). We regularly report on the implementation
ofresolution 1540 (2004). So far, we have provided three
national reports. As we carry out the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) this year, we are
preparing the next review of our own national report.
We stand ready to contribute to a successful outcome
of this year's comprehensive review - which is being
led by Spain, which we congratulate for its excellent
work - with the aim that it will deliver positive and
tangible results.

Resolution 1540 (2004) has become even more
important in the today's context, when we bear in
mind that the potential acquisition and use of chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear materials by terrorist
groups presents a clear threat to international peace
and security. Slovenia therefore believes that the
international community must stand united against
that threat by improving the effectiveness of resolution
1540 (2004) at the 2016 comprehensive review, which
can be achieved only through enhanced international
cooperation within the United Nations among
Member States, different regional and international
organizations and civil society, academia, and national
Parliaments.

Slovenia is committed to treaty-based nuclear
disarmament and arms control and advocates the
universal adherence to and the full implementation
of all non-proliferation and disarmament treaties and
conventions. Slovenia also firmly believes that the proper
way to combat effectively the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is through the universalization of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. I would also add to those
other very important international instruments in this
area, such as the Proliferation Security Initiative, the
International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation, international export control regimes and
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism,
which this year marked its tenth anniversary. We should
also spare no effort to initiate the fissile material cut-
off treaty negotiations as soon as possible.

The International Atomic Energy Agency plays a
crucial role in finding adequate solutions to nuclear
security and in offering technical assistance to those
who need it in implementing those solutions. During our
upcoming third membership in the Board of Governors
for September 2016 to September 2018, Slovenia will
constructively engage in the work of the Board.

In conclusion, as an active country in the field
of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation,
Slovenia hosted the twelfth annual NATO WMD
conference last May. The emerging threat of the
acquisition, production and use of WMDs was also
among the discussed topics, and we believe that the
conference contributed in a meaningful way to our
mutual endeavours and efforts to fight the peril posed
by non-State actors, including terrorists.

