Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): From the very
beginning, Azerbaijan has consistently supported all
efforts in connection with the situation in Syria aimed
at ending violence, overcoming the crisis and finding a
solution by peaceful means and through dialogue.

From the outset, we have also expressed our full
support for the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and for his six-point proposal. Needless to say,
the Joint Special Envoy is doing his utmost and
exploring all possible avenues to end the Syrian crisis
peacefully. We highly appreciate his efforts in that
regard. The Security Council supported the mission of
the Special Envoy right from its inception. The
adoption of resolution 2042 (2012) today is yet another
illustration of the unanimity within the Council.

We note that the parties involved committed to
implement the six-point plan of the Joint Special
Envoy and started taking important practical steps to
that end. At the same time, the resolution calls for the
urgent, comprehensive and immediate implementation
of all elements of the Envoy's six-point plan, which
aim at bringing an immediate end to all violence and
human rights violations, securing humanitarian access

and facilitating a Syrian-led political process leading to
a democratic, pluralistic political system.

The resolution provides for the establishment of a
United Nations supervision mission in Syria to monitor
a cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all
parties and for guaranteeing the effective operation of
the mission, including its advance team. It is important
that the resolution reaffirms the commitment of the
Security Council to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria.

Azerbaijan voted in favour of the resolution
based on that understanding and with the hope that its
adoption would contribute to ongoing efforts aimed at
encouraging dialogue, overcoming the crisis and
putting an end to human suffering.

