Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour of the
resolution we have just adopted with considerable
reservations. The human tragedy in Darfur is a matter
of serious concern to us and to Africa, as it is to the
international community. In that regard, in the interest
of justice and accountability, we believe that further
delay in reaching an agreement in the hope of a more
desirable outcome would not serve the ends of justice
or the aspirations of the people of Darfur to peace,
justice and reconciliation. Regrettably, the delay in
addressing those expectations has been the result of an
undue focus on the mechanism at the expense of
addressing urgently the plight of the people of Darfur.

We are relieved that the Council has ultimately
taken action on the matter. Tanzania is a State party to
the International Criminal Court - a Court established
to bring to justice those accused of genocide and other
serious crimes against humanity. We strongly believe
that the Court is the most appropriate international
organ for dealing with the situation in Darfur, as
recommended by the Commission of Inquiry. However,
we are concerned that the resolution also addresses
other issues that are, in our view, extraneous to the
imperative at hand. We are therefore unable to accept
that the resolution should in any way be interpreted as
seeking to circumvent the jurisdiction of the Court. In
spite of those shortcomings, it is our hope that the
resolution will assist in addressing the issue of
impunity in Darfur.

We are gratified that the resolution provides for
the possibility of conducting proceedings in Africa as a
way of contributing to Africa's efforts to dispense
justice and to fight impunity. We also welcome the fact
that the resolution recognizes the proposal by Nigeria
regarding the need to provide national healing and
reconciliation in the Sudan, in cooperation with the
African Union and the international community, as
appropriate.

It is our hope that the international community
will not fail the people of the Sudan as a whole and of
Darfur in particular.

