Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, Ijoin previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, and the Russian
delegation on your successful steering of the work of
the Security Council during the month of October.
We are grateful to Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien and
the Regional Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Hadi, for their briefings and for their commitment
to Yemen and its people.

Regarding the political process, we praise Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmedfor doing his utmost by working with all
parties to the conflict in order to spell out the technical
details ofa peace agreement and find a political solution
to the devastating conflict. The latest proposal ofa road
map for a cessation of hostilities and the resumption
of political dialogue on the country's future is a viable

path for the solution to the Yemeni crisis that we would
like to see embraced by the warring parties. We call on
the Houthis and Saleh's followers to stop their deadly
military offensives, and encourage them to accept the
proposals of withdrawing their military forces from the
capital. We further encourage President Hadi to foster a
sense of flexibility and a spirit of compromise.

However, it is most regrettable that President
Mansour Hadi and the Houthis have rejected the
road map proposal on the grounds that it is not a
balanced solution. President Hadi and the Houthis
should be open to compromise, taking into account
the devastating impact of the conflict on the Yemeni
people and its dangerous repercussions on the region as
a whole, with the terrorists of Al-Qaida exploiting the
situation to advance their sinister agenda. Maintaining
an inflexible stance and preconditions is not the best
course of action to engage in meaningful negotiations
towards a cessation of hostilities.

Enough is enough. We strongly condemn the proxy
war being waged against the Yemeni people by regional
and other Powers and by the Yemeni parties to the
conflict themselves. Sadly, some countries that boast of
being the top providers of humanitarian aid to victims
of conflict are also the main suppliers of weapons and
training to those who indiscriminately bomb civilians
and prolong the war just for the sake of promoting
dubious strategic objectives, in absolute denial of the
basic interests of the Yemeni people.

We are all well aware of the devastating impact the
fighting has had on the civilian population in Yemen, as
well as on the country's economy. Civilians, including
children, continue to suffer the heaviest burden of the
conflict, with vital infrastructure, such as schools and
hospitals, being bombed and destroyed. The briefings
of Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and Regional
Director Hadi portrayed a situation that is completely
unsustainable and a catastrophe of incalculable
dimensions.

We take this opportunity to call once again on all
the parties of the Yemeni conflict to work towards a
permanent cessation of hostilities and refrain from
air strikes, ground fighting and shelling, especially
in populated areas. It is imperative that the parties
constructively engage with the Special Envoy in order
to overcome the lack of mutual trust. The only solution
is a political compromise and putting an end to external
meddling in the conflict.
In order to avoid the deepening humanitarian
and economic catastrophe that would in turn fuel
the criminal and terrorist networks in the country
and throughout the region, all political stakeholders,
as well as the international community and the
Security Council in particular, are called on to uphold
their responsibilities by redoubling their efforts in
support of the Special Envoy's mediation to foster
confidence-building measures for a more favourable
negotiated environment.

