Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
honour to address the Security Council today on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

At the outset, I would like to express the Movement's
appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing to the
Council today.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction of the urgent need for the international
community to act resolutely and collectively to fulfil its
longstanding commitment to, and responsibility for, the
realization of a just solution to the question of Palestine
in all its aspects, on the basis of international law and
the terms of reference of the peace process, including
the resolutions of the Council.

The Movement remains resolute to continue
assisting the Palestinian people in their legitimate quest
for dignity, justice and their inalienable right to self-
determination in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. The issue is long
overdue and its continued postponement will only put
that goal further out of reach.

The Movement fully supports the application
submitted by Palestine, on 23 September 2011, for
membership in the United Nations and considers it to
be consistent with the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and independence.

The Movement regrets that all efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including by
the Quartet, have been unable to achieve any progress,
owing to the deliberate obstruction by Israel, the
occupying Power, its refusal to respect the parameters
of the peace process and its insistence on continuing to
change the facts on the ground, in total contradiction
of the two-State solution, the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.

The Movement remains concerned about the
ongoing and intensifying acts of violence, terrorism
and racist hate crimes, the demolition of houses, the
revocation of residency, the attacks on towns and
villages across the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the excavations under Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the storming of the Mosque compound, the firing
of stun grenades at Palestinian worshipers, the latest
instance of which took place on Friday, 5 October and
caused many injuries among Palestinian worshipers, as
well as the uprooting of olive and other trees by illegal
Israeli settlers.

The Movement expresses its grave concern over
continued illegal Israeli colonial settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in
and around East Jerusalem, and the construction of the
apartheid annexation wall in violation of international
law, relevant United Nations resolutions and the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion of 9 July
2004, and calls upon the international community,
including the Security Council, to compel Israel to
cease these illegal actions and measures.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses grave
concern regarding the deteriorating situation and
deplorable conditions of the thousands of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees unlawfully held in Israeli jails
and detention centres, including at least 300 children as
well as women and elected officials, and calls for their
immediate release.

In the light of the very difficult conditions on the
ground, the Non-Aligned Movement calls once again
for specific measures to address in particular the grave
impact ofIsrael's settlement policies on the Palestinian
people and their land, including the violent actions
by Israeli settlers against Palestinian property and
Palestinian civilians, including women and children, as
well as provocations, incitement, attacks against holy
sites in occupied East Jerusalem and the vandalizing of
mosques and churches.

Equally, the Movement remains concerned about
the new round of deadly violence, terror and ongoing
missile air strikes and artillery bombardment by Israel,
the occupying Power, against the Palestinian people in
the besieged Gaza Strip, including the deadly attacks
carried out on 7 October. The Movement strongly
condemns such attacks, which are a grave breach of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and the relevant provisions regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the prohibition of
reprisals and collective punishment against civilian
populations under occupation.

The intensification ofIsrael's aggression against the
Gaza Strip threatens to further destabilize the situation
on the ground and to ignite yet another round of deadly
violence. The Movement also remains concerned about
the critical humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
We call once again for the full and immediate lifting of
the illegal Israeli blockade, which has now entered its
sixth year, in violation of resolution 1860 (2009), other
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
humanitarian law, which prohibits the collective
punishment of civilian populations under occupation.
Israel must promptly and unconditionally open all
its crossing points with Gaza and end its continued
obstruction of the freedom of movement of persons and
of the reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip.

The Movement stresses that those actions must
be ended, as they undermine the resumption of
credible negotiations and obstruct the achievement of
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This demands the
attention of the international community, particularly
the Security Council, which is duty-bound to act to
maintain international peace and security and ensure
respect for international law.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for
the Security Council to act and demands that Israel,
the occupying Power, immediately cease all such
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and fully abide by
its legal obligations, including those under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Israel's blatant impunity and
disregard for the law cannot be tolerated.

The Movement also takes this opportunity to
express its support for Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which continue to be sponsored by Egypt, and
hopes that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in
the interest of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people.

Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel's ongoing Violations of Lebanon's sovereignty
and calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragility of the situation and avoid the resurgence of
hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical or demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures to
impose its own jurisdiction and administration there,
are null, void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

I would like to take a few minutes to speak in my
national capacity.

I wish to refer to the current political and security
situation in the Middle East, which is becoming more
and more delicate and risky. There are now more threats
than ever in the region from terrorism, extremism, the
militarization of the region and the nuclear weapons
of the Zionist regime. Under such circumstances, any
militarization of the region, miscalculation or wrong
decision would only foment extremism, terrorism and
sectarian clashes.

This is particularly true with regard to the situation
in Syria. Iran believes that any foreign military
involvement in or against Syria would only exacerbate
the crisis and extend insecurity to other countries in
the region. The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view
that the way out of the present crisis in Syria lies in
strengthening a comprehensive, peaceful political
process under regional and international supervisory
arrangements aimed at establishing, first and foremost,
a cessation of hostilities and the holding of a national
dialogue between the opposition and the Syrian
Government for a peaceful political process and an
end to the violence as soon as possible. This view was
reiterated in the talks with Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the
Joint Special Representative visiting Iran, in the course
of his meeting held yesterday with our high-ranking
officials. We assured him of our full support for his
initiatives.

We believe that the countries in the region should
cooperate with one another to make the restoration of
peace and national dialogue and reconciliation possible.

If we want to bring peace and stability back to
Syria and to the region, there is no alternative but to
work together. I am therefore not going to respond to
some allegations made here by some friendly countries
in the region.

