Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Mr. President, allow me to
begin by welcoming you here with us and thanking you
for chairing this meeting. We also thank your
delegation for organizing this debate, which has
focused our attention on a topic that not only deserves
the sustained attention of the Security Council but also
needs to be approached in a coherent and coordinated
manner. Let me also thank the Secretary-General for
being here with us and for his remarks in which he
presented us with concrete steps for moving forward on
actions charted by the presidential statement that the
Council adopted last year (S/PRST/2008/16) under the
United Kingdom presidency. We would also like, of
course, to thank Ambassador Mufioz and the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank for their
contributions today.

While Croatia aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union, allow me to
add some further remarks in our national capacity.
Post-conflict reconstruction and stabilization has been
recognized as critical in laying the foundations for
lasting and sustainable peace. The early success of
peacebuilding efforts is undoubtedly a matter of
collective interest, as failed peacebuilding risks
bringing about a definite backlash and the return to
violence and new wars. Given that the window for
action in a post-conflict period may not be longer than
a few - approximately two - years, it is
indispensable that those involved in peacebuilding be
ready to start immediately and offer rapid support to
national authorities alongside a peacekeeping
deployment. Clear goals, effective leadership and
coordination, adequate resources and an appropriate
mandate are required in order to be able to rapidly
provide basic security and early peace dividends as
well as to build confidence in a political process and
expand core national capacity in a highly volatile
environment.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
before us (S/2009/304) as making an important
contribution to coherence and the integration of efforts
on a practical level by identifying challenges and
spelling out a number of concrete steps to develop and
improve United Nations capabilities in support of
national efforts to end war and secure a sustainable
peace. We particularly welcome the five points stressed
by the Secretary-General and offer our full support in
that respect.

Croatia is pleased to see that the approach taken
by the Secretary-General has prominently endorsed the
concept of national ownership of the peacebuilding
effort. Our own experience during the war imposed on
Croatia in the 1990s, when a number of United Nations
missions and agencies operated on the ground, led us
to conclude that external actors may have come with
the best of intentions, but in some cases were not able
to understand the real needs of the population or
cooperate effectively with each other or with the local
institutions involved. External actors alone may
sometimes be ill-equipped to rebuild the institutions of
a war-torn State. Peacebuilding efforts anchored at the
country level are inextricably linked to their legitimacy
and sustainability. National actors need to be part of an
early peace dividend.

It is our view that the key demand regarding
peace operations in general is sustainability. As the
Secretary-General mentions in his report, peace
operations are not quick fixes. There can be early
windows of opportunity during which peace can be
achievable, but there is also a series of small practical
movements and undertakings - the so-called everyday
life of a peace operation - which have to be given our
full attention.

We have to build upon early successes and
achievements in the field; we have no right to be
discouraged by the obstacles and setbacks that we will
inevitably face. Likewise, we believe that capacity-
building is crucial and might easily be the most
fundamental issue in peacekeeping. We should also
factor in the unavoidable issue of spoilers, against
whom we have to fight with patience and resilience.

For Croatia, the centrepiece of international
peacebuilding efforts continues to be found in the
United Nations architecture, notably in the
Peacebuilding Commission, which, together with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, represents the key mechanism to ensure greater
coherence in international efforts, including on one of
the key issues: the sustainable financing of
peacebuilding. As the principal organ for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
is well-placed to provide suggestions for integrated
peacebuilding and to offer guidance in situations on its
agenda.

While the United Nations is increasingly
expected to play a leadership role in the field, it is
often just one among many actors on the ground. The
report rightly points out the need to build strategic
partnerships, notably with the World Bank. Such
partnerships need to be based on recognizing the clear
comparative advantages provided by different actors on
the international, regional and subregional level, while
integrating the peacemaking, peacekeeping and
development spheres. This in turn underscores the need
for greater clarity in delineating the role and
responsibilities of different actors, both within and
outside the United Nations, and the need to have well-
defined mandates that are complementary, mutually
reinforcing and achievable.

Croatia is grateful to the Secretary-General for
presenting a concrete agenda for action aimed at
strengthening United Nations responsiveness in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, based on effective
leadership, enhanced coordination and accountability
and predictable civilian deployment and financing. We
support the agenda and, in particular, its
recommendations aimed at strengthening effective and
accountable senior United Nations leadership on the
ground as well as those promoting integrated planning
and common assessments and the strategic
consolidation of competing individual agendas.

At all times, local actors and the development of
their capacities need to remain at the heart of the
process. In order to meet peacebuilding priorities, the
United Nations has to provide for the deployment of
civilian experts, and we welcome the steps proposed by
the Secretary-General aimed at expanding and
improving existing capacities. We also recognize that
success largely depends on reliable funding
mechanisms and support.

Croatia believes that the text of the draft
presidential statement we are to adopt today reflects
the main messages of this debate, and it has our
support. We see efforts aimed at enhancing
responsiveness in post-conflict environments by
adopting a more coherent, effective and focused
approach as part and parcel of the wider effort to
strengthen the ability of the United Nations to play its
role to the fullest extent in conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in an
integrated and coherent manner.

