Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his update on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Office of the High Representative has played
an essential role over 22 years to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina move towards peace and prosperity and to
secure the stability of the region as a whole.

I want to express our sincere thanks to High
Representative Inzko for his tireless efforts and
convey our strong support for his mandate as the final
authority under the Dayton Agreement with regard to
the interpretation of the civilian implementation of the
peace agreement.

The United States remains dedicated to upholding
the Dayton Peace Accords, maintaining the sovereignty
and territorial Integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
promoting its continued development and integration.
We commend Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
towards those goals and integration with Euro-Atlantic
institutions. The completion of the defence review
in November, continued progress towards NATO
standards, the registration of defence properties and the
work with European Union are all positive steps.

Continued progress towards integration with
both NATO and the European Union, however, will
require vision, political will and real follow-through
on commitments, but, for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
achieve its full potential, it will have to resolve long-
standing political issues. Bosnia and Herzegovina
must continue diligently to enhance the rule of law,
address corruption and improve the overall political
climate in the country for the benefit of all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is particularly important to
address reforms now before campaigning for the 2018
elections begins.

We share the concerns voiced by High Representative
Inzko about the actions of anyone who seeks to
erode state-level institutions whether by ignoring the
decisions of the Constitutional Court and acting outside
the established decision-making process or advocating
for further divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. United
States sanctions against Republika Srpska President
Milorad Dodik should be a warning to those who seek
to undermine the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The United States reiterates its strong support
for ongoing efforts to make sure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We anticipate the day when we can say
with absolute confidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a peaceful, viable State irreversibly on course for
European integration. We are not there yet, but look
forward to Bosnia and Herzegovina meeting the
objectives and conditions established by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. We encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina's leaders and all members of the
international community to support the actions and
reforms needed to reach that milestone. Until that
time, the international community must deliver on
its commitment to provide all necessary support and
funding to the Office of the High Representative to
fulfil its mandate and goals for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

