The Secretary-General: At the outset, I wish to
pay tribute to the just-concluded Security Council
mission to the Great Lakes region. I believe that that
timely and important visit served to consolidate the
recent momentum for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and demonstrated the
importance that the United Nations attaches to the
peace process there. We heard a very eloquent and
comprehensive briefing from Ambassador Levitte, who
led the team.

By visiting not only the States signatories of the
Lusaka Agreement, but also Burundi, the Security
Council recognized the linkage between the conflicts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. It
is clear that we will have to work to ensure the
implementation of both the Lusaka and the Arusha
Agreements if we are to achieve peace throughout the
region.

The Democratic Republic of Congo, a vast and
impoverished country devastated by conflict, with
virtually no infrastructure, presents an immense
operational, administrative and logistical challenge to
any outside mission. However, we are now faced with a
genuine window of opportunity for peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I think
that Ambassador Levitte described it very clearly.

An important signal was the reopening of the
river network in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for humanitarian assistance and commercial exchanges
between Kinshasa and Kisangani. More specifically,
there has been progress on disengagement, and the
United Nations has been actively assisting the parties
in implementing their commitments. The United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has deployed 490
military observers, who, supported by 1,660 troops, are
verifying the disengagement. Already, MONUC has
verified close to 60 per cent of the redeployment
positions.

In the near future, the parties will be finalizing
plans for the withdrawal of all foreign troops, as well
as for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement of armed groups. This
process will also present a major challenge to MONUC
and the international community as a whole. The
planning for these operations has already begun - of
course, we need to work with those on the ground -
and must be incorporated into the overall planning for
phase III of the Mission. I think that the insight that the
Council has brought will also be very helpful as we
move to transition and implementation of phase III. My
recommendations for that phase will be contained in
my forthcoming report to the Security Council, to be
issued in mid-June. I hope the international community
will also contribute generously.

Significantly, there has also been a change in the
political climate within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Recently, we have seen progress in the inter-
Congolese dialogue, about which we have just heard;
that is an indispensable element of the peace process.
Recent developments include the signing by the
Congolese parties on 4 May in Lusaka of a Declaration
of Principles for the conduct of the dialogue; the
announcement on 17 May by President Kabila lifting
the ban on political parties; and the announcement by
the facilitator for the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, that he will convene a preparatory
meeting for the dialogue on 16 July, as we have just
heard, which could open the way for political
reconciliation.

Among the remaining urgent challenges in the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I wish to highlight the following. First, with
regard to the humanitarian situation, recent political
and military developments have resulted in greater
access to vulnerable communities, including some
which had been beyond our reach since the start of the
war. Needs assessments are currently being carried out
in these areas. It is imperative that additional resources
be made available to address the emerging
requirements, as well as to fund quick-impact projects
that can bring immediate benefits to the population.

Frankly speaking, I believe that current
international support for humanitarian activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is unacceptably
low, with only 20 per cent of the 2001 consolidated
appeal for $139.4 million being funded. The Council
may wish to take up this issue with donors as a matter
of urgency.

Secondly, I would like to speak about human
rights. I think we have heard quite a lot about human
rights. The dire situation concerning the human rights
of civilians is well known to Council members. I
believe that it is important to step up MONUC's
monitoring activities in this area without delay. In
cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, I have taken steps to
increase the number of human rights officers in
MONUC. Within this area of concern, the question of
impunity has to be addressed by investigating alleged
massacres and other major violations of human rights.
Without accountability for the most severe crimes,
there can be no lasting peace.

Thirdly, as the Council is aware, the use of child
soldiers has been pervasive in all fighting forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara
Otunnu, is currently visiting the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and I am looking forward to receiving
his recommendations on how to address this issue in a
comprehensive manner.

Separately, the security situation continues to be
precarious, especially in the east of the county. In Ituri
province, where six workers from the International
Committee of the Red Cross were killed recently, only
one international organization, Memisa, has resumed
work outside Bunia, the provincial capital. At present,
there are only three United Nations field security
officers for the entire country, which is totally
inadequate.

We face a truly daunting challenge in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, I believe
that there is a foundation for peace, based on progress
in three areas: the holding of the ceasefire, about which
we have just heard; the steady implementation of the
disengagement of troops; and the liberalization of
political life. As members well know, peace will not be
brought to the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
MONUC alone. The leaders and the peoples of the
region must lead the way and create a new culture of
peace and coexistence. Beyond the region, every
member of the United Nations family has a role to play
in helping to secure the peace and in improving the
lives of the Congolese people.

I applaud the Council's commitment and
contribution to this cause and look forward to building
on the progress that has been achieved. I think the
Council should be very proud of its mission and of
what it has achieved on the ground.

