Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania fully associates
itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union. I shall therefore limit my statement to a few
complementary remarks.
I wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for including consideration of the item "Justice and the
Rule of Law: The United Nations Role" in your
programme of work. We also highly commend you for
having taken the initiative to convene in a timely
manner this open debate on such a high-priority item as
a follow-up to the Security Council meeting held on 24
September.

As a country that has put forward its candidature
for membership of the Security Council from next
January, we took special note of the following
statement by the Secretary-General:

"This Council has a very heavy
responsibility to promote justice and the rule of
law in its efforts to maintain international peace
and security. This applies both internationally
and in rebuilding shattered societies." (S/PV4833, 
p. 2)

Romania attaches utmost importance to justice
and the rule of law. Indeed, they are a major thread in
the fabric of Romania's successful transition to
democracy. It is true that the background in Romania's
case is different from that of war-torn countries.
However, as a country ravaged by dictatorship,
Romania's evolution since December 1989
substantiates another sentence in the Secretary-
General's statement: "... the rule of law is not a luxury
and justice is not a side issue." (Supra)

As a country that struggled to rebuild a
democratic society based on the rule of law, on a
market economy and on respect for human rights, we
have a more immediate understanding of the complex
challenges of transition now facing other countries.
Transition is not an easy process, yet it is the only way
to reach durable economic prosperity and social
cohesion for the people. Equally important, the role
played by the rule of law in a society has a
tremendously formative influence on the shaping or
consolidation of national identity.

The community of democracies cannot be built
without the solidarity of democracies. Romania knows
the meaning of democratic solidarity, since we
benefited extensively from the support of the
democratic community after the breakdown of the
oppressive communist regime. The assistance of
various United Nations bodies and agencies is
gratefully acknowledged.

In other cases, justice and the rule of law are
inseparably connected to peacekeeping, to crisis
prevention and to conflict management. We support a
strengthening of the central role of the United Nations
in its worldwide efforts to that end.

Romania welcomes the embedding of components
of justice and the rule of law in the terms of reference
for United Nations peace operations and for United
Nations missions in general. Here, we see a valuable
response to the challenges of multidimensional
peacekeeping in post-conflict stages. Without the rule
of law - the backbone of any functioning society -
one cannot make people trust democracy, and
consequently one cannot make them talk peace to one
another. The mandate for the future United Nations
Mission in Liberia, which was agreed through
resolution 1509 (2003), sets a standard in that regard.

Kosovo is another case in point. The rule of law
and an adequate law enforcement system are the most
important priorities for any positive evolution there. In
that respect, Romania fully agrees with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, who made the rule of law a top
priority of his new tenure.

Atrocities and injustices brought by civil wars
and by State repression can easily fuel new cycles of
violence. Impunity may undermine trust in the legal
system, thereby increasing the risk that vigilante justice
will be resorted to, which encourages further atrocities.
Mistrust and hatred between former adversaries inhibit
political reconstruction, decision-making and economic
development. Against this reality, Romania looks to the
Security Council to continue to build upon its
contribution in recent years to various dimensions of
justice and the rule of law. The International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the International
Criminal Court are important steps in the right
direction.

Romania reiterates its commitment to the goals
and principles of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, an institution that reflects universal
aspirations to the rule of law and the achievement of
justice.

The track record shows that comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants are among the first requirements for
the rule of law, as we know it, to really take off in post-
conflict stages. Long-term investments in education,
training and family and community support must be on
top of reconstruction processes.

The involvement of the United Nations and the
international community in these stages has gradually
expanded to include assistance in the creation of
sustainable government, security and legal institutions.
We share the views of those speakers who pointed out
that, eventually, real progress in achieving justice and
the rule of law depends largely on local actors.
Multilateral and bilateral assistance should be
conducive to justice and the rule of law effectively
permeating the targeted region or country and reaching
the stage of sustainable local ownership.

That implies a need to engage civil society from
the start, which will ensure that the specific character
of each society - its culture and identity - is duly
taken into account. The international community must
provide greater resources and expert assistance in that
respect.

Furthermore, the United Nations goals and
concrete activities related to justice and the rule of law
in post-conflict countries should be placed in a
comprehensive and coherent framework that includes
police reform, good governance and a functioning and
accountable system of public administration. Perhaps
no less essential is the balance that should exist
between justice and the rule of law themselves,
between the goals of justice and those of reconciliation,
or between the demands of peace and those of justice.

From the same perspective, it would be
worthwhile to corroborate the conclusions drawn
following the Security Council's consideration of the
theme with the ideas emerging from similar endeavours
in other United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as
in other international and regional forums active in this
area.

A wider and integrated approach would further
help the United Nations and Member States identify
current trends, recent experience, practical lessons and
challenges for national and international initiatives to
foster reconciliation, peace, stability and development
in post-conflict societies. By the same token, that will
lead to improved decisions by the Security Council and
better action in the field so that justice and rule of law
components become integral parts of United Nations
peace operations and missions.

