Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Ambassador Tanin for his briefing just now; we
also thank High Representative Mogherini and the
European Union for facilitating the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Those efforts should, in turn,
be rewarded with the strong commitment from Serbia
and Kosovo, in good faith, towards the normalization
of their relations.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that it is
high time to recognize Kosovo's considerable progress
since 2008. In that context, I will focus on three issues:
first, the reporting cycle; secondly, the strategic review;
and, thirdly, the rule of law.

First, the current situation in Kosovo clearly
allows for a reduction of the Secretary-General's
reporting cycle. We also encourage a shift of format
from briefings to closed consultations. The Council set
a welcome example by reducing the frequency of our
discussions to twice a year. We call upon the Secretary-
General to adjust his reporting cycle accordingly.

Secondly, we believe that it is possible for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to downscale its operations. We therefore
call once more for a strategic review of UNMIK, in
coordination with all the relevant actors. Such a review
should align the Mission to the situation on the ground.

My third and final point is on the rule of law.
We appreciate Kosovo's progress in strengthening its
judiciary. We welcome the launch of Justice 2020 and
the functional review. Those are positive examples of
efforts to increase performance and accountability.
However, political will and the efforts of all strata of
Kosovar society remain necessary to push forward in
strengthening the rule of law and improving the daily
lives of citizens. High-profile cases must be treated
with the utmost scrutiny and precision. We encourage
Kosovo to keep reforming its judiciary. Kosovo needs to
embrace its responsibilities and ensure accountability
at the national level, as we encourage the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to hand over
responsibilities to Kosovar authorities.

In conclusion, Kosovo has come a long way since
its independence 10 years ago. We encourage Kosovo
to keep building up its institutions. We have full faith
in its ability to handle its affairs as a sovereign nation.

