The President: As this is the first open meeting
of the Security Council for the month of August, I
should like to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of July
2002. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Greenstock for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and South Africa, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to Her Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Dlamini
Zuma (South Africa) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Leonard
She Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She

Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)

took a seat at the Council table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I also
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Patrick
Mazimpaka, Special Envoy of the President of Rwanda
on the Great Lakes Region.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mazimpaka
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I would like to extend a warm welcome to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to thank our
special guests for having come so far at such short
notice. They have shown great statesmanship by
signing an Agreement that represents an important step
towards ending a war that that has cost countless lives
and produced immeasurable suffering. With the help of
South African President Mbeki, the signatory heads of
State have for the first time met to pledge to bring this
difficult chapter in their history to a close. They should
be applauded.

The Agreement signed in Pretoria on 30 July
provides a real opportunity for progress. Members of
the Council want to understand fully the provisions of
the Agreement and the intentions of the parties to
ensure that all those who will play a role in making the
Agreement work understand their responsibilities and
obligations. Implementation will be a difficult and
complicated task that will require unswerving
commitment by the parties and by the international
community.

Having said that by way of introduction, I shall
now give the floor to the Secretary-General.


