Ms. Scott (Namibia): I congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and I thank you for organizing this debate on
the important topic of the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I would also like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and
Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director of B'Tselem, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Namibians are deeply concerned by Mr. Mladenov's
recent report, which states that Israeli settlement
expansion has continued in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. We were informed that plans for some
2,800 units had been proposed, some 900 additional
units were approved, and tenders for over 1,700 housing
units were announced. As reaffirmed in resolution 2334
(2016), those settlements are illegal under international
law, represent a serious impediment to the two-State
solution, and diminish hope for peace. We also note the
ongoing destruction of Palestinian-owned structures
over the past five months by Israeli authorities,
which has led to the displacement of 145 Palestinians,
including 82 children.

Violence represents an impediment to peace. The
Great March of Return protests along the Gaza-Israel
border fence demand that Palestinian refugees and their
descendants be allowed to return to the land from which
they were displaced. Namibia is concerned that since
March, violence along the fence has been frequent, with
dozens killed and injured following the excessive and
disproportionate use of force by Israel. On at least three
occasions, the situation escalated dramatically. We
thank Egypt and the United Nations, which intervened
to de-escalate tensions.

The ongoing violence and tension along the border
fence has further compounded the situation in Gaza,
which remains on the brink of collapse. The overall
humanitarian and economic situation continues to
deteriorate. More than 53 per cent of the population
is unemployed, households receive electricity for
three to four hours per day, access to clean water has
not improved, and major strain is being placed on the
health system.

The situation in Gaza has been exacerbated by
the recent decision taken by the United States to
terminate its funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which is a stabilizing factor across
the region, offering educational, health and social
services - a lifeline for Palestinian refugees. The
recent proposal made by the mayor of Jerusalem to
remove UNRWA-run programmes in the city is a cause
for serious concern. If implemented, it will worsen the
already harsh conditions of the Palestinian refugees.

The decision taken by the United States
Administration to stop funding UNRWA follows other
decisions that represent an impediment to peace and
an obstacle to the two-State solution. In December
2017, the United States announced its recognition of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. In May, the United
States officially transferred its Embassy from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem. That decision was condemned in
General Assembly resolution ES-10/19 of December
2017, overwhelmingly adopted by Member States. That
resolution notes that "Jerusalem is a final status issue
to be resolved through negotiations in line with relevant
United Nations resolutions". The decision taken by
the United States in September to close the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) office in Washington,
DC, under the pretext that the PLO has not taken
steps to advance the start of direct and meaningful
negotiations with Israel is also counterproductive.
What is needed is dialogue, not more alienation.

As a child of the United Nations that fought
tirelessly for its independence, Namibia will always
support Palestine in its fight for self-determination.
During the debate held a few weeks ago, most Heads of
State and Government reaffirmed their strong support
for the Palestinian cause. Support for Palestine was also
demonstrated in its election as Chair of the Group of 77
and China for the year 2019.

In conclusion, we call on the Israeli Government to
end all construction of settlements and the destruction
of Palestinian homes and infrastructure. We call
for Israel's complete and unconditional withdrawal
from the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem. We urge all parties to return to the
negotiation table to ensure that the Palestinian people
are able to exercise their inalienable rights in an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and as a rightful member of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.

