Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My delegation
would like first of all, Sir, to offer you our
congratulations on the assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We look forward to a serene month
under your guidance. We thank the previous Chilean
presidency for its outstanding chairmanship during what
was certainly not a serene month.

The Security Council has, rightly in our view, made
a heavy commitment to supporting the peace process in
Angola. The draft resolution before us represents a further
effort in this regard, and we shall vote in favour of it.

There have been some positive developments in the
peace process since the mandate of UNAVEM. III was
renewed in February. We welcome the general reduction
in the level of violence in Angola. The military situation
in the country has remained stable, and there has been a
reduction in the number of cease-fire violations.

But overall achievements in the peace process still
fall far short of our expectations, and we are deeply
concerned that these continued delays to the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol commitments
could put the whole peace process at risk.

A mandate of only two months for UNAVEM. 111,
which is now the largest United Nations peace-keeping
operation, is exceptional and presents obvious
administrative difficulties for the United Nations. But we
are supporting this unusual step because we believe the
peace process has reached a critical stage and it is
necessary to put pressure on both parties to accelerate
progress in the peace process.

This extension should give both parties the
opportunity to demonstrate the political will to implement
their often voiced commitments to the peace process. The
draft resolution is comprehensive about the obligations of
both parties over this intervening period. There are
various tasks which have to be achieved by them, in
particular the quartering of UNITA troops and their

 

demobilization and integration into the Angolan army, the
disarming of the civilian population, demining, and the
formation of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. We look to both parties to carry out their
individual tasks and to stick to the deadlines which they
have agreed.

The key point is that in order to achieve these tasks
both parties will have to demonstrate the necessary political
will. We attach importance, therefore, to President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi remaining in contact, in addition
to the work undertaken in the Joint Commission.

Finally, during our discussions on the draft resolution
my delegation suggested that the Council might have an
open debate on Angola in four or five weeks time. We
hope to see real progress on the ground by the time of that
debate, in accordance with the tasks which both parties
have committed themselves to.

