Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): In
the General Assembly in September, President Obama
reminded us that terror attacks are not simply an assault
on one country, but an assault on the very ideals upon
which the United Nations was founded (see A/67/PV.6).
Through concerted action and international cooperation,
the world has made significant progress in combating
the scourge of terrorism, but we have not yet eliminated
it. Although Al-Qaida's core has weakened, we have
seen the rise of affiliated groups around the world, such
as in the Sahel and the Arabian peninsula.

The Security Council's three counter-terrorism
Committees exemplify our common efforts and reflect
the international community's multifaceted approach to
confront this challenge. Thwarting nefarious actors from
supporting acts of terror, building national capacities to
address terrorism domestically, and working to prevent
the most dangerous weapons and materials from falling
into the wrong hands are all essential elements of a
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism, and they
require constant multilateral cooperation.

The Council's sustained commitment to promoting
the implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) has helped build stronger legal,
policy and institutional counter-terrorism frameworks
at the national and regional levels. We commend the
Committees for their dedication, their Chairs for their
leadership over the past two years, and the three expert
groups for their continued excellent work.

The sanctions regime of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) remains a critical tool for countering
Al-Qaida and affiliated groups, which continue to
pose grave danger to international peace and security.
The actions of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities help prevent these
groups from perpetuating acts of terror. The United
States encourages the Committee to reinvigorate the
implementation and enforcement of the regime, in
particular to strengthen the international community's
ability to thwart terrorist finance and travel. We further
urge the Committee to impose targeted measures
against Al-Qaida-linked militants operating in the
Sahel, especially those responsible for violence in
Mali. The Committee should hold special meetings to
discuss the financing of terrorism through kidnapping
for ransom and to focus on key regions victimized by
terrorism.

We remain committed to ensuring that the
Committee's procedures are fair, and we commend
Ombudsperson Kimberley Prost for her important role
in aiding the Committee's review of delisting petitions.

Finally, we recognize the dedicated service to
this Committee of Richard Barrett and several other
long-standing members of the Monitoring Team who
will depart at the end of this year. We deeply value
their work. Moving forward, we encourage the Team
to continue focusing on implementation challenges,
particularly in those States in which sanctioned
individuals and entities are located, and we would
welcome recommendations for actions the Committee
might take in cases of non-compliance.

The effectiveness of international efforts to combat
terrorist activities depends on countries' abilities to take
action domestically. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate (CTED) have
played a vital role in building the capacities of nations
to deal effectively with terrorism. We strongly support
their efforts to monitor and promote the implementation
ofresolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
as reflected in our voluntary contributions across
the United Nations system for regional and national
training. The valuable work of the CTC and CTED
includes training judges and prosecutors, developing
witness protection programmes, and programmes to
rehabilitate and reintegrate violent extremists. The
appointment of a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
would further strengthen our collective counter-
terrorism efforts by fostering a more strategic and
coordinated United Nations approach to these issues
and integrate the work of the three counter-terrorism
expert groups.

In addition, the United States strongly supports the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
The United Nations should continue to work with
multilateral entities such as the Global Counterterrorism
Forum to increase international capacity to counter
violent extremism. We look forward to the United
Nations developing a close partnership with the new
International Center of Excellence on Countering
Violent Extremism in Abu Dhabi and the soon-to-
be-established international institute for justice and the
rule of law in Tunisia.

One of the greatest threats to international security
is terrorists gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. For eight years, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has been dealing with
that threat. We have seen significance progress towards
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
for which we thank the 1540 Committee and its
experts. But much more remains to be done. The full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-
term endeavour that will require continuing Security
Council commitment and engagement with regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations and
industry. We must continue to find ways to integrate the
competencies and capabilities of those organizations
into the global effort.

We also hope that the 1540 Committee's expanded
group of experts will energize implementation. Only
with sustained financial support can the goal of full
implementation be reached. The United States has
donated a total of $4.5 million to the United Nations
trust fund for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and we encourage all Member States to make
voluntary contributions to the fund.

The ongoing threat of terrorism around the
world should reinforce for us the importance of these
Committees and their work. We are pleased with the
Committee's progress, grateful to those who have
made it possible and confident that, under the capable
leadership of the Chairs, the Council's counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce Member States' action
to combat terrorism in the coming years.

