Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
think there was a considerable amount of good and
optimistic news in Mr. Annabi's briefing. I, too, am
grateful to him for reporting to us so early after his trip
to give us a first-hand impression. There are a couple
of points I want to flag and a couple of questions I
want to ask.

We strongly support the electoral timetable. We
think it is essential that it be held to even though the
schedule is very tight. I was glad to hear Mr. Annabi's
comments on that. There are a lot of things that need to
be done between now and the end of the year, but it is
fundamental, in our view, that that process be worked
through.

I was also glad to hear that the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
is already taking care to ensure that the views of
ordinary citizens can be fed into the process, looking
towards the constituent assembly and beyond. We are
encouraged by that, and we urge them to continue. This
is also, in our View, an important element of this
process.

We are very concerned about the security
situation both within East Timor and along the border.
The recent civil disturbances are of concern. Nothing
challenges East Timor's chances for a peaceful future
more than unrest from within. The emergence of
intolerance as a factor in that, if it continues, will, I am
sure, in the end cost East Timor international support
and aid. We hope that the authorities and UNTAET can
cooperate in bringing that under control.

We are also very concerned about the recent
incidents of violence along the border. We welcome
and support the robust support of UNTAET
peacekeepers, and in that regard also believe that
Indonesia should do more on its side of the border, in
keeping with resolution 1319 (2000).

We are also not satisfied with the handling of the
suspects in the murder of the three workers from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). We encourage Indonesia to show
greater commitment to accountability and other
elements of resolution 1319 (2000).

I wanted to ask a question in that connection. We
understand that a former militia member named
Jacobus Bere, whose name has been linked to the
killing of a New Zealand peacekeeper, is currently in
Indonesian custody. I am wondering what steps the
United Nations is taking in that case.

I also wanted to ask Mr. Annabi: we have been
approached by a number of international non-
governmental organizations expressing concerns that
we consider legitimate about current UNTAET tax
regulations, which are disadvantaging them. I would be
interested in Mr. Annabi's comments on that problem
and on how it might be solved.

