Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to welcome you to the Council,
Mr. Minister, to preside over today's meeting. I also
welcome the presence of Secretary-General Annan and
thank him for the report (S/2006/956) he submitted to
us yesterday.

As a cradle of human civilization, the Middle
East is the birthplace of the Mesopotamian civilization
and the religions of Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
Unfortunately, for the past half-century or so, that land
has been plagued by protracted wars and frequent flare-
ups, and its peoples have been subjected to all kinds of
suffering brought about by occupation, wars, sanctions
and so on. The incessant turbulence in the Middle East,
with no solution in sight, does not bode well for the
prospect of peace and development in the region.
Moreover, it negatively affects the peace and stability
of the whole world. The current situation is particularly
worrisome given the continued conflict between
Palestine and Israel, the impasse in the implementation
of the Road Map and the lack of progress in both the
Lebanese-Israeli and the Syrian-Israeli talks. Where the
Middle East is heading is a question of serious concern
to the international community.

Against that backdrop, Mr. President, your
initiative to hold this ministerial meeting of the
Security Council on the question of the Middle East is
highly necessary and timely. We support it fully.
For decades, the question of the Middle East
mainly found expression in conflicts between Israel
and Arab countries. At present, however, various
hotspot issues share the stage, including the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, the Lebanese-Israeli
conflict, the instability in Iraq and other tensions in
region. Moreover, they are intertwined and affect each
other. The Middle East is undergoing the most
profound changes in recent years, which has resulted in
an even more complicated overall situation that has a
major bearing on international peace and security and
on global economic development. No country can
respond to it single-handedly, and no country can
simply mind its own business. The international
community must take a strategic perspective and join
hands in a concerted effort to seek a comprehensive
settlement.

China appreciates the efforts of the Quartet in
promoting peace and facilitating talks and encourages
it to play a more proactive role. Yesterday, Secretary-
General Annan submitted to the Security Council his
final report on the Middle East, which contains a
number of bold and detailed proposals for the
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
They deserve serious consideration by the Council.

While a settlement of the Middle East question
cannot be achieved without the support of the
international community, the key still lies in the hands
of the parties concerned. Decades of confrontation and
conflict have left a deep legacy of grievances between
Israel and Arab countries. Thus, it is necessary to foster
an atmosphere of mutual trust. It is our sincere hope
that the parties concerned will break out of the futile
mode of offering Violence for Violence and toughness
for toughness, take the initiative to show goodwill and
do more to ease tensions.

In that connection, we support efforts by
Palestine to form a government of national unity,
welcome the willingness expressed by Israel to engage
in peace talks and hope that the two parties will work
together for an early return to the path of negotiations.

The Security Council bears the solemn
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. The question of the Middle East is the oldest
item on the Council's agenda and the Council's biggest
headache. The failure to find a solution to the Middle
East question, over such a long time, has had a
negative impact on the role and authority of the
Security Council.

For many years, the Security Council has been in
passive firefighting mode. After the outbreak of the

Lebanese-Israeli conflict, it took 34 days of arduous
consultations for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution requesting the two sides to cease hostilities.
When United Nations peacekeepers were attacked and
lost their lives, the Security Council only expressed its
regret in a mild manner, in a presidential statement.
Such abnormality has aroused the serious
dissatisfaction of many Member States, especially Arab
States. That is something the Council must reflect
upon. It should transform itself as soon as possible
from firefighter to problem solver, come up with
innovative ideas, work in the spirit of seeking overall
common ground and setting aside minor differences
and take an active and pragmatic approach in order to
assist in efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and
push for the resumption of the Middle East peace
process.

After decades of turmoil, the people of the
Middle East are tired of endless conflict and instability.
In the twenty-first century, when the whole world is
advancing rapidly, their desire to achieve peace and
join the mainstream of development has become
stronger and more urgent. China is willing to work
together with the rest of the international community to
promote the Middle East peace process and to help the
people of the region achieve the goal of peace and
development at an early date. If we make concerted
efforts, peace in the Middle East will no longer be an
elusive dream.

