The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

Russia agrees with all the arguments that have
already been presented here in favour of the need to
tighten sanctions against the Taliban in connection with
their complete ignoring of all the demands of the
Security Council, first and foremost the demand for a
cessation of support for international terrorism. I will
not here reiterate all those arguments that were voiced
by the majority of my colleagues who spoke.

I want to say a few words regarding those
arguments that were expressed in connection with the
doubts of some members of the Security Council
concerning the necessity of adopting this resolution.

First, reference was made to the fact that the arms
embargo that is being imposed in accordance with the

S/PVAZSI

 

resolution just adopted is, in fact, one-sided. However,
I would like to emphasize that the one-sided nature of
this embargo is fully justified. It is precisely the
Taliban who have always banked on using military
means to resolve the Afghan problem and who are
continuing to bank on such means. Also, it is precisely
the Taliban who have offered their territory for the use
and protection of terrorists and who openly support
Chechen, Uzbek, Tajik, Uigur and other extremists.
Therefore, the weapons that end up in the hands of the
Taliban are used not only for the civil war in
Afghanistan, but also, we are convinced, in order to
support international terrorism. Given this, there was
nothing for the Security Council to do but impose a
one-sided arms embargo.

Secondly, arguments are being put forward to the
effect that the resolution just adopted may have a
negative impact on the peace process. In particular,
reference was made to the fact that on 2 November the
Taliban and the Northern Alliance agreed in writing to
resume negotiations. In this connection I would like to
say that already on many occasions the Taliban have
promised, both orally and in other forms, to begin the
negotiating process, and each time they went back on
their word. As far as we know, they have also gone
back on the obligation that they entered into on 2
November and signed. The Taliban is continuing to
refuse to respond to the numerous appeals made to
them by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Francesc Vendrell, regarding the proposed agenda for a
political dialogue. Thus they are continuing to boycott
the political process and continuing to bank on war.

Therefore, I would venture to say that the
negative impact on the peace process will not be
exerted by the Security Council resolution, but by the
consistent policy of the Taliban. Naturally, no one -
the Russian Federation least of all - is going to close
the door on the possibility that the Taliban might
finally participate honestly and with good will in
negotiations on a political settlement in Afghanistan.
This door continues to remain open, and the resolution
that has just been adopted does not close it.

The third argument that was put forward by
colleagues who have expressed doubts about the
resolution concerned its humanitarian implications.
Previous speakers have already discussed how the
major cause of the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan,
aside from the drought, is the war. Tens of thousands of
Afghans are fleeing this war and the Taliban's most

flagrant violations of human rights, which are also
causing suffering in the Afghan population. This is the
precise cause of the humanitarian disaster, and,
unfortunately, the assessments of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance
in Islamabad failed to take into account objective
factors that are not linked to the positions of the
Security Council but are the direct result of Taliban
policies.

In addition I would like to recall here that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance
in Islamabad decided to inform all those who wished to
know about their assessments via an unusual
procedure: by placing these assessments on the
Internet, instead of bringing them to the Security
Council. Standard procedure was thus flagrantly
violated, and naturally this could not fail to distress
those delegations who had more objective information
than what had been distributed by the Islamabad
division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Despite all of this, as has already been stated by
many of my colleagues, the resolution just adopted
contains all of the necessary humanitarian exemptions.
The sanctions are, in fact, targeted. They are targeted
exclusively at the leaders of the Taliban and not at the
Afghan people. They contain humanitarian exemptions;
humanitarian assistance can be provided without
constraint and automatically. And the sanctions have
time limits, at the end of which they will have to be
renewed.

The last argument that is being raised in
connection with the humanitarian consequences
involves concerns that after the adoption of this
resolution, the Taliban may expel the humanitarian
personnel of the United Nations and of non-
governmental organizations.
If the Security Council takes such threats into
account, we will become the direct victims of
blackmail. We will be seen not as the organ responsible
for the maintenance of peace and security, but as one
that acquiesces to blackmail. That would be analogous
to our deciding to rescind the sanctions against UNITA
because it is shooting down United Nations aircraft
carrying humanitarian assistance. That would be quite
the same thing and I am very gratified that the Security
Council did not yield to such blackmail.

S/P\'.4251

 

I new resume my functions as President of the of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council. Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

There are no further speakers on my list. The The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
