Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We congratulate
the people of Afghanistan on having successfully
conducted two rounds of presidential elections. Those
landmark elections should deepen democracy, bring the
first step of a democratic transfer of power and move
the country towards peace and stability. It is a defining
moment for Afghanistan and the region.

Afghanistan's political continuity and national
reconciliation, as well as its security and economic
transitions, clearly hinge on a smooth democratic
transition. Afghan institutions now have an historic
obligation to take the electoral process towards its logical
end. It is time to build trust, complete the task at hand
and usher in a new era in the history of Afghanistan.
We believe that the Afghan elections are an internal
affair, led by Afghan institutions. It is the aspiration of
the people of Afghanistan to resolve differences within
the framework of the Afghan Constitution and laws.
We agree with Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis that it is indeed a time for engagement
and statesmanship.

For its part, Pakistan took a series of steps to
support a free, peaceful and secure electoral process
in Afghanistan. We bolstered security along the
Pakistan-Afghanistan border by deploying additional
troops, enhancing communications vigilance and aerial
surveillance and increasing patrols. Pakistan has no
favourites. Afghans are a proud people and masters of
their own destiny. We respect the democratic choice of
the people of Afghanistan and look forward to working
with the next leader. The people of Afghanistan realize
that the political transition will not deliver its full
dividends until a lasting political settlement is worked
out through an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned reconciliation process. Pakistan is committed to
facilitating that process.

While acknowledging the professional strengths
that the Afghan National Security Forces have been
gathering over the years, both the Secretary-General
and the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) have warned that the Security Forces will
need support beyond 2014 to ensure their Viability
and sustainability. The ongoing security, political
and economic transitions in Afghanistan must not be
thwarted or derailed. The projected drawdowns should
be prudent and responsible. They should not leave any
security vacuums and no one should harbour ambitions
to fill such vacuums. The world had to pay a heavy
price for the precipitous withdrawals in the 1990s. A
repeat of that precedent would be more costly to peace
and security.

There are forecasts of an economic downturn as the
war economy, we hope, changes into a peace economy.
The Secretary-General has cautioned that the decrease
in the physical presence of foreign troops should not
lead to a decrease in development assistance. The
misperception that Afghanistan was being abandoned
must be rectified. The international community has a
responsibility to avert a large-scale economic recession
in Afghanistan, which could lead to unemployment,
displacement and a greater reliance on the illicit
economy. The reconstruction efforts must focus on
policies that would stimulate growth and investment,
create jobs and facilitate the rehabilitation of refugees.

Pakistan continues to host 3 million registered or
unregistered Afghan refugees. We have been bearing
the burden of an even higher number of refugees for
the past 34 years. According to the Secretary-General,
the registered 1.6 million refugees alone represent
the world's largest protracted refugee population. In
April, Pakistan and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees launched a solutions
strategy for the sustainable return and reintegration
of Afghan refugees. Recently, there has been a sharp
decrease, of about 64 per cent, in the return ofrefugees.
The international community must step forward to help
quicken the pace of repatriation of Afghan refugees
and the United Nations should assist the Afghan
Government in creating pull factors.

Pakistan is one of the victims of the opiates
trafficked from Afghanistan. We are glad that the
Afghan Government has intensified its counter-
narcotics campaign by conducting targeted operations,
dismantling laboratories, seizing illicit drugs and
eradicating opium poppy cultivation on hundreds of
hectares of land. Yet we realize that the overall pace
has slowed down and that we have a long way to go.
Pakistan, in collaboration with Afghanistan and Iran
as part of the Triangular Initiative, will continue to
work for more stringent drugs control and border
management.

Peace in Afghanistan has a direct bearing on
regional economic cooperation. In order to enhance
regional connectivity, as well as trade and energy flows,
Pakistan supports transregional projects, including
the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project, the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India gas pipeline and infrastructure
development. Their success clearly depends on stability
in Afghanistan.

Pakistan-Afghanistan relations continue to be
marked by contacts and communication at the highest
level. President Mamnoon Hussain, who visited Kabul
last March, along with President Karzai, underlined
that the people of our two countries would tap the vast
potential for progress and prosperity. Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif, who has met with President Karzai
four times in the past year, is pursuing his vision of
a peaceful neighbourhood and stable and cooperative
relations with Afghanistan. Pakistan and Afghanistan
agree that terrorism and violent extremism pose a
grave threat to our two countries. We must fight the
scourge together. In that context, border management
and border security are an abiding concern and priority.
Our Chief of Army Staff, General Rahid Sharif, visited
Kabul to discuss with his counterpart the security
situation in Afghanistan, ISAF drawdown and ways
to enhance bilateralism, with particular emphasis on
better coordination along the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border.

Pakistan and Afghanistan must not allow non-State
actors to influence their relationship. Because of the
fluid situation along the border, it is important to have
more frequent and real-time communication between
military and intelligence agencies to address mutual
concerns and build trust. Allegations made by Kabul
from time to time against cross-border shelling from
the Pakistani side are exaggerated and misinformed.
When our forces come under heavy attack by terrorists
from across the border, we act in self-defence.

We have launched a comprehensive operation,
Zarb-e-Azb, to deliver a fatal blow to foreign and local
terrorists hiding in our tribal areas. Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif, while addressing the Parliament on
16 June, said that we have started the operation to make
Pakistan a land of peace. Through those operations we
would purge selected areas of militants and terrorists,
dismantle terrorist entities and networks and establish
the full writ of the State. The operations in north
Waziristan should not be a cause for concern for the
Government of Afghanistan but a source of strength for
it.

We express our deepest condolences to the families
of the victims of recent flash floods and landslides in
Afghanistan. Pakistan sent three planes loaded with
relief supplies for the people stricken by the massive
landslide on 2 May in Badakhshan. Afghanistan
remains vulnerable to recurrent sudden and slow onset
disasters. As pointed out by the Secretary-General, the
United Nations should help Afghanistan develop a risk
reduction and risk management strategy.

We admire and commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his
effective, sensitive and results-oriented leadership of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I also thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
for his briefing this morning.

Finally, I thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for the
very insightful, forward-looking and constructive
statement he delivered this morning.

