Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Moscow has learned with concern of the
decision of the Government of Israel to proceed with the
construction of a new residential settlement in East
Jerusalem.

We share the negative response of the Palestinians,
Arab and Islamic States, and the entire international
community to this ill- considered and untimely step taken
by Israel. Given the seriousness of the situation, Russia
supported the request of a group of Arab countries for an
urgent consideration of this issue at a formal meeting of
the Security Council. This meeting assumes special
significance since Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and President of the Palestinian National
Authority, is currently in New York.

Israel's decision clouds the negotiating environment
in the Middle East in general, especially on the threshold
of the start "in mid-March of the final-status talks.
Unfortunately, all this is occurring after the agreements
on Hebron opened a road to progress on the Palestinian-
Israeli track based on the fulfilment of commitments
undertaken by both sides.

The steps taken by Israel run counter to the
Palestinian-Israeli agreements reached, since they are,
factually speaking, designed to predetermine solutions to
issues that require discussion during the final-status talks,
the agenda for which includes the status of Jerusalem and
the future of settlements. Such unilateral actions, designed
to change the demographic composition of East Jerusalem
in favour of the Israeli population, perpetuate the policy
of fair actompli with respect to the Holy City and
actually obviate a negotiated search for compromise on
the problem of Jerusalem. All of this is at variance with

1]
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

the direction of the peace process begun at the Madrid
Conference.

Believers, especially Muslims, are extremely sensitive
to any change in the status quo of East Jerusalem. Such
changes contradict relevant Security Council resolutions and
raise additional barriers to peace in the Middle East.

The efforts of the Russian co-sponsor are currently
focused on energetically promoting a Palestinian-Israeli
dialogue and on the resumption in a constructive spirit of
the final-status talks. According to the Madrid formula, and
in compliance with the letter of the Palestinian-Israeli
accords, these talks must be based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Accordingly, the
principles set forth in these resolutions, including the
inadmissibility of acquiring foreign territories by force, are
applicable not only to the current situation but also to any
future solution of the East Jerusalem problem. Moreover,
the Palestinians' right to self-determination and
statehood --- and we stress this in particular- can be
realized only on a basis of mutual acceptability and within
the framework of the peace process.

The issue of Israeli settlements in the Palestinian
territories will be stressed during the forthcoming contacts
with the Israeli leaders in Moscow. We hope that the Israeli
Government will find it possible to ponder all the
consequences of its decision and to reconsider it."

As a co-sponsor of the peace process, Russia is
convinced that the situation requires resolute action so as to
avoid a relapse into tension in Palestinian-Israeli relations,
as occurred last September. This, in our View, is the major
motive behind today's Security Council meeting. A speedy
resolution of the situation in East Jerusalem would ensure
progress in the peace process and meet the interests of the
Palestinians and Israelis alike, as well as the desires of the
international community as a whole. We are sure that the
Security Council will again declare itself in favour of this.

