Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Ijoin
others in welcoming Mrs. Kelly Craft, our colleague
from the United States, and assure her of my delegation's
full support in ensuring the success of her mandate.

I speak on behalf of the three African countries
that are non-permanent members of the Security
Council, namely, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and
Cete d'Ivoire.

The three African members welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2488 (2019), which eases the
arms embargo imposed on the Government of the
Central African Republic. We commend the penholder
on ensuring that the commitment of the members of
the Security Council vis-a-vis the Central African
Government is respected with regard to the easing of
the arms embargo in the light of the progress achieved.

Undoubtedly, the casing of the arms embargo
against the Central African Government will be a
powerful driver for multidimensional efforts to speed
up the re-establishment of State authority throughout
the entire country. Such a positive development will
enable the Government of the Central African Republic
to effectively fulfil its responsibility of protecting its
people and defending its territorial integrity, which for
too long have been negatively affected by the spate of
attacks by armed groups.

(spoke in English)

The fact that the Security Council adopted
this resolution is indicative of the Central African
Government's continued commitment to the
implementation of the sanctions regime despite
the challenges that it is facing in implementing the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. It should be noted
that, if they are strictly respected, the sanctions will
constitute an effective instrument that can support the
work of the Central African authorities, especially in
the implementation of the Political Agreement, signed
on 6 February, between the Government and the
armed groups.

Our three delegations joined the consensus on the
sanctions mandate renewal because of the realization
that sanctions continue to have a role to play in
supporting the political process in the Central African
Republic. The Central African peace deal is facing a
difficult time, as the Government prepares for the
2020-2021 electoral process.

(spoke in French)

The three African members of the Council
therefore encourage the Government of the Central
African Republic, as well as all regional partners, to
persevere in their efforts to overcome the current crisis.
We assure them of our full support for achieving a
definitive return to peace and stability in that brotherly
country, in line with the aspirations of the continent
and the African Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative. We call on the Council to continue to support
the Government and all initiatives aimed at convincing
all parties that the Political Agreement is the best way
forward towards the return to normal life in the country.
Lastly, South Africa, Equatorial Guinea and Cote
d'lvoire call for taking synergistic action by the Central
African authorities, the States of the region and the
United Nations, with the support of the Panel of Experts,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, so as to ensure the effective implementation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions on fostering a
lasting peace in the Central African Republic.

