The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

I wish to express my appreciation to Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the ICTY; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR, for their reports.

More than 20 years ago, the world was shocked and
horrified by reports regarding violations ofinternational
humanitarian law and the commission of atrocities
such as war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. The
establishment of the respective International Criminal
Tribunals - namely, the ICTY and the ICTR - was
the international community's firm response aimed at
ensuring that the perpetrators of such atrocities would
be held accountable for their acts.

As was the case last year, when we marked the
twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, we
are mindful that this year will mark the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide. The anniversary
serves as a recognition of the suffering of the victims
and their families, and also as a painful reminder to all
of us of our responsibility to ensure that such atrocities
should not be repeated. We need to send a strong and
unequivocal message that impunity will not be tolerated
or allowed to stand.

Malaysia remains resolute that the perpetrators of
such crimes must and will be brought to justice and that
they will be held accountable. However painful that
may be, we also believe that it is part of the healing,
truth and reconciliation process that communities and
States must undergo in order to seek and upholdjustice.
In that regard, Malaysia highly values and underscores
its support for the work of the ICTY and the ICTR
in upholding the rule of law and justice. We deeply
acknowledge their contributions to the international
justice system and to international peace and security
and the rule of law.

Concerning the implementation of the completion
strategy, we note the commitments made by their
respective Presidents to ensuring that both Tribunals
are on track to meet their respective completion
deadlines, namely the end of this year for the ICTR and
2017 for the ICTY. We acknowledge the efforts that the
Presidents of both Tribunals have undertaken to ensure
the efficient transfer and transition of cases to the
Mechanism or to the national courts, where relevant.
With respect to the ICTR, we note that its judicial and
prosecutorial functions have already been handed over
to the Residual Mechanism. The only pending case is
the Butare appeal. Of the nine remaining fugitives,
six will be referred to Rwanda, while the Residual
Mechanism will try the remaining three top-priority
fugitives. We highly encourage all States to extend
their fullest cooperation to the ICTR so as to ensure the
apprehension of all nine remaining fugitives.

With respect to the ICTY, we note that several
factors, including the health of the accused, which
has affected their ability to stand trial, as well as
high staff attrition rates have resulted in requests for
extensions of its mandate. We are especially mindful
of the continuing risk that justice may be denied due
to the medical conditions of several of the accused,
which may prevent the completion of their trials and the
determination of their guilt or innocence. While such
consequences would be unfortunate, we believe that the
factors involved were unavoidable and unintended. In
that regard, we commend the President of the ICTY for
taking the initiative to recruit personnel to fill existing
staffing gaps in order to expedite the completion of
cases.

We also acknowledge the Tribunals' continuing
efforts to ensure that the lessons learned in managing
the judicial, prosecutorial and administrative functions
of an international tribunal are shared with other
international and national jurisdictions and the public.
It is important to encourage the sharing ofbest practices
and lessons learned, for example by holding workshops
with the participation of legal officers from the various
international tribunals.

We are encouraged to see the relatively smooth
transition of the two Tribunals to the Residual
Mechanism, as demonstrated by the transfer of some
judicial and administrative functions. We are confident
that the Tribunals will carry out their work efficiently
in accordance with the Security Council's resolutions.

We further wish to highly commend the cooperation
of the States concerned and regional States with the
Tribunals. It would not have been possible for the
ICTR and ICTY to fulfil their obligations and mandate
without the full cooperation of the respective States.

In conclusion, while we understand the concern
at the delays in meeting the previous completion
deadlines, we also understand the need to exercise
some flexibility in this regard. We are assured of the
commitment shown by the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the Tribunals in carrying out their obligations and to
meet their respective deadlines.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

