Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation supported the
adoption today of resolution 2479 (2019), extending
the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for four
months. We understand the position of the African
Union, which expressed the importance of conducting
a comprehensive analysis of the emerging situation and
developing the most appropriate concept for UNAMID's
responsible withdrawal. We also noted the Secretariat's
assurances that the June 2020 deadline for the mission's
drawdown agreed on by the Security Council would be
fully respected.

We once again call for refraining from insistent
attempts to link the state of affairs in Darfur to the
situation evolving in the greater Sudan. We cannot help
thinking that ifthe work with the unreconciled Sudanese
opposition had been done with the same fervour - and
we all know perfectly well where those people prefer to
live - peace would have come to Darfur much sooner.
However, even now the situation emerging in this region
of the Sudan shows that it is essential to reconfigure
the peacekeeping support into peacebuilding support,
for which all the necessary conditions are already in
place. The representatives of the United Nations and
the African Union reached the same conclusion in their
latest strategic assessment (S/2019/445).

We welcome the decision of the Transitional
Military Council to annul decree 102, which some of
our colleagues and the leadership of the Secretariat
termed one of the main obstacles on the path to handing
over the peacekeeping sites to the Sudanese. As we see
it, the Sudanese authorities are keeping their promise
and are interested in mutually respectful cooperation.

To sum up, we expect to see specific proposals for
implementing the Security Council's decision to draw
down UNAMID in September'sjoint special report. We
want to emphasize that we are opposed to attempts of
any kind to change the plan for the Mission's drawdown.
The time has come to focus on recovery and economic
development in Darfur. That should now be the priority
of the international community.

