Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We commend you, Sir,
for the choice of this particular topic at a time when
terrorism and violent extremism continue to challenge
the resolve and efforts of the international community.
I thank Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing and able coordination
of United Nations initiatives against terrorism and
transnational organized crime. I also thank Ambassador
Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for his briefing and we
align ourselves with his statement on behalf of the
African Union.

We have noted that, despite various findings on
the intersection between terrorism and transnational
organized crime for the last decade, there is not a
dedicated Security Council forum to discuss both
topics jointly. Rwanda believes that effective strategies
to tackle one should be responsive to the strategies to
tackle the other.

Organized crimes, such as wildlife trafficking in
the Central African region, in particular in the Central
African Republic; maritime piracy; drug trafficking
in northern Mali; kidnapping for ransom; the illicit
trade of charcoal involving Al-Shabaab; the illegal
mineral trade by armed groups, including the genocidal
movement Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; as
well as all smuggling by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq,
has become the lifeline for terrorist organizations. Even
more worrying is the contribution of organized crimes
to the instability of countries emerging from conflict
and to the collapse offragile States. In Africa this is true
from the West to East African coast, where organized
crime has undermined governance and accountability
structures, creating a breeding ground for terrorist
organizations.

It is important that we enhance the capacity
of national law enforcement and counter-terrorism
institutions and ensure the strong coordination and
collaboration of all stakeholders if we are to succeed in
the fight against terrorism and transnational organized
crime. In this regard, I hope that the Secretary-General
report requested by the just adopted resolution 2195
(2014) will enable the Council to make a comprehensive
assessment of the nexus between terrorism and
transnational organized crime, but also consider its
input on conflict prevention and conflict resolution
efforts, particularly in Africa, and make concrete
proposals on effective measures required to deal with
these issues.

We welcome the Nouakchott declaration adopted
yesterday during the first summit of countries
participating in the Nouakchott Process on the
enhancement and operationalization of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Sarahan
region. This declaration stressed the importance of an
exchange of information and intelligence in the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime.
In this respect, the continued collaboration between
the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism and the Committee of Intelligence and
Security Services of Africa is critical to eradicating
both scourges on the African continent.

Border security and management remains one
of the core challenges for countries facing the most
imminent threat of terrorist attacks, in particular in
Africa. Therefore, the lack of adequate capacity to
effectively control border security and management
easily fuels transnational organized crime and the
unhindered movement of terrorist groups with their
negative impacts on State authority and sovereignty.

In this context, it is encouraging to note that the
matrix of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force on United Nations counter-terrorism projects
features prominently important projects addressing the
issue ofborder security and management globally and on
the African continent. However, more work needs to be
done, including by the Council. We need to use existing
Security Council mandates and tools to analytically
address organizational and operational connections
between networks of transnational organized crime and
those ofinternational terrorists and organizations. These
exercises could provide opportunities to disrupt global
criminal activities and pre-empt terrorist operations.
To achieve this, inter-State and regional cooperation
assistance will be crucial, since it will require, among
other issues, information-sharing and common methods
of intelligence gathering and analysis.

Organized crimes and terrorism have plagued some
of the areas in which the United Nations has deployed
its peacekeeping or special political missions, and in
most cases those missions have neither the mandates
nor the required capacities to deal with the scourges.
This is the case of the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. It is therefore
critical to tailor specific United Nations peacekeeping
mandates to specific situations, taking into account
the scope of terrorist threats. Meanwhile, we look
forward to the recommendations of the High-level
Panel on Peace Operations appointed by the Secretary-
General. We believe that the report of the Secretary-
General expected in mid-2015 will guide the Council in
orienting its focus for its future peacekeeping operation
mandates, taking into consideration new and emerging
threats, including terrorism and violent extremism.

Finally, we believe that these debates should
remain open for future in-depth exchanges between the
Council and troop- and police-contributing countries,
considering the political landscapes and geographical
presence of United Nations peacekeeping operations
throughout the world.

