Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank Mr. Yamamoto for his
briefing and Aisha Khurram for her inspiring words. We
also take this opportunity to thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his years ofservice and his great dedication to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

We wish to express our recognition to the Afghan
people for having decisively stepped up to exercise
their right to vote, despite the obstacles and threats to
their security. We extend that recognition to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces for their efforts
to ensure security during the electoral process. We
deplore the fact that consensus has not yet been reached
regarding the results of the elections. In that regard. it
is vital to preserve the integrity of the process and to
ensure that the electoral institutions fully exercise their
responsibilities. The concerns raised must be addressed
institutionally and through the appropriate channels.
We believe that the international community, including
the Council, must play a key role in accompanying
the process of building a definitive political solution
in Afghanistan.

The Dominican Republic therefore believes that
now is the time to redouble efforts to that end on the
basis of the achievements already made.

First, we believe that dialogue and direct
negotiations between the Government and the Taliban
are the best way to put an end to the conflict, which
continues to cost lives and delay the sustainable
development of the country, which the Afghan people
so strongly hope for.

Secondly, with respect to the security situation,
we are concerned about the high number of victims
resulting from the continued hostilities and attacks. No
political or peace process can move forward in a hostile
atmosphere. We would recall the parties' obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and to refrain
from carrying indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
whom they have an obligation to protect.

We welcome the recent approval of the law on
the protection of children, which is another milestone
towards renewal and hope for children and all people
in Afghanistan. It is truly alarming that Afghanistan
continues to be the most deadly conflict in the world
for children, with more than 2,000 children killed
or injured in the first nine months of the year. We
categorically condemn such violations and attacks
against children. The only way to break with this
horrifying trend is for both the Government and the
Taliban to comply with peace initiatives aimed at
ensuring a permanent ceasefire.

Despite the difficulties that we have already
mentioned, we welcome the fact that the Government
continues to enhance measures aimed at eliminating
violence against women and girls. In that same vein, we
reiterate the need to achieve significant participation
by women in the peace process and in all areas of
decision-making in Afghanistan.

While progress has been made, much remains
to be done. Poverty, inequality, illiteracy, harmful
traditional practices and violent extremism mean
that women, particularly in remote provinces, are
vulnerable to violence and abuse. There is also a need
to foster economic development and job creation among
a population that is predominantly young and whose
participation continues to be crucial for peace and
development in Afghanistan.

The security risks faced by humanitarian personnel
in certain parts of the country are unacceptable.
During the most recent reporting period alone, six
humanitarian workers were killed, nine injured and 16
abducted. We urge all parties to the conflict to ensure
access and security for humanitarian personnel and
to be unstinting in their efforts to bring to justice the
perpetrators of such attacks.

In conclusion, we acknowledge the role played by
UNAMA to promote peace in the country. Its work and
its achievements in the various aspects of its mandate
must be further shored up, so as to guarantee an enduring
peace and a new future for the people of Afghanistan.

