Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to express
Germany's full support for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and for their invaluable contribution to the fight against
impunity for serious international crimes. We thank
Presidents Theodor Meron and Vagn Joensen, as well
as the ICTY and ICTR Prosecutors, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow, for their most recent assessments and for
the efforts undertaken to ensure a smooth transition to
the International Residual Mechanism, as foreseen by
resolution 1966 (2010). I also congratulate Judge Meron
and Mr. Jallow for their respective appointments as
President and Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism.

All 161 individuals indicted before the ICTY have
been apprehended, and we very much welcome the
anticipated conclusion of 32 of the remaining 35 trials
in 2012. At the same time, we recognize the reasons
that require the Hadeie', Mladie and Karadeic' trials to
continue beyond 2012, not least so that the accused can
make fullest use of their rights to defend themselves.

Germany was extremely satisfied to see the
commencement of the Mladic' trial on 16 May 2012.
Among the multiple counts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war of
which both Mr. Karadiie and Mr. Mladie stand accused,
the 1995 massacre in Srebrenica will stand out forever,
both as a reminder of all the atrocities committed and
as a warning for future generations. Let me say that
I share the assessment made by the Prosecutor that
the denial of that genocide is not acceptable. We are
therefore grateful to the more than 300 witnesses in
the case against Karadzie and to the 387 witnesses the
prosecution intends to call in the Mladie case. Their
testimonies, which often add further hardship to the
losses and sufferings already endured, are indispensable
in fighting impunity, both past and present.

Cooperation by States continues to be of crucial
importance for the work of the Tribunals and for a
successful transition from the Tribunals to national war
crimes prosecutions. With regard to the ICTY, we note
with appreciation the prompt and adequate responses
from Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
to the Tribunal's requests for assistance, and we call
upon them to maintain that approach in the future. At
the same time, we note with concern the Prosecutor's
appraisal that Serbia's stated commitment to investigate
the networks that allowed some indicted fugitives to
evade justice for many years has produced very few
results. We are similarly concerned about the delays
encountered in the follow-up expected with regard to
investigative material transferred by the Prosecutor to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by delays in war crimes
prosecutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
also like to call upon the relevant authorities, notably
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to overcome the remaining
obstacles so that the proposed protocol on the exchange
of evidence and information in war crimes between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia can be signed.

Turning to the ICTR, we welcome the progress made
towards completing all of the trial work foreseen in the
completion strategy report of 2011. Another positive
development is the first-ever transfer of an accused,
Jean Bosco Uwinkindi, to the Republic of Rwanda
for trial and the setting up of an adequate monitoring
mechanism for such cases. We commend Rwanda for
having strengthened its national legal system so as to
allow the adjudication of cases transferred from the
ICTR. Germany is confident that the newly launched
video-link facility at the Rwandan Supreme Court
in Kigali will contribute to the efficient and effective
delivery ofjustice.

It remains a matter of concern, however, that nine
accused and internationally sought persons still remain
at large, including the three highest ranking ones. We
understand that in a number of those cases referral
decisions have either been taken or are expected to be
taken. The apprehension of those fugitives, who have
been charged with genocide or complicity in genocide,
must nonetheless be a priority. Unfortunately, no
progress has been made in that matter since we last
discussed the issue in November. We therefore once
again call upon the international community, and in
particular concerned States in the region, to make sure
that all possible efforts are made in order to bring those
persons to justice.

As both the ICTY and ICTR are approaching the
transition to the International Residual Mechanism, we
note that preparations for a smooth handover are under
way, and we recognize the challenges and practical
difficulties encountered within the process. Some of
those challenges are of a particular nature, such as the
need to retain qualified staff to enable the Tribunals to
fulfil their functions until the last day. We appreciate
the measures taken to alleviate the situation, and we are
willing to look into practical proposals and steps on how
to address the issue.

We also look forward to the adoption of the Residual
Mechanism's rules of procedure and evidence by the
judges, including a provision that ensures confidentiality
for information provided by the International Committee
of the Red Cross. Germany also looks forward to
extending its unwavering support for the ICTY and
ICTR to the Residual Mechanism as well.

