Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
is proud of resolution 2389 (2017), adopted today by
a unanimous vote. It attests to the special interest we
attach to the situation in the Great Lakes region and
to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
That agreement represents a framework of 11 countries
of the region, which are at the vanguard of every effort
to confront the challenges and threats present in the
Great Lakes region, with the support of international
and regional partners, in particular the four guarantors:
the United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community.

Five years have passed the signing of the
framework agreement, which remains a key instrument
for achieving sustainable and lasting peace and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region. All partners must therefore step up their
efforts to implement their international, regional and
local obligations, as set forth in the declarations on the
framework agreement issued by the African Union on
7 November and by the Regional Oversight Mechanism
for Peace, Security and Cooperation Agreement at its
meeting held on 19 October in Brazzaville.

Egypt, in cooperation with the two other African
members of the Security Council, Ethiopia and
Senegal, led a consultation process that included the
main parties to the framework agreement and the
guarantor institutions in order to ensure national and
regional ownership of this initiative. The process was
comprehensive, inclusive and transparent. We sought
solutions that would be in line with the concerns of the
members of the Council and preserve our constructive
spirit ofwork. These efforts concluded in the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2389 (2017) today.

The resolution sheds light on the various challenges
in the region, including those related to the activities
of armed groups, which represent a dangerous threat
to civilians, and to their role in the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, preventing the peoples of the
region from enjoying the benefits of those resources
and development. The resolution stresses the need
for further cooperation among the countries of the
region to eliminate armed groups in the context of
their obligations under the framework agreement. The
resolution welcomes the obligations and commitments
announced by the countries of the region at the
Brazzaville summit, including the earliest possible
repatriation of ex-combatants .

The resolution also sheds light on the humanitarian
crisis, including the increase in the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons, which represents
a burden on host countries. It calls on donors to step
up their efforts to eliminate the funding gap in the
region. It also welcomes all regional initiatives that
support political processes and dialogue in the region
in a comprehensive and inclusive manner. It calls on
the countries of the region to honour their obligations
under international law and to pursue further efforts to
end impunity and to strengthen the status of women,
allowing them to participate in political life and
peacebuilding efforts.

There is a need to reach sustainable solutions to
the challenges in the region. We must therefore adopt
a regional perspective that addresses the root causes
of instability and lays the foundation for sustainable
and lasting peace and security. The resolution adopted
today stresses that fact and highlights the potential
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, in cooperation
with regional partners, including the African Union
and subregional organizations. The resolution also
stresses the importance of the framework agreement,
which represents the development approach adopted
by the United Nations in support of the agreement in
a manner that would contribute to addressing the root
causes of conflict and to strengthening economic and
development cooperation among the countries of the
region. The resolution calls on all donors to step up
their efforts in support of the framework agreement.

In conclusion, the resolution stresses the need for
further and deepened cooperation between the United
Nations, guarantor institutions and the signatories of
the framework agreement. It calls on the Secretary-
General to take advantage of the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the framework agreement, which we will
mark in a few weeks, to launch a high-level dialogue
to take stock of progress achieved and to highlight any
obstacles and shortcomings, with the aim of achieving
a common vision based on genuine cooperation and
partnership with the countries of the region. Egypt
looks forward to the results and outcomes of this vision
and the recommendations of the Secretary-General.

The meeting rose at 9.45 am.
