Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Since my
previous briefing to the Security Council in December
(see S/PV.7587), the Security Council has adopted
resolution 2253 (2015), which refocused the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), or Da'esh, and its affiliates,
and on limiting the financing of those groups. Since
then, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team established pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, tasked with keeping
us apprised of the threat posed by ISIL, Al-Qaida
and affiliates, has provided the Committee with
several updates.

In February, the Monitoring Team briefed the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, and
more recently also briefed the 1267 Committee on the
expansion of ISIL beyond Iraq and Syria. I will share
some of its findings today.

The threat posed by ISIL has shifted somewhat
since December. ISIL's core in Iraq and Syria is under
pressure. It has lost control of some territory, and the
destruction of significant parts of its oil infrastructure
has led to a drop in internal revenue generation. As a
response to that, however, we have seen ISIL looking to
increase revenue from other streams, including internal
taxation, smuggling antiquities and, potentially,
kidnapping for ransom.

Nor is ISIL short of arms and fighters. Although
recent reports indicate that the flow of recruits to it
is slowing, estimates suggest that to date upwards
of 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters have travelled
to Iraq and Syria. As reported by the Monitoring
Team, in response to the pressure on its core, ISIL's
centre of gravity is shifting. The threat is expanding
geographically as ISIL affiliates spring up around the
world. And as pressure on ISIL's core increases, foreign
terrorist fighters are also seeking to return home. Those
developments pose both a challenge and an opportunity
for improving the impact and effectiveness of the 1267
sanctions regime. While some foreign terrorist fighters
return from conflict zones disillusioned by what they
have experienced, others come back radicalized,
battle-hardened and well networked. Such fighters pose
a real threat to the wider international community.
Member States from all regions of the world are
affected. These fighters can exploit networks, including
with local Al-Qaida affiliates, to conduct terror attacks.
Their capacity to initiate complex attacks at great speed
is already becoming a reality.

It is also difficult to detect the travel of foreign
terrorist fighters. Many now use broken travel routes
to and from conflict zones, making it much harder
to track them. Whereas previously they may have
travelled directly from their state of residence to a
neighbouring country of the conflict zone, they are now
taking multiple, indirect routes, often using more than
one passport. If we are to get on top of this threat, it is
essential that Member States implement the steps called
for in resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) and share
information to enable better detection and disruption of
travel by foreign terrorist fighters.

ISIL affiliates in Libya, Afghanistan and Yemen are
steadily gaining a foothold and becoming increasingly
important to the survival of ISIL. As pressure increases
on the ISIL core in Iraq and Syria, it is expected
that ISIL will look to move funds to those affiliates,
including through the use of informal money transfer
arrangements. It is crucial, therefore, that Member
States, particularly those neighbouring Iraq and Syria,
be vigilant in implementing the 1267 regime.

This movement of funds and fighters outside of
ISIL-controlled territory provides an opportunity for
Member States to detect and prevent the wider spread
of ISIL. This is where the sanctions measures can
have the most impact. When effectively targeted and
implemented, the sanctions can place pressure on ISIL
and its affiliates, preventing the dispersal of funds and
disrupting further attacks on civilian populations. The
measures for the freezing of assets are one area where
the sanctions can really bite. But for this to happen, the
Committee needs targeted designations of individuals
involved in the generation and movement of assets.
Member States with information about these individuals
and entities have a role to play by putting forward new
listing requests, as encouraged in resolution 2253
(2015).

It is also crucial that Member States engage with
and provide updated information to the Monitoring
Team and 1267 Committee on the nature of the threat,
listed individuals and entities, and the status of their
implementation and enforcement of sanctions measures.
This information is fundamental to the operation of the
regime. The Council and international community can
target their response effectively only if they have up-
to-date information. I encourage those Member States
that have not done so to submit their implementation
reports called for in paragraph 36 of resolution 2253
(2015).

The Committee is also playing its part in assisting
Member States' engagement with the sanctions regime.
The Committee already held one open briefing for
interested Member States last month, and plans to hold
another two such open briefings before the end of this
year. A one-page outline is available in the Chamber
today, providing an overview of the key upcoming
dates and deadlines for 1267 Committee engagement.
We are also in the process ofupdating the Committee's
guidelines with the aim of improving the regime's
efficiency and effectiveness. These guidelines were
last updated in 2013. It is important that Committee
processes support the efficient and effective operation
of the regime. As the Monitoring Team keeps the
Committee apprised of the evolving threat posed by
ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates, the Committee will
also work closely with key actors, including the other
relevant Security Council sanctions committees.

