Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is an
important factor for promoting peace and stability in the
region. Its Government has been making unremitting efforts
to urge the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace plan. Just a
few days ago, the Foreign Ministers of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia signed
a declaration of principles on the settlement of the Bosnian
conflict, thus moving the peace process one step forward.
The Security Council has already welcomed this
development.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has indeed made
many efforts to implement the relevant resolutions of the
Council. The Mission of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia has clearly stressed in all the reports
it has submitted to the Council that the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to meet its
commitment to close its border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Mission enjoys full freedom of
movement within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
good cooperation with its Government.

We are of the View that these unremitting efforts of
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
continue to meet its commitment to bring peace to Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be fully recognized and encouraged
by the Council through concrete action. We have noted that
the draft resolution before us extends the partial suspension
of sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
180 days. The Chinese delegation will vote in favour.

In keeping with China's basic position on sanctions,
we are not in favour of using pressure tactics such as
mandatory sanctions in the region of the former Yugoslavia.
Instead of rendering any help, they would only complicate
the issue and hurt innocent civilians. We are therefore of
the view that the Security Council should lift these
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
further consider the easing of other economic sanctions
against it. We believe that this will not only help to
alleviate the suffering caused by the sanctions to the
people in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
region, but also facilitate the economic development of all
the countries of the region and contribute to restoring
peace and stability.

