The President: (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

China thanks the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Burundi, Mr. Kafando, and Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
The current situation in Burundi is generally
calm. The Government of Burundi has been actively
promoting the political process to implement the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement and
maintaining domestic peace and stability. Important
progress has been made. A large number of refugees
have returned to their homeland. Over 20 Burundian
political parties have jointly formulated a road map for
the elections to be held in 2020, while the Independent
National Electoral Commission has been established in
accordance with the new Constitution. The momentum
for national reconciliation, social cohesion and political
inclusion is becoming ever stronger.

China welcomes those achievements, which
fully demonstrate that the Government and the
people of Burundi have the full capacity and resolve
to independently settle internal political problems
and maintain their country's peace and stability.
The international community should fully respect
Burundi's ownership and leadership in handling its
own affairs and effectively respect the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Burundi. In particular,
with regard to issues relating to the elections and the
political process, the international community should
fully respect the choice of the Government and the
people of Burundi.

China welcomes the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations - including the
African Union, the East African Community, and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region - in providing mediation in the Burundian
political process. We hope that all the relevant regional
actors will continue to enhance their communication
and consultation with the Burundian Government and
provide constructive assistance.

China notes that, during the General Assembly's
general debate this year, the Foreign Minister of
Burundi stated that the current political and security
situation in the country was completely calm, stable
and under control and that, as such, it had long ceased
to be a threat to international or regional peace and
security (see A/73/PV.14). He also expressed his view
that Burundi should be removed from the agenda of the
Security Council. The Security Council should heed
the voice of Burundi, view the country's situation in
a comprehensive, just and objective manner and make
the necessary adjustments in a timely fashion and
according to the evolution of situation on the ground,
so as to send a positive message.

At the same time, due to the suspension of
cooperation and assistance by some countries and
organizations, Burundi is faced with challenges in terms
of socioeconomic development and the humanitarian
situation. Development is the guarantee of peace. As
Ambassador Lauber pointed out, peace, stability and
progress in the political process in Burundi cannot be
achieved without socioeconomic development. The
international community should continue to provide
support and assistance to Burundi according to the
country's needs. We call on the relevant international
organizations and agencies to reinstate their economic
cooperation and development assistance to Burundi as
soon as possible.

China welcomes the formulation of a 10-year
national development by the Burundian government, a
plan that not only shows the blueprint for the country
in the years to come but also provides guidance with
regard to international assistance to Burundi. We
hope that the international community and Burundi's
international partners will honour their commitments
with timely actions, tailor their assistance to Burundi's
development plan and prioritize support to areas
such as agriculture, infrastructure, education and
environmental protection.

The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
the Peacebuilding Commission are important bridges
between Burundi and the international community. We
hope that they will continue to leverage their respective
advantages and enhance their communication and
consultation with the Government of Burundi. As
always, they can count on China's support going
forward.

The Chinese Government has all along been
supportive of Burundi's peace process and has provided
assistance to the national reconstruction of Burundi
within the scope of our capacity. In fulfilment of our
commitment made during the Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China Africa Cooperation, China recently
provided ¥300 million in free assistance, as well as
¥50 million in humanitarian food assistance, to the
Burundian Government. China stands ready to continue
to play a constructive role in achieving peace, stability
and sustainable development in Burundi.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

