Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing and to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', and to thank him for his statement. I
also thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his statement.

We wish to confirm our support for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in its efforts to promote reconciliation,
security and human rights. We pay tribute to UNMIK
for its role on several fronts, including missing persons
and the protection of cultural and religious heritage.
We call on the parties to provide the necessary support
to UNMIK so as to enable it to implement its mandate.
We believe that coordination between UNMIK, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force should continue within the status-
neutral framework referred to in resolution 1244
(1999).

It is encouraging that progress has been achieved
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. That
has lead to progress on many issues that facilitate the
daily lives of the people of Kosovo, including civil
registry, freedom of movement and academic diplomas.
We are hopeful that this will lay the foundations for the
resolution of all outstanding issues in an open and
constructive spirit. We also hope that the two parties
will make efforts to achieve genuine reconciliation
between communities and thereby enhance long-term
peace and security.

We believe that the current situation is very
delicate as it paves the way for future steps. Any
unilateral actions that exacerbate the situation on the
ground will impact dialogue and trust between parties,
not to mention the legal implications. We View the
incidents that took place on 25 and 26 July from this
perspective. We urge both parties to refrain in future
from unilateral action or from resort to violence. We
urge them to contain any escalation of tension via
dialogue.

When it comes to security, we are satisfied at the
relative calm that prevailed in most of the region
during the reporting period. We share the Secretary-
General's concern regarding the increased tension in
northern Kosovo and his assessment that delicate
issues can be resolved only through peaceful means
and consultations among local communities. We call on
all stakeholders in northern Kosovo to play a
constructive role in finding solutions to delicate issues,
as this is very important for the political and security
environment.
Moreover, we believe that the current efforts to
shed light on the fate of missing persons are very
important despite the slow progress in this respect. We
pay tribute to UNMIK, EULEX and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their efforts in this
area.

Finally, with regard to allegations of inhumane
treatment and the alleged trafficking of human organs
in Kosovo in 1999, we hope that every effort will be
made to uncover the truth, hold the perpetrators
accountable and promote justice, reconciliation and
lasting peace.

