Mr. Kodama (Japan): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Fedotov, for their comprehensive and informative
briefings. I would also like to express my respect and
gratitude to all the men and women of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
who have demonstrated such deep commitment to this
difficult mission. And I thank Ambassador Tanin for
his statement.

We applaud the recent positive developments in
the area of security in Afghanistan, such as the launch
of the third tranche of transition, and we are pleased
with the progress of the two initial rounds, which will
bring 75 per cent of the country's population into the
process. We are also pleased that the number of former
anti-Government personnel enrolled in the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme has grown to
4,641, according to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/462). Japan also welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani as the new Chair of the High
Peace Council.

Unfortunately, we have also witnessed several
shocking incidents over the last quarter, such as the
large-scale insurgent attack on 15 April, which affected
several Government institutions and foreign missions,
including the Japanese embassy, and the assassination
of senior High Peace Council member Mawlawi Arsala
Rahmani on 13 May. While such deplorable incidents
show that grave security challenges remain, they have
also been witness to the ability of the Afghan National
Security Forces and have strengthened our resolve to
stop the cycle of violence and ensure that such tragedies
never occur again.

With that transition process and security situation
in mind, our most predominant and demanding task is
proving to the international community that Afghanistan
will be stable and self-reliant in the future, particularly
beyond 2015. In order to achieve this, it is incumbent on
both Afghanistan and its international partners to tackle
the related challenges of advancing both security and
sustainable development in the country. In that regard,
we view this year's series of key high-level meetings,
in particular the NATO Summit on security held in
Chicago in May, the ministerial conference on regional
cooperation held in Kabul in June, and the Tokyo
conference on sustainable economic development, to
be held in July, as momentous factors in the shaping of
Afghanistan's future.

The NATO Summit in Chicago, together with
the new strategic partnership agreement between
Afghanistan and the United States, made important
steps forward in terms of ensuring the constancy and
predictability of the security situation in the country.
Japan is also determined to continue its assistance to
the Afghan National Police so as to improve it both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Along with improving
its security situation, it is essential for Afghanistan to
work with its neighbours in order to achieve lasting
stability and prosperity. Japan therefore supports the
Istanbul process, launched in November, and recognizes
the outcome of the Kabul ministerial conference held
on 14 June.

Japan welcomes Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
attendance at the Tokyo conference as a sign of the
consistent commitment of the United Nations to
Afghanistan's stability and sustainable development.
Building on the outcomes of the NATO Summit
and the Kabul ministerial conference on regional
cooperation, the Tokyo conference on Afghanistan on
8 July will focus on a sustainable development strategy
for Afghanistan, and will discuss the coordination
of international economic assistance, the Afghan
Government's commitment to improving governance,
and a follow-up mechanism. We will aim to reaffirm
the historic partnership between the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan, from
transition to the transformation decade of 2015-2024,
based on the concept of mutual accountability.

That notion of mutual accountability is at the
very heart of our partnership. The Government seeks
long-term assistance from the international community
to enable it to become self-reliant in the future. In order
to achieve such self-reliance, the Government must
achieve a wide range of reforms in governance that will
assure the international community that its assistance
will be utilized in an appropriate and transparent way.

The necessary reforms are in a variety of fields;
they include holding free and fair elections, combating
corruption, establishing the rule of law and achieving
better public financial management. In that regard, we
would like to express our gratitude for the leading role
that UNAMA has taken in this challenging area, as
well as its efforts as a coordinator between the Afghan
Government and international donors.

Japan has also actively supported the Government
in these areas through its contributions to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other
United Nations agencies' country programmes.
Furthermore, we recently made the decision to
contribute an additional $8.6 million to the second phase
of the UNDP technical assistance project, Enhancing
Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, aimed at
enhancing the functions of the Independent Election
Commission regarding the presidential election of 2014,
which will be critically important to the Government's
legitimacy.

In the same spirit, Japan is ready to continue its
assistance to Afghanistan in a responsible manner and
encourages international partners to continue to deliver
predictable financial support for the country. I would
like to reiterate once again that the concept of mutual
accountability is the key to the future prosperity of
Afghanistan, based on a firm and lasting partnership
with the international community.

With the drawdown of international troops
bringing civilian agencies increasingly to the fore,
UNAMA's leadership and coordination of efforts to
achieve both sustainable peace and reconciliation and
economic and social development in Afghanistan will
only grow in importance. We would like to once again
express our commitment to supporting UNAMA's
efforts, and to pledge to work closely with the mission,
the Government and other international partners for
Afghanistan's lasting stability and development.

