Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his briefing
today. We take this opportunity to reiterate our support
for his important work.

The challenges to international peace and security
facing the international community, in general, and
in particular to the Security Council in carrying out
its mandate, are undoubtedly manifold and complex.
Nevertheless, we believe that those that truly threaten
to undermine the Council's efforts to prevent breaches
of international peace and security are linked to
the inadequate implementation of the mechanisms
provided for under the Charter of the United Nations.
Accordingly, it is important to remain focused on the
responsibilities and mandates assigned to each organ in
carrying out coordination tasks so that the best options
can be agreed upon in addressing problems arising from
conflict, avoiding unnecessary duplication of work and,
above all, preventing overlap and impingement upon
the specific mandates of each one.

We unequivocally believe that one of the challenges
that the Council must address in order to improve its
work is the effective implementation of mediation,
prevention, reconciliation and good offices for the
pacific settlement of disputes, as well as the pre-eminent
use of the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII of the
Charter. In that context, we believe that important
tools such as the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, adopted as
General Assembly resolution 37/10, must be considered
with a view to achieving that goal. On the other hand,
the implementation of the provisions of Chapter VII
for settling disputes must not be considered until those
under Chapters VI and VIII have been exhausted, and
must be implemented only as a means of last resort.
In that regard, the Security Council must always act
within the framework of the Charter and of respect for
the multilateralism - the principle upon which our
Organization is based.

Therefore, we believe that one of the greatest
challenges facing not only the Security Council but
the Organization in general is unilateral action that,
in flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of
the Charter, recklessly risks undermining the work of
the Council and even threaten to exacerbate situations
on the ground, thereby entailing consequences that
could potentially negatively affect entire regions.
Regrettably, such unilateral actions are among the root
of governance vacuums and the weakening of the forces
of law and order. They have created in humanitarian
crises in various regions and led to the loss of millions
of lives.

Against that backdrop, the number of terrorist
groups and irregular fighters who have found the space
in which to commit destabilizing acts and crimes
against humanity has increased and become a clear
and current threat to international peace and security.
We believe that action taken by the international
community must be robust so as to confront that threat,
while contributing effectively to its eradication in
accordance with the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

Moreover, the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and weapons of mass destruction is another important
challenge facing the Security Council and the
international community. In that regard, we all face the
great challenge of urgently implementing the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted by
the General Assembly on 7 July. In order to achieve
that goal, it is essential that States commit to banning
the development, testing, production, acquisition and
possession of nuclear arsenals and explosive devices,
and refrain from engaging in any act of provocation or
unilateral action that is clearly outside international law.

Finally, Bolivia wishes to reiterate that, in its
dedication to respect for international law and as
a pacifist State, it advocates the implementation
of peaceful means of conflict resolution, good
offices, preventive diplomacy, multilateralism,
non-interference, and respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, which
are universal principles recognized by the international
community and effective tools for avoiding the scourge
of war and its consequences.

