Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
ofthe European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania and Liechtenstein align themselves with
this statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin lnzko back to the Security
Council and in assuring him of the European Union's
continued support. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank
him for his statement.

I recall my delegation stating a year ago (see S/PV.8089) that 2016 had been a very good year for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, both in terms of reforms and
progress towards European integration. Unfortunately,
the same cannot be said for 2017. Early electoral
campaigning, divisive rhetoric and delayed, if not
stalled, reforms have too often occupied the main
headlines. But 2018 does not have to continue that cycle.
Recent developments - ranging from the submission
of the replies to the EU Commission questionnaire, the
adoption of excise legislation or the removal of Bosnia
and Herzegovina from the list of countries under the
Grey List of the Financial Action Task Force - show
that results can be obtained if Government coalition
partners focus on improving the lives of citizens and
delivering reforms.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made clear its desire to
become a member of the European Union. That strategic
commitment from the country's institutions and leaders
should be followed up by concrete reforms, for which
there is substantial EU support. Strengthening the rule
of law and fighting corruption and organized crime are
key for advancing the socioeconomic situation in the
country and EU rapprochement.

We are now approaching the end of the current
legislature. The implementation of the reform agenda has
delivered mixed results. Elections have been officially
announced today to be held on 7 October. Official
election campaigning will start. The real question for
the election campaign is what new proposals on putting
into action the reform agenda the new Government
will put forward after the October elections. That is
an opportunity political leaders should seize to show
both their citizens and EU member States their concrete
proposals to take forward reforms and improve the lives
of citizens.

Bosnia and Herzegovina today still has a gross
domestic product per capita lower than in the 1980s.
The percentage of Bosnia and Herzegovina's citizens
born in the country and living abroad is the highest in
Europe, including the Western Balkans. Emigration of
talented young people continues unabated. That brain
drain puts a mortgage on the country's future.

(spoke in French)

It has often been said that to govern is to write
prose, and to conduct an election campaign is to
declaim poetry. What the election campaign needs,
however, is prose that looks to the future and puts
forward a political agenda for concrete progress. The
glorification of war criminals found guilty by an
international court, playing the secessionist card or
glossing over rearmament, all such rhetoric from the
past simply has no place in the electoral campaign
of a European country aspiring to join the European
Union. Despite a relatively calm security situation, in
that politically charged context, the European Union
maintains its firm support for the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea and the mandate
given to it by the Council.

(spoke in English)

The conduct of elections also entails the proper
implementation of its results. Unless political leaders
break the current impasse on electoral reform, there
is a real risk that the elections will fail to produce a
Government, and a Government is essential to take
forward reforms. There is nothing inevitable about a
political crisis after the elections. Politicians in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have the responsibility to prevent
one. To date, we have witnessed from all sides little
willingness for cross-party compromise. To ensure
the proper implementation of recent rulings by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must find a
compromise without further delay.

While acknowledging that the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lists Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs as constituent peoples, along with others, the
European Union reiterates that the principles of
equality of all citizens and non-discrimination shall be
fully warranted. The most pressing issue is to find a
solution that will enable the formation of the Federation
House of Peoples and political institutions linked to it
as required by 2016 and 2017 Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court decisions. The issue of local
elections in Mostar requires full attention as well.

The European Union considers that electoral
reforms should be approached in a spirit of consensus
and dialogue as an important matter, thereby also
calling on Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights recommendations in order to move the country
towards European standards, improving democratic
processes for future elections.

The EU, together with our international partners,
including the United States, has worked extensively
through facilitation efforts to resolve the current
electoral impasse, and we will continue to do so. The
onus, however, remains on the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take ownership for political reforms.
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to show the international
community, and the EU member States in particular,
that it can organize its political life effectively and in a
spirit of compromise - a prerequisite for any country
aspiring to become a member of the EU.

The election of the members of the Presidency
will be addressed after the October elections. While
electoral campaigning will play a major part in the
political scene ofBosnia and Herzegovina in the coming
months, we urge other actors, chiefly the rule-of-law
institutions, to continue taking forward reforms, and
for judges, prosecutors and law enforcement officials
to continue adjudicating, prosecuting and investigating
with full determination. In that context, we expect
appropriate amendments to the Criminal Procedure
Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina to be adopted as a
matter of priority. The amendments should be in line
with international standards and should not undermine
the ability of institutions to tackle serious organized
crime, corruption and other rule of law challenges. In
addition, the European Union calls on the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to step up efforts regarding
the functioning and the independence of the judiciary,
strengthening migration and border management,
fighting corruption and organized crime, as well
as countering terrorism and violent extremism and
preventing radicalization.

The adoption, in February, of the strategy for
the Western Balkans demonstrates our renewed
commitment to the Western Balkans. On 17 May, the
European Union's leaders will hold a summit in Sofia
together with all our Western Balkans partners. Fifteen
years after the Thessaloniki Summit, the door to the
European Union remains open. It is for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seize the opportunity offered and to
fulfil the conditions to reach its European goal.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina's resolve to move
forward towards European integration needs to translate
into an election campaign that allows for honest
reflection on the challenges ahead and the reforms
required to address them. That means an election
campaign that does not dwell on what happened a
quarter of a century ago, but that puts forward concrete
proposals for its citizens to decide where the country
sees its own future.

