Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Portugal would like to thank France for having
organized this extremely timely debate.

As the months go by, the world helplessly watches
as a most savage repression is unleashed against a
people who are only asking for the recognition and
respect oftheir most basic rights. The Damascus regime
responds to such legitimate requests with only force,
bombing civilians with heavy weapons, destroying
entire neighbourhoods, killing and wounding thousands
and forcing thousands of others into exile.

We have waited too long to put an end to this
appalling and unacceptable situation. We have failed
too long in our duty as the Security Council and have
too long allowed the worst violations of fundamental
rights to continue as if nothing were happening. I very
much hope that today's debate will provide a much-
needed jolt to the international conscience and finally
bring about a new desire to act together to put an end to
this tragedy and the suffering of an entire people.

We have heard Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Guterres speak
of the seriousness and extent of the situation. I would
like sincerely to thank them for their statements. We
have also heard from the Ministers of Iraq, Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey, and I thank them for being here
and for their important statements.

We are indeed facing a genuine humanitarian
disaster, which, beyond its direct impact on the Syrian
people, is likely to further destabilize an already fragile
region. Even worse, this situation is deteriorating every
day as the violence and repression increase.

(spoke in English)

As I said, this human tragedy could have been
averted had the Syrian Government not responded to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people with
sheer brutal force and by resorting to the use of tanks,
helicopter gunships and fighterjets against civilians.

Let us be clear: such actions are illegal under
international law and totally unacceptable, no matter
the circumstances. The humanitarian impact of
increasing Government violence against ordinary
people, including women and children, is extremely
severe and places hundreds of thousands at risk. As we
heard, the numbers are absolutely shocking.

Entire families have been uprooted from their
homes. Essential services are denied to thousands.
Women and children are particularly vulnerable. Large
refugee communities within Syria have also been
seriously affected, be they Palestinian, Iraqi or of other
nationalities.

The tragic situation is placing enormous strain
on host communities both inside and outside Syria.
As we have also heard, local response mechanisms
and support networks have exhausted their capacities
and are no longer able to respond to such urgent and
overwhelming needs. In neighbouring host countries,
humanitarian assistance resources are rapidly reaching
the breaking point.

Portugal is deeply thankful to the Governments
and people of Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan and Turkey for the
generosity, solidarity and selflessness with which they
have harboured all those fleeing persecution and violent
repression in Syria. We also praise the heroic efforts of
the humanitarian relief organizations on the ground,
which, despite the many constraints and security risks,
continue to work diligently, bringing much-needed
relief to an increasing number of people. There is clearly
a pressing need to scale up humanitarian assistance
inside Syria and to increase support to the countries
hosting Syrian refugees. The needs of both must be
urgently met, so that all Syrians in want, whether
inside Syria or outside its borders, can be assisted.
We also recall the humanitarian commitments the
Government of Syria undertook within the framework
of the six-point plan, and we urge the Syrian authorities
to enable greater humanitarian access to the country.
Finally, we underscore the obligations of all sides under
international humanitarian law and call upon all parties
to respect civilians and do their utmost to ensure
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need.

For over 18 months now, the Syrian Government
has sought to crush dissent through brutal repression
and widespread and systematic gross violations of
human rights. It has killed, maimed and tortured, and
carries on doing so.

Portugal vehemently condemns all human rights
violations and abuses, for which there can be absolutely
no tolerance, regardless of the perpetrator. Those
responsible for such violations and abuses must be and
will be held accountable. We regret that the Syrian
Government has shunned every opportunity to search
for a political settlement of the present situation. That
was particularly the case when it refused to engage
with Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan in his efforts to
end the violence and to open the way for the peaceful
transition desired by the majority of the Syrian people.
Instead, the Syrian Government preferred to blatantly
disregard its commitments under the six-point plan, to
consistently and systematically violate resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012) and to intensify its military
operations against populated areas, thus exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis even further.

That criminal choice of action has launched the
country into a destructive spiral of violence, pushing it
to a full-ledged civil war and threatening the integrity
of Syria itself, while destabilizing its neighbours and
menacing regional peace and security. Another very
worrisome aspect is the risk posed by the existing
stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons inside
Syria. Not only is the use of such arms prohibited
under international law, but the Syrian authorities are
responsible for ensuring their safe storage.

Further militarization of the conflict can only lead
to additional human suffering and will aggravate the
humanitarian crisis even more. There is no alternative
to a political solution based on the six-point plan and a
Syrian-led political transition, as set forth in the 30 June
final communique of the Action Group. Even at this late
hour, we appeal to the Syrian Government to engage
seriously in such a political solution.

In that context, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as the Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States. We
wish to assure him of our full support. His chances
of success will indeed depend greatly on the support
he receives from the international community and
the Security Council. It is crucial that all parties and
stakeholders view his appointment as an opportunity to
end the violence and engage seriously in an inclusive
political transition that meets the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people.

It is time for the Security Council to finally live up to
its responsibilities, to learn from the lessons of the past
and to stand on the right side of history. To be effective
and credible, the Council has to exert united, sustained
and effective pressure on all sides, and on the Syrian
authorities in particular, in the light of their primary
responsibilities under the six-point plan. Portugal will
continue to engage with all members of the Council,
the League of Arab States and the Group of Friends of
Syria with a view to ending all forms of violence and
ensuring a political transition that promotes stability
and peace in Syria and the region.
Finally, on behalf of Portugal, I would like to
conclude by thanking Special Envoy Kofi Annan for
his tireless efforts to promote a peaceful resolution of
the crisis in Syria. His service to the Syrian people and
the cause of peace deserves to be highly commended.

