Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Kim
Sung-hwan and the Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Korea for having convened this debate, especially
given the alarming events of recent days. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Ms. Navi Pillay and
Mr. Philip Spoerri ofthe International Committee ofthe
Red Cross for their remarks and overall assessments.

Serious and continuing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
systematic violence against civilian populations, are
occurring daily. It is an unfortunate and unacceptable
reality of our times that civilians continue to be the
main target of armed attacks and account for a high
number of casualties in conflicts. We strongly condemn
such violence and find it both appalling and intolerable.
That is why the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict remains one of the main priorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Therefore, we urge all parties to armed conflicts to
fully comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The Organization, and in particular
the Security Council, should take every opportunity
to send the message that crimes committed against
civilians are unacceptable and that all perpetrators
of grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice.

Additional efforts are necessary to make
Governments aware of their responsibility to protect
civilians. Supporting the relevant national institutions
and strengthening their role and capacity to deal with
those issues is of vital importance. The struggle against
impunity is an integral element in the protection of
civilians, which cannot be addressed seriously without
prosecuting those responsible for serious crimes.
Gradual and targeted measures play an important role
in overall efforts as well as in initiatives to improve
compliance with the law by non-State armed groups.

At the same time, Council-mandated action to
protect civilians should ensure that the international
response is proportional to the threat, while the use of
force should be a last resort.

We are deeply concerned at continuing reports of
attacks on schools and hospitals, which are part of the
daily life of children and civilians in conflict settings.
Therefore, we urge all parties to conflict to keep
schools and hospitals as protected areas and zones of
peace. Specific provisions for the protection of children
need to be included in all relevant mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations as well as political
and peacebuilding missions, while the existing child-
protection capacity should be strengthened.

We are further alarmed by the reports of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in countries
affected by conflict and the constant increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons. In
that regard, we support the efforts of the international
community to increase its efforts and provide much-
needed humanitarian assistance.

A more consistent and comprehensive approach
to addressing humanitarian access and ensuring
accountability for denial of access is crucial and should
be urgently dealt with.

Existing mechanisms for the protection of civilians
are important elements of the protection of civilian
agenda in peacekeeping. Host Governments need to be
consulted, involved and properly informed about their
functioning. The data collected during their work needs
to be available to national judicial systems.

Strengthening security institutions and their
capacity by providing the necessary training for police
and military forces is critical for the protection of
civilians and the rule of law in a country. Ensuring
the effective protection of the civilian population
is essential for the promotion of inclusive dialogue,
national reconciliation and the restoration of peace and
stability in a country. National judicial systems are the
cornerstone of the process for addressing accountability
and impunity. However, the relevant United Nations
bodies need to develop comprehensive and innovative
approaches to support their work.

Finally, the challenges facing the Council with
regard to the protection of civilians call for greater
international cooperation and better coordination
among the Council and other United Nations bodies
and agencies as well as regional and subregional
organizations. To that end, additional efforts should
be made to prevent conflicts and their recurrence and
promote early-warning systems and adequate responses
to situations that specifically threaten civilian
populations.

