Mr. Loayza Barea (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first to express
our great pleasure at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council. We are absolutely certain that under
your guidance, Burkina Faso and, consequently, the
Council will have a meaningful month of activity.

Bolivia would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We would also
like to acknowledge the briefing given by the
representative of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC).

The Plurinational State of Bolivia is resolutely
committed to combating the world drug problem, drug
trafficking and organized crime. In that regard, it is
important to point out that the Nineteenth Summit of
Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies -
HONLEA - of Latin American and the Caribbean,
which took place in Venezuela from 28 September to
2 October, commended Bolivia for its efforts to combat
drug trafficking and eradicate illegal excessive crops of
coca leaf.

In addition, the presentation of the UNODC
report on the monitoring of coca cultivation in the
Plurinational State of Bolivia recorded that the
Government of Bolivia deserves to be commended for
the significant increase in drug interdiction. There has
been a 45 per cent increase in the quantity of cocaine
based seized, from 14,912 kilograms to 21,641
kilograms, and a 145 per cent increase in the quantity
of cocaine hydrochloride seized. In addition, the
number of laboratories that have been dismantled
continues to increase.

Operations against drug trafficking have
increased by 58 per cent as compared to 2005 - from
6,831 in that year to 10,795 in 2008. The effectiveness
of those interventions made it possible to increase
seizures of cocaine and related substances by 252 per
cent. In 2005, we seized almost 11.4 tons, a figure that
rose to 28.8 tons of cocaine and related products in
2008. In 2009, as part of reducing excessive coca-leaf
production, we eradicated production on 6,272
hectares - a substantial record in the past five years.
That serves to amply confirm the commitment of
President Morales in the fight against drugs. Similarly,
there was a significant increase in 2008 in the seizure
of chemical substances, as well as in the destruction of
recycling laboratories and facilities for crystallizing the
drug.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia has, for the
first time, earmarked $20 million of its own resources
to combat drug trafficking. In the framework of our
regional and multilateral strategy to combat drug
trafficking, the Union of South American Nations has
worked towards the creation of a South American
council to combat drug trafficking. We have signed
bilateral agreements and undertaken joint interdiction
efforts with Argentina, Paraguay and Brazil.

I should also note that, according to the World
Drug Report 2008 published by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, coca leaf crops in Bolivia
account for only 18 per cent of world coca leaf. The
maximum potential cocaine production in Bolivia is
equivalent to 13 per cent of potential cocaine
production worldwide. We should clarify that that
figure will decrease even further once the
comprehensive coca leaf study is concluded. That
study will calculate the quantity of leaves used for
traditional consumption, subtracting it from the
maximum potential cocaine production in Bolivia.

With regard to traditional consumption, in March
2009 President Morales Ayma presented a draft
amendment to article 49 of the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 to decriminalize coca leaf
chewing, which had been prohibited in that Convention
because of unscientific cultural prejudices. A draft
resolution on international cooperation against the
world drug problem (A/C.3/64/L.15/Rev.1) was
recently adopted by consensus in the Third Committee
and will in turn be adopted by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution reflects the view that due account
should be taken of the traditional licit uses of crops
where there is historical evidence of such use. Coca
leaf chewing is an age-old ancestral practice of the
indigenous peoples of the Andes and the Amazon of
South America and it is part of our history and cultural
identity.

At the second South America-Africa Summit,
held on Margarita Island in September, there was
explicit recognition of the adverse affects of all aspects
of the world drug problem, including illegal trafficking
in drugs and psychotropic substances and connected
crimes, on security, peace, governance, economic
development and public health for our peoples. This
poses a severe challenge to social institutions and
policies and contribute to environmental degradation,
produce poverty and weaken efforts at social
integration.
In that context, Latin America and Africa
committed themselves to encouraging bilateral and
regional initiatives activities, as indicated by the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, always on the
basis of the principles of common and shared
responsibility, which entails an integrated and balanced
focus, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-intervention in internal affairs
and respect for human rights, as established in the
Charter of the United Nations.

This joint effort, this national effort and this
subregional effort will make it possible to pool the
concerted efforts of the entire international community
to make ever greater strides towards achieving the
results we all hope for in the fight against this scourge,
especially in West Africa. We believe that the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and their
subsidiary bodies are the appropriate forum for in-
depth consideration of the subject.

