Mr. Savua (Fiji): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Samoa on behalf
of the Pacific Islands Forum.

The recent terrorist attacks in Madrid, London
and Bali illustrate the ease with which terrorists move
around, acquire weapons and equipment, form
alliances and execute their missions. Human lives do
not matter to them, rules and laws mean nothing and
national borders are mere nuisances. They even believe
that they will go to paradise for their beliefs and
twisted sense of fair play. We, however, have to respect
all laws, recognize all borders and ensure that our
actions are not so draconian that they verge on the
denial of individual human rights.

The perception by the public that our efforts are
too little and come too late is, perhaps, correct, but it
may never be appreciated how much has been achieved
and how many terrorists' plans have been thwarted
because of the vigilance of the security officers at our
borders and of the thousands who work overtly or
covertly in the war on terror.

Most of the successes are due to the commitment
and willingness of States to cooperate with one
another. The Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committee guides such cooperation on terrorism.
However, while adherence to such guidance is not
obligatory, it is the decisions of States to conform that
have enabled some restraint to be imposed. There is
room for improvement, particularly in areas of work
identified by countries and regions. There are currently
13 anti-terrorism instruments and, although an omnibus
convention is being drafted, we do not believe that it
will lessen the number of obligatory returns and reports
that we will have to prepare. In this regard, we fully
endorse the proposal submitted by Samoa that our
region invite a representative of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to attend the 2006 meeting of the South
Pacific Working Group on Counter-Terrorism, and we
request that a collective Pacific regional report to each
Committee be submitted by the Pacific Islands Forum
secretariat to alleviate the pressure faced by Forum
member countries in meeting the individual reporting
requirements and deadlines.

Sometimes the South Pacific region feels isolated
because of the lack of attention it receives. While it
may be true that because of our insularity we offer no
worthwhile targets to terrorists, the hardening of major
targets could make our countries' security
arrangements soft by comparison. As we have
mentioned regularly, while the tyranny of distance has
an adverse effect on our trade and development, it is
not a credible defence against terrorism. Indeed, the
very 747 airliner that feeds our tourism industry is also
the engine that takes away the security cushion of
distance.

The importance of the exchange of information
and intelligence in counter-terrorism strategies must be
emphasized. However, unprocessed information and
intelligence are not worth much and can prove very
expensive. Every time a country responds to received
intelligence, money has to be spent on the resulting
mobilization. We also stand to lose the support of the
people if we consistently cry wolf. We therefore appeal
to nations with the ability to cast a wide net and to
collect and collate intelligence to ensure that the raw
data is diligently and properly analysed, and to spare a
thought for those who may not have the funds to
respond on an ongoing basis.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support for the statement made by the representative of
Samoa and to respectfully ask that it receive favourable
consideration.

