Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I am very
grateful to you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting on the sensitive issue of counter-terrorism to
consider the activities of three subsidiary bodies of the
Council.

We listened very attentively to the statements
made by the Chairpersons of the Committees -
Ambassador Loj, Ambassador Mayoral and
Ambassador Burian - to whom we pay tribute for the
professionalism they have demonstrated in carrying out
their respective mandates. We know that they have the
assistance of eminent experts, and we would also like
to express our appreciation to them.

There is no threat today that is as present, as
pressing and as elusive as terrorism, because it can
strike anywhere, without discrimination. We often
speak of it as being blind. But it is a kind of Hydra of
Lerna: the seven-headed serpent of mythology whose
heads grew back if cut off. It is a very real threat that
demands the constant vigilance of all of us and requires
concerted solutions at the international level.

I therefore welcome the relevance of the
provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), as well as all other resolutions whose
implementation by Member States would considerably
reduce the scope of the terrorist activities.

With regard to the briefings provided by the three
Chairpersons, I would like to make just a few brief
comments reflecting my delegation's concerns.

My first comment relates to the strengthening of
national capacity. One of the most important functions
of the counter-terrorism Committees is to help States to
build their capacity to combat terrorism. The actions of
the counter-terrorism Committees are directed
principally at State actors and, from what we have
heard and know about the genuine threats that
terrorism poses for the whole of the international
community, it is clear that such actions need to be
further strengthened.

The statements made by the Chairpersons of the
three Committees made it clear that there are still many
delays in the submission of reports. The reasons for
such delays should be carefully studied so that
appropriate solutions can be found. I would like to
stress the necessity of providing assistance to States
that request it so as to help them to develop their
national capacities. Here, my delegation urges better
coordination of efforts to make available the best
practices of codes and norms permitting compliance
with the obligations arising from the counter-terrorism
resolutions.

The 1540 Committee's establishment of a
legislative database containing links to public sources
of information on legislative and other measures taken
by States at the national level is a commendable
initiative. We hope that it will very soon become a
valuable source of information for States that need it,
with a view to improving their internal procedures
concerning the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

We know, for example, that many developing
countries have not yet acceded to the 13 international
conventions and protocols on terrorism. The legislative
database could be very useful in improving
performance in that regard. We encourage any other
initiative to enhance States' awareness - including
through their permanent missions in New York -
regarding the need to implement the resolutions on
terrorism.

My second comment concerns interaction among
the three Committees and strengthening international
cooperation. Better interaction among the counter-
terrorism Committees and their expert groups, as
envisaged in resolution 1566 (2004) and emphasized in
presidential statement S/PRST/2005/64 of 21 December
2005, would promote optimal results. Likewise,
increased cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations would help to improve the procedures for
the implementation of the various resolutions on
terrorism. We therefore encourage the development of
those kinds of contact.

Here, my delegation appeals once again for the
strengthening of international cooperation at all levels.
Cooperation between the counter-terrorism Committees
and the international financial institutions and
functional organizations - such as the World Customs
Organization, the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the International Maritime
Organization - to discuss areas of interest, including
money-laundering, the transfer of sensitive materials,
et cetera, and also to finance and provide assistance for
capacity-building in the area of counter-terrorism, is
not just a necessity; it is one of the essential elements
of the counter-terrorism system.

My third comment concerns the strengthening of
visiting missions. I would like to highlight the
importance of field visits. They are the best way to
observe the progress made by States concerning their
counter-terrorism obligations and to become familiar
with needs that must be taken into account. However,
there must be better coordination among the expert
groups of the various Committees to reduce duplication
and to promote the optimal use of resources. These
visits can enable the three Committees to better assess
areas for assistance and to facilitate and rationalize the
needed technical assistance, as stressed by the
Chairperson of the CTC in her statement today. In
addition, the results of these visits should be utilized
with a view to the improvements we seek at various
levels.

In that regard, and without wishing to influence
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) or to change the criteria
determining which countries are to be visited, my
delegation would like all regions to benefit from the
same attention, in view of the need to build the
capacities of every Member State to deal with an
unpredictable actor. There must be an active dialogue
with Member States - for example, regarding the
needs perceived by the CTED - in order to establish
priorities and to aim for concrete results.

The work programmes of the three Committees
are quite ambitious, and we endorse them. We
understand and support the concern for clarity that
underpins them, particularly with regard to establishing
consolidated lists of individuals and entities suspected
of having violated the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including with respect to the Al-Qaida/
Taliban Sanctions Committee. Nonetheless, we express
our concern over the time involved in addressing
certain sensitive cases regarding the delisting of certain
individuals covered by resolution 1267 (1999). We
welcome the strengthening of the cooperation between
Interpol and the 1267 Committee to expedite the
procedures in that regard.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my delegation's
support for the efforts of the Chairpersons of the three
Committees in carrying out their respective mandates. I
assure them of our constant support as they go about
their tasks, which remain urgent and vital for the entire
international community.

