Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this very important open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report on
the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*), as well as for his
briefing.

Azerbaijan reaffirms its commitment to an
international order based on international law and the
rule of law and considers it essential to cooperation
among States. In recent years, international attention
on the importance of the rule of law at the national and
international levels has significantly increased. At the
same time, greater efforts are needed to ensure a
unified approach to the rule of law and to address the
major threats and challenges that continue to affect
basic elements of the international legal order, to
undermine the national unity, territorial integrity and
stability of States, and to generate disregard and
contempt for human rights.

In that regard, further efforts, in particular
through resolute measures aimed at ensuring the strict
compliance of parties to armed conflict with their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, remain crucial and must be an
absolute priority. The lack of agreement on political
issues in situations of armed conflict and military
occupation cannot be used as a pretext for disrespect of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
fact that illegal situations continue because of political
circumstances does not mean that they are therefore
rendered legal. Law and justice are more important
than force.

With respect to such situations, we proceed from
the importance of reaffirming the continuing
applicability of all relevant international legal norms,
putting an end to activities aimed at the consolidation
of foreign occupation, initiating urgent measures
towards removing the adverse effects of such activities,
and discouraging any further practices of the same or a
similar nature.

The situation of the most vulnerable in societies
affected by conflicts, in particular forcibly displaced
persons, women and children, brings an element of
urgency to the imperative of restoring the rule of law.
Ensuring the right to return represents a categorical
rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing and provides
a significant measure of justice to those displaced from
their homes and land. The impact of conflict on
housing, land and property, as well as discrimination
on ethnic grounds and forced demographic changes in
situations of foreign occupation, require a more
consistent and resolute international response. As the

Secretary-General pointed out in his report, reparations
mechanisms that compensate returnees for the illegal
occupation of their property show promising results
and should be replicated.

Integral to the existing challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community. In recent
years, important steps have been taken for the
protection and vindication of rights and the prevention
and punishment of wrongs. Justice is a fundamental
building block of sustainable peace that needs to be
further strengthened, fully taking into account existing
United Nations activities and structures, including in
the fields of the rule of law and accountability.

It is therefore important that peace and mediation
efforts never accept or tolerate situations created by the
unlawful use of force or other egregious violations of
international law. They should never promise amnesties
or encourage any other form of immunity for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community.

We would like to emphasize once again the
responsibility of States to comply with their obligations
to end impunity and to thoroughly investigate and
prosecute persons responsible for such crimes in order
to prevent violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation. We
are of the View that the international community, in
general, and the Security Council, in particular, should
react in cases of consistent disregard by States of their
obligations to fight impunity.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
order to achieve the goal of the rule of law, we should
uphold fundamental principles, adhere to the uniform
application of international law and promote the
democratization of international relations.

