Mr. Afande (Togo) (spoke in French): The
Togolese delegation would like first of all to join
other delegations in thanking Judge Meron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
as well as Prosecutors Serge Brammertz and Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, for their briefings on the work of the
two Tribunals. We also congratulate Judge Meron on his
appointment as President of the soon to be operational
Residual Mechanism, as well as Prosecutor Jallow, who
will become Prosecutor of the Mechanism.

We welcome all four briefings from the principals of
the two Tribunals, detailing the Tribunals' programmes
and plans as they work towards the completion of
their mandates, pursuing the fight against impunity
for perpetrators of crimes as defined in the statute of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the statute of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. We commend the Tribunals for
concretizing their mandate completion strategies in
many spheres, including investigation, trials at first
instance and in appeal, the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions, witness protection, the preservation and
dissemination of archives and managing the Tribunals'
legacies. Their briefings have informed us about past
and future measures in meeting the administrative
and judicial challenges of realizing their completion
strategies.

We applaud the progress made ahead of schedule
by the ICTY on many cases on its judicial calendar, as
well as the fact that the ICTR has completed nearly all
of its cases at first instance. One of the Tribunals' main
challenges lies in the issue of cooperation by States,
without which they cannot perform their functions. I
need not remind members of the importance of such
cooperation in many arenas, including the arrest and
transfer of defendants and the relocation of those
acquitted or who have served their sentences. Togo calls
on all States involved to redouble their efforts in those
areas, so as to achieve the completion of the Tribunals"
mandates and ensure a solid start for the Residual
Mechanism, which is to begin operations in Arusha on
1 July.

The Tribunals have had mixed success in transferring
defendants to national courts and jurisdictions.
Togo commends the ICTR for its recent progress in
transferring cases to Rwanda and for its initiative in
establishing a robust system for the oversight of cases
transferred to national courts so as to guarantee that
defendants receive fair trials.

Togo also commends the Tribunals for working
steadily towards completing their mandates, despite
the difficulty they face in retaining personnel. Togo is
prepared to work with other members of the Council,
as well as other relevant United Nations bodies, to find
flexible and comprehensive options for dealing with
that problem - a problem that, if allowed to go on
unsolved, could compromise the Tribunals' ability to
complete their mandates on schedule. We believe that
the collective experience of the Tribunals' principals
here today, in their respective roles, will be crucial
to ensuring a successful transition to the Residual
Mechanism, as well as the success of the Mechanism
itself.

We strongly support President Joensen's untiring
commitment to the relocation of those who have
served their sentences or have been found innocent,
because, beyond the logistics of relocating them,
there are also human rights issues at stake. We believe
that, if prisoners who have served out their terms and
defendants who have been acquitted continue to be
subject to strict surveillance, then they are not enjoying
basic, fundamental human rights. We urge the Council
to reiterate its call on States to assist in the relocation of
former defendants.

Clearly, the Tribunals' four principals here with us
today correctly gauge the weight of responsibility they
bear, which involves not only steering the transition
to the Mechanism but also, as they and we both know
with certainty, to press forward the fight against
impunity, even after the Tribunals have shut down, and
to consolidate the lessons learned and the advances in
jurisprudence acquired in the course of the Tribunals'
work.

