Mr. Chikoti (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I have the
honour to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
and its member States, namely, Angola, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao
Tome and Principe, and East Timor, while fully
endorsing the statements made by the representative of
Guinea-Bissau at this important and timely debate on
the situation in that country.

Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
scheduling this emergency meeting, as well as to thank
all members of the Security Council for their
willingness to deepen the debate on the serious
situation that afflicts a member of the Community,
namely, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, a country
bound to the CPLP by linguistic ties and with which
we share a historical and cultural legacy, supported by
a multifaceted cooperation between our countries.

The reasons that brought us to the Security
Council to participate in this debate are extremely
serious for Guinea-Bissau and for its people, and are
also important for the African continent and for the
international community as a whole.

The 12 April military coup has interrupted the
most positive period in the country's recent history,
one of relative political stability, good governance and
significant economic growth, which augured a
promising future for the country, the pursuit of which
was being encouraged and rewarded by the
international community, as evidenced by the relief of
the country's debt and by the positive assessments
made by international organizations.

The military coup d'etat, which has already been
categorically condemned by the Council, the Secretary-
General, the Peacebuilding Commission, the CPLP, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union, the European Union,
the International Organization of la Francophonie and
by other national and international organizations, is of
exceptional seriousness because it took place in the
middle of the electoral process, which reflects a total
disregard for the democratic will and sovereignty of
the people of Guinea-Bissau. The military coup has
therefore violated all the principles of democratic life
and constitutes the most basic violation of article 25 of
the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. It cast its authors and accomplices under
political condemnation, sanctions and prosecutions.
12-30011

The history of Guinea-Bissau has been very
tragic, marked by several coups d'etat in recent years
in which a President, a presidential candidate, three
chiefs of staff and several other military and civilian
authorities died. Given that situation, it was with
extreme concern that the CPLP member States,
meeting at a summit of heads of State in Luanda on
22 July 2010, after extensive consultations with the
partners from ECOWAS, agreed on a road map for the
implementation of the defence and security sector
reform programme.

The CPLP's solidarity with Guinea-Bissau has
been ongoing and active. Portugal and Brazil, through
various development programmes, have supported the
country in maintaining social services and economic
recovery. It was also in the context of that assistance
that, in 2010, the Governments of Angola and Guinea-
Bissau signed a bilateral cooperation agreement that
included a programme of financial assistance for
Guinea-Bissau's budget and a military-technical
cooperation agreement to support the country's reform
of its defence and security sectors.

Angola, like all members of the CPLP and the
international community, wants to see Guinea-Bissau
consolidate peace, stability and development. That is
why we joined the combined efforts of all, because we
think that only through concerted actions on an
ongoing basis and through ideas can we help the
brotherly people and country of Guinea-Bissau to
overcome the current crisis, as it has in the past. In that
connection, Angola, in its capacity as President of the
CPLP, has been holding open consultations with
various international partners, such as the United
Nations, the African Union, in which it presides over
the Peace and Security Council, and ECOWAS, with a
view to finding a lasting solution for Guinea-Bissau.

Guinea-Bissau has deep-rooted problems
affecting a large part of its political and military class.
The increase in drug trafficking in the country can
affect not only the neighbouring nations but also the
entire region, with consequences for regional stability
and security. The ongoing instability that Guinea-
Bissau faces, marked by successive military uprisings,
which affect not only the institutions but also the entire
political class in the country, is the result of long-
standing impunity and the absence of functioning
institutions, particularly the judicial system, due to the
intervention of military authorities in public life. That
makes the country hostage to military power. It is also

the result of the increase in drug trafficking, with the
risk of turning the country into a platform for
international drug trafficking.

Guinea-Bissau therefore needs adequate
assistance, with the aid of the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the CPLP and other actors, in order to find a
lasting solution for the country. We call on the Security
Council to consider adopting appropriate measures
with a view to restoring constitutional order, ensuring
the unconditional release of the arrested leaders,
creating a peacekeeping force for stabilizing Guinea-
Bissau, concluding the electoral process and providing
a system of penalties for breaches of the measures
adopted.

For the implementation of those measures and to
help the people of Guinea-Bissau, time is of the
essence. We cannot afford to wait and make the people
of Guinea-Bissau suffer - people who are constantly
at the whim of military power. The challenge to the
international community is serious enough that if we
fail to find appropriate solutions in due time, with the
efforts of all, we will be again putting the people at the
whim of the military, as they have been in the past.

The CPLP reaffirms the decisions contained in its
resolution resulting from the eighth meeting of its
Council of Ministers, held in Lisbon on 14 April, as
well as all of the resolutions that have recently been
issued by various bodies, namely the African Union's
Peace and Security Council, ECOWAS and the
Security Council, which on 13 April called for the
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.

We encourage the Security Council to do all that
it can to support all of the measures that can be taken
collectively to help the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to
emerge from this crisis created by the military class,
which has brought about extremely difficult problems.

I appreciate the attention that has been given me
and the opportunity that I have been given to transmit
those thoughts to the Council on behalf of the CPLP.

