Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I am confident that,
under your able leadership, the Council will effectively
address burning issues of peace and security,
specifically the situation in the Middle East. My thanks
also go to Ambassador Kolby of Norway and his
delegation for the way in which they guided the
Council during the month of March.

Ukraine is participating in this debate to express
its deep concern about the extremely dangerous
situation in the Middle East. Each time the Security
Council considers this issue, it seems that the situation
has already reached its most critical point and that
common sense will guide the parties from the path of
violence to the path of dialogue. Much to our regret,
that logic has not been working in the Middle East, and
violence continues to dominate over wisdom.

Ukraine has condemned in the strongest terms
possible the recent terrorist acts in Israel, specifically
those in Netanya, Jerusalem and Haifa. No one can
justify the killing of innocent civilians. We call on the
Palestinian leadership to take urgent and decisive
action to prevent terrorist acts and to stop the activities
of terrorist networks. They endanger the prospects for
peace in the region and are not bringing the Palestinian
people closer to the fulfilment of their legitimate
aspiration to a Palestinian State.

However, one cannot realistically demand that the
Palestinian Authority and its elected President, Yasser
Arafat, fight terror while at the same time eliminating
their ability to do so. Israel must stop the devastating
raids into Palestinian-controlled territory, the excessive
use of force and the attacks on heavily populated areas.
Most immediately, we urge Israel to put an end to the
siege of the headquarters of Yasser Arafat and to
withdraw its forces from Ramallah and other
Palestinian cities. The use of force will not bring
security to Israel and its people.
Ukraine is confident that there can be no military
solution to the conflict and that none of the problems
that separate the Israeli and Palestinian peoples can be
resolved by means of force and violence. It is
necessary to look beyond the hatred and despair and to
find, through negotiation, the political solution that
will bring a comprehensive, just and lasting peace to
the Middle East. To achieve that goal, both security and
political efforts should be pursued in parallel.

Only last week, the Arab League summit adopted
a historic decision on the initiative of Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, offering to establish normal
relations with Israel and to provide security for all
States in the region, in exchange for full Israeli
withdrawal from the territories occupied since 1967
and Israel's acceptance of a Palestinian State. On the
eve of the summit, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002), which affirmed the vision of a
region where two States - Israel and Palestine - live
side by side within secure and recognized borders.

Ukraine welcomes both of those decisions; they
restore a clear political perspective to the settlement
process and outline a concept of comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East, based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on
the principle of land for peace. The implementation of
the Tenet work plan and the Mitchell committee
recommendations would help negotiations to resume so
as to make this vision a reality.

These positive and encouraging steps should not
fall victim to the deadly explosion of shells. We urge
the parties to seize this opportunity and to implement,
unconditionally and without delay, the provisions of
the most recent Security Council resolutions on the
subject - resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1397 (2002) -
in fulfilment of their commitments under the United
Nations Charter. It is indeed unacceptable that the
Council's decisions should be ignored at a time when,
at last, the Council has become fully engaged in the
settlement of the conflict.

Of particular importance is the need for the
maximum mobilization and coordination of
international diplomatic efforts aimed at breaking the
deadlock in the crisis and resuming peace negotiations.
It has become evident that the parties cannot achieve
this on their own. The Security Council should
continue to remain seized of the matter; in particular, it
might return to consideration of a third-party
mechanism.

We also welcome in this regard the ongoing
efforts of General Zinni and the "quartet", and we
consider the personal involvement of the Secretary-
General, Kofi Annan, in the process as a critically
important factor. As an active participant in all of these
efforts, Ukraine is ready to further contribute to this
end.

