Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Secretary of State
Pompeo for his presence here today and his engagement
on the subject. I also want to thank Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo and Mr. Christiane for their briefings,
and of course to express our great appreciation to our
Dutch colleague and his team for their very diligent
work in facilitating the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

This is the fifth briefing on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) during Sweden's tenure on the
Council and probably the last, so I would like to reiterate
our principled position on this agenda item. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a prime
example of finding successful multilateral solutions
to collectively shared challenges. It has effectively
ensured the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme and made our world a safer place
in that regard. It should also be seen in the broader
non-proliferation context. The undermining of the Plan
of Action risks undermining our efforts elsewhere.

Together with its European Union partners, Sweden
continues to strongly support the full implementation
of the agreement. We welcome Iran's continued
engagement and implementation of its nuclear-related
obligations under the Plan of Action, as reported by
the International Atomic Energy Agency. I want to
equally welcome Iran's participation in this meeting,
since Iran is a party to the JCPOA and directly affected
by resolution 2231 (2015). Iran's early ratification
of the Additional Protocol would be a significant
confidence-building measure. It is very important to
respect both sides of the deal. The procurement channel
must be kept functioning and the Joint Commission
should continue to discuss any outstanding issues under
the agreement. It is also important that the Iranian
people continue to experience the economic benefits of
the deal. The withdrawal of the United States and its
reimposition of sanctions is therefore regrettable. We
fully support the efforts within the European Union to
protect and preserve the JCPOA in all its aspects.

Like many others, we continue to express our
serious concerns about ballistic-missile activity that
is inconsistent with annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
including the most recent test, on 1 December. That
matter, however, should be addressed separately and
not at the expense of the JCPOA. Iran must heed the
Council's call and refrain from any actions that put
its commitment to resolution 2231 (2015) in doubt.
All parties must contribute to further de-escalation in
the region. With respect to other alleged transfers and
possible arms shipments, we thank the Secretariat for
its thorough analysis and reporting so far in relation to
the information at hand. We appreciate today's update
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and look forward
to further analysis, as appropriate, in due course.

As our term on the Council comes to an end, we
note that divisions in the region remain deep, to the
detriment ofinternational peace and security both in the
region and beyond. We believe that the Council should
intensify efforts to bridge those divides. All actors
in the region must now come together to de-escalate
tensions and make common efforts to achieve political
solutions to the ongoing conflicts and crises in the
region. It is also crucial to continue the important
political dialogue with Iran on its role in the region,
as well as on the human rights situation in the country.
We will continue that dialogue through our established
channels, including through the European Union.

In conclusion, at a time when multilateralism
is often described as under pressure, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action remains a model for
successful multilateral negotiations and reaffirms the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes under
the Charter of the United Nations for our common good
as the norm. It is important to hold on to it.

