Mr. Akufo-Addo (Ghana): Allow me at the
outset to express to the United Nations through you,
Sir, the deep condolences of our entire delegation over
the recent tragic loss which the United Nations suffered
in Baghdad. May the souls of Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello and the others rest in perfect peace.

On behalf of the ministerial delegation and the
executive secretariat of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), I want to express our
appreciation for the opportunity given us at such short
notice to address this most august of bodies. This, I
believe, is another indication of the interest the
Security Council has always shown in ECOWAS and
its efforts to promote lasting peace in the West African
region.

The delegation I have the honour to lead -
which includes a former member of this Council,
Mr. Francois Fall, the Foreign Minister of Guinea;
Mr. Mamadou Bamba, the Foreign Minister of Cote
d'Ivoire; Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and a well-
known figure to members of the Council; and the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, Mr. Ibn Chambas -
is here in execution of directives by the authority of the
heads of State and Government of ECOWAS that the
Security Council should be constantly briefed on
activities undertaken by ECOWAS as part of efforts to
promote peace. It is a double honour for me, since, as
late as 28 April, I was privileged to lead another such
delegation to brief the Council on developments in
Cote d'Ivoire.

On our part, it was with great pleasure that we
played host to the very important mission that the
Security Council sent to our region in 2001, which led
to the establishment of the United Nations Office for
West Africa. Another important Security Council
mission visited West Africa as recently as June 2003 to
get a first-hand view of events in our troubled region.
All these actions convinced us that the West African
region continues to be at the centre of the Security
Council's preoccupations and ECOWAS is indeed
grateful for the initiatives taken by the Council.

We have come here today to brief the Council on
the situation in Liberia and, more particularly, on the
efforts ECOWAS has made, with the assistance of the
African Union and the international community, to
ensure that peace returns to that country, which has
been so ravaged by war and is facing a disastrous
humanitarian situation. ECOWAS is resolutely
committed to the search for lasting peace in Liberia
with a View to ensuring stability not only in that
country, but also in the entire Mano River Union area
and the ECOWAS community at large. In this regard, I
wish to express our gratitude to the United Nations for
the extensive contributions it has made to the peace in
Sierra Leone.

As members of the Council will recall, several
initiatives have been taken to promote lasting peace in
Liberia. These include the meeting organized in Abuja
on 15 and 16 March 2002, preparatory to the national
reconciliation conference on Liberia; the eighth
meeting of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council, held in Dakar on 29 March 2002; the summit
of ECOWAS heads of State and Government, held in
Yamoussoukro, Cote d'Ivoire, on 17 May 2002; the
meeting between the Liberian Inter-Religious Council
and ECOWAS; the Liberian Leadership Forum, held in
Ouagadougou from 8 to 11 July 2002; and the Security
Council workshop on the Mano River Union.
Following those meetings, a decision was taken to
establish an International Contact Group on Liberia to
assist ECOWAS and the United Nations in their efforts
to restore lasting peace to Liberia and the Mano River
Union area through political dialogue.

Following meetings among the Contact Group;
the current ECOWAS Chairman, the tenacious
President of Ghana, John Agyekum Kufuor; the Taylor
Government of Liberia; Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD); the Movement
for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL); civil society
organizations; and various political groups, aimed at
ensuring the widest representation possible, the
Liberian peace talks finally began at Accra on 4 June
2003. Chaired by General Abdulsalami Abubakar,
former head of State of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, as ECOWAS-appointed mediator, the peace
talks were aimed at obtaining a ceasefire agreement
and at bringing the parties involved to sign a
comprehensive peace agreement.

On 17 June 2003 - two weeks after the talks had
begun - a ceasefire agreement was concluded among
the Taylor Government of Liberia, LURD and
MODEL, the combatants of the Liberian conflict.
Following the signing of the ceasefire agreement,
negotiations continued and culminated in the signing of
a Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Accra - the
Accra accord - on 18 August. The process was
undoubtedly painstaking and long, having taken more
than three months, during which the mediator had to
crisscross the region to meet leaders of the rebel
movements who were not present at Accra and a
number of heads of State in the region whose countries
play crucial roles in resolving the crisis.

One factor that contributed significantly to the
conclusion of the Accra accord was certainly the
departure for Nigeria of Charles Taylor, whose exit had
been vociferously sought by a wide spectrum of
Liberian opinion and by powerful forces within the
global community as a necessary condition for the
restoration of peace in Liberia. His departure took
place at a historic ceremony in Monrovia on 11 August
2003, witnessed by leading dignitaries of the continent:
Joaquim Chissano, President of Mozambique and
current Chairman of the African Union; Thabo Mbeki,
President of South Africa and immediate past
Chairman of the African Union; and John Kufuor,
President of Ghana and current Chairman of ECOWAS.
That day, Charles Taylor honoured his pledge, turned
over power to his Vice-President - now President -
Moses Blah, and left the country for voluntary exile in
Calabar, in the great Federal Republic of Nigeria.

I should like to take this opportunity to express
once again the gratitude of the entire ECOWAS
community to Nigeria, and particularly its President,
Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, for his generous act of
statesmanship, not only in offering political asylum to
President Charles Taylor, but also in deploying a
vanguard force of two Nigerian battalions to Liberia to
help begin the process of stabilizing that country. The
first troops belonging to the interposition force were
deployed on 4 August 2003. The force is currently
made up of 1,696 men, but its total strength is expected
to increase to about 3,500 by 4 September 2003. The
interposition force was deployed with the assistance of
the United Nations and the United States of America.
Peace is gradually returning to Liberia as the guns
begin to fall silent.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Secretary-General, my compatriot Kofi
Annan, and the President of the United States of
America, George Bush, for their personal commitment
to the cause of peace in Liberia. It is for that reason
that we view with considerable anxiety recent measures
by the Government of the United States, including the
withdrawal offshore of the Marines in Liberia and
yesterday's statement that the United States
Government will pull out of direct involvement in the
resolution of the Liberian crisis on 1 October, when the
United Nations peacekeeping operation is scheduled to
begin.

The signing of the Accra Agreement marked a
significant step towards peace in Liberia. ECOWAS
and its partners on the African continent and in the rest
of the international community should, therefore, work
together to ensure effective implementation of the
Agreement. The Agreement, comprehensive in nature,
provided an opportunity to reaffirm a number of
principles that are very dear to ECOWAS, the most of
significant of which is the determination of the
Community to uphold the conduct of legality in the
affairs of member States and to avoid - despite any
practical accommodations that may be necessary for
peace - the conferment of any reward for insurgency.
That is why, at the insistence of the ECOWAS
Chairman and with the agreement of broad sections of
Liberian society, the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman
of the Transitional Government, due to take office on
14 October 2003, came from civil society, not from the
insurgents.
The Accra Agreement covers the cessation of
hostilities; the containment, disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
combatants; security sector reform; restructuring of the
security forces; the release of prisoners and abductees;
human rights issues; humanitarian issues; post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction; the settlement of
disputes; political issues such as, inter alia, the
establishment of a governance reform commission,
electoral reform, the organization of elections, the
interim Government and the establishment of a
Transitional Government; and, finally, the conduct of
credible elections in Liberia in October 2005.

What are the prospects for successful
implementation of the Peace Agreement? Much will
depend on the following: the adherence of the
combatants to the ceasefire, the commitment of the
parties to fulfil their obligations under the Accra
accord and the support of the international community.
The deployment of the international stabilization force
and the return of humanitarian agencies and of
displaced persons and refugees - some of which have
begun in earnest - will all depend on the success of
the ceasefire.

Consequently, every effort should be made to
help ECOWAS to maintain the vanguard force in
Liberia until the international stabilization force is
deployed so as to secure the ceasefire. It is our
expectation that the ECOWAS vanguard force will, on
1 October, be blue-hatted as the first elements of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission, which will be
subsequently strengthened by contributions from other
United Nations Member States. We believe that the
follow-up Security Council resolution called for by
resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August to give effect to the
1 October deadline for the start-up of the United
Nations operation will reflect that expectation. It is
vital that the Security Council adhere to that deadline
and ensure that it is met if the momentum for peace in
Liberia is to be maintained.

Similarly, the regional, continental and
international communities should work in unison to
ensure that the various parties fulfil their obligations
under the Accra accord. The international community
should also give its full support to the Committee
responsible for monitoring the Agreement. Assistance
from the international community will enable Liberia
to implement the disarmament, demobilization and
rehabilitation programme and the reinstallation,
rehabilitation and reintegration programme for the
combatants - matters of the greatest moment if
durable peace is to be obtained in Liberia and in the
region.

In 1997, a golden opportunity to achieve the
disarmament of the combatants in Liberia was lost. The
cost of that lost opportunity is all too plain to see. We
cannot afford a repeat of that tragic error. We must, all
together, find the will and the resources to ensure that,
this time, the goals of disarmament and reintegration
are fully achieved.

To conclude, I wish to reaffirm the determination
of ECOWAS to continue to engage in Liberia even
after deployment of the stabilization force, through the
office of the Special Representative of the Executive
Secretary, and continue to contribute troops to the
stabilization force.

Permit me once again to express our gratitude to
the Security Council and to the Secretary-General for
their continued concern and support. I also thank the
members of the international community, particularly
the United States Government and the European Union,
for their pledge to assist ECOWAS.

