Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank all
the briefers - Executive Director Fedotov, Ambassador
Umarov and Ms. Haress - for having shared their
comprehensive analyses on the current situation in
Afghanistan. Let me also express my gratitude to Special
Representative Yamamoto for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1092) as well as for all
the work of the team of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, which is helping to promote
political dialogue, foster economic development and
enhance good governance.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later in today's debate by the Charge d'affaires
of the Delegation of the European Union.

Let me make three points: on parliamentary
elections, the development of Afghanistan, with special
attention to climate change, and the security situation
in the country, including the threat posed by landmines.

Poland welcomes all the positive developments
that have occurred in Afghanistan in recent months.
The parliamentary elections, conducted under difficult
circumstances, demonstrated the strong commitment
of Afghanistan's citizens, especially women and young
people. The determination of millions of Afghans to
exercise their civil rights was proof of the strength of
the foundations of the democratic procedures used. We
encourage the Afghan National Unity Government and
all relevant institutions to continue their efforts aimed
at improving the voting process during the upcoming
presidential elections.

Poland has been a strong supporter of the nexus
between security and development. In this regard,
we took an active part in the Geneva Ministerial
Conference, which expressed solidarity with the
Afghan people and their Government in its efforts to
promote prosperity and stimulate development. It also
allowed Afghanistan to show progress and commitment
in its pursuit of structural reforms. In this context, we
welcome the commitment of the Afghan Government
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the progress made towards achieving Afghanistan's
sustainable development goals.

Climate change affects the security situation of
many regions, including the region where Afghanistan
is located. Extreme weather events, droughts,
desertification and water scarcity can lead to the
escalation of local and regional conflicts and act as a
threat multiplier. Therefore, we must emphasize the
importance of mitigation and adaptation to climate
change and strengthen countries' resilience in that
regard. Proper climate-related risk assessments based
on reliable data from the field and better management
strategies are needed to effectively address these threats.

As a strong contributor to the NATO engagement
in Afghanistan, we are deeply concerned by the
recent developments in Ghazni province, which have
been experienced as a heroic struggle between the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and
anti-Government elements. The deterioration of the
security situation in the western areas of Ghazni
province during November as a result of large-scale
Taliban attacks is especially disturbing.

Poland encourages the Afghan Government to
restore stable security conditions, which will allow
the local population to live normal lives. We also
confirm our commitment to supporting the Afghan
forces through training and advisory activities in
the framework of the Resolute Support Mission, led
by NATO.

Despite the efforts undertaken by the Afghan
authorities, the security situation strongly affects the
civilian population. We are particularly concerned about
the sad plight of children, who continue to suffer from
the violence in the country. We welcome an enhanced
focus on children and armed conflict. However, in order
for us to see substantial and sustainable improvement,
words must be translated into action. In addition,
ensuring respect for humanitarian principles, human
rights and international humanitarian law should always
be an integral part of the United Nations Mission.

Poland remains concerned over the growing number
of civilian casualties, including women and children,
resulting from landmines and improvised explosive
devices. Afghanistan is one of the countries most
affected by this type of contamination. In this context,
let me welcome the country's efforts aimed at addressing
the threat posed by landmines and underline the role of
mine action in supporting sustainable development.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Umarov for his dedication to the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). We believe that the Committee
is a useful tool that can contribute to reconciliation in
Afghanistan. However, we would like to underline that
the procedures applied to its work have to be followed
strictly by all States Members of the United Nations
in order for the peace process to be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned.

Finally, let me express our full support for the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan aimed
at bringing about lasting peace and stability in the
country. We encourage all parties to the internal and
regional dialogue to strengthen their commitments in
order to achieve that ambitious objective.

