Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): At our
joint Council briefing in May 2014 (see S/PV.7184),
Ambassador Gary Quinlan - the then Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities - raised the issue
of the evolving nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, including the group's localization
and globalization and its new generation of leadership.
Since then we have seen that threat develop dramatically
through the rapid territorial gains and brutal tactics of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also
known as Daesh, as well as, to a lesser extent, of the
Al-Nusra Front. That has been further intensified
by the presence of foreign terrorist fighters and the
growing influence of Al-Qaida associates in Libya.
In today's briefing I will outline how the threat from
Al-Qaida and its affiliates has evolved over the past
year, as well as describing the Committee's response,
the ways in which Member States can engage with it,
and its upcoming work.

Over the past year we have witnessed a marked
increase in ISIL's use of digital media to promote its
messages, in order both to shock and intimidate and
to recruit others to its cause. Despite the role that
digital media has played, direct social contact has also
remained a key factor in recruitment. The human cost

of Al-Qaida and ISIL-related attacks is immense and
tragic, not only in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic,
but also in parts ofNigeria, Libya, Yemen, Afghanistan,
Somalia and further afield. Many attacks are on innocent
civilians and even on places of religious worship, such
as those that resulted recently in the deaths of 25 people
at Friday prayers in a mosque in Saudi Arabia. While
the peoples of Syria and Iraq are most at risk, no State
is immune to the threat of terrorism.

In response to the evolving threat from Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, the Council has adopted various
resolutions expanding the work of the Committee
and its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, for example, in relation to oil and financing. In
addition to its regular reporting, the Monitoring Team
has submitted reports to the Committee on ISIL and
the Al-Nusra Front (S/2014/815) and on foreign terrorist
fighters (S/2015/358). It is also due to submit a report
to the Committee by 12 July on the implementation
of resolution 2199 (2015), regarding ISIL and oil
interdictions, and to report on the threat in Libya
by 27 September. The Monitoring Team's workload
continues to increase, presenting challenges for its
resources, and we want to commend it for its dedication
and the quality of its work.

The growing terror threat has led to an increase
in designations of individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida. Between June 2013 and May 2014,
six individuals and entities were designated, while
between June 2014 and May 2015, that number rose
to 41. More than half of the listings were related to
the issue of foreign terrorist fighters. There has also
been an increase in Member States' use of the assets-
freeze exemptions, with five granted between June
2014 and May 2015, as opposed to one in the previous
period. We welcome further designations by Member
States. I would like to emphasize that listings should
be strategic, targeted and implementable. We want the
sanctions to have a practical effect, and to focus on
targeting individuals and entities that can be disrupted.
The Monitoring Team can assist Member States in
preparing listing and exemption requests.

The sanctions list is a living document that must be
kept up-to-date, relevant, fair and transparent. There
are three ways the Committee does that. The first is
through its triennial review, which considers whether
listings, especially those that have not been reviewed
for three years, are still relevant and implementable.
The Committee is in the process of finalizing the 2014
triennial review, and I would like to thank the Member
States that have provided information for the review,
since obtaining responses from all the Member States
that have designated individuals and entities has been
a challenge. We urge all Member States to engage with
the Committee on the 2015 triennial review, which we
will be undertaking shortly.

The second way is through the delisting
requests submitted to the independent Office of the
Ombudsperson by designated individuals and entities.
The Ombudsperson plays an integral role in ensuring
that the Committee's procedures are fair and transparent
and that the list dynamically reflects the threat posed
by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. The Ombudsperson
continues to have a significant caseload and role.
Since the Committee's last briefing to the Council, six
individuals and entities have been delisted and three
retained, following the Committee's consideration
of reports submitted by the Ombudsperson. There
are currently 10 petitions received through the
Ombudsperson that are under various stages of
consideration. Thirdly, the Monitoring Team regularly
updates the list based on information provided by
Member States, and we encourage them to keep the
Monitoring Team informed.

For sanctions to be effective they must be clear,
targeted and implementable. Several initiatives
have been taken in that regard. Earlier this year, the
Chair produced a procedural note clarifying the
reporting requirements of resolution 2199 (2015),
adopted in February with the aim of stemming the
financing of terrorists through the illicit oil trade.
While the resolution has made a major contribution to
consolidating international efforts to counter the threat
posed by ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front, the level of
reporting has so far been insufficient. The Committee
therefore urges Member States to submit their reports
required under paragraph 29 of the resolution as soon
as possible, and to continuously submit those reports
required under paragraph 12. We also look forward to
the Monitoring Team's assessment, in cooperation with
other United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, of the
impact of the measures, and to proposals for improving
their implementation. In February, the Monitoring
Team also produced three explanation-of-terms papers
on the sanctions measures, which are available on the
Committee's website.

Work is also being done to standardize the format
of all United Nations sanctions lists and to update the
Committee's website to make it more user-friendly.
The Committee is mandated, with the Monitoring
Team's assistance, to consider issues of possible
non-compliance with sanctions measures, and has
received complaints from Member States. On 24 April
the Chair held an open briefing for interested Member
States that included discussion of the implementation
issues. I encourage Member States to share any queries
and concerns with the Committee and the Monitoring
Team. We stand ready to assist.

As for the Committee's future activities, the
Monitoring Team will be presenting reports on Libya
and the impact ofresolution 2199 (2015). The Committee
is currently discussing the recommendations of the
Monitoring Team's seventeenth report, and we hope to
have those agreed on shortly. I also plan to continue
to hold regular open briefings on the work of the
Committee for all interested Member States.

I would like to take this opportunity today to note
there will be a changing of the guard in the roles of the
Ombudsperson and Monitoring Team, and especially
the Coordinator. Both are crucial to the Committee's
work and the ability of the regime to respond effectively,
fairly and transparently to the evolving threat posed by
Al-Qaida and its affiliates. I would like to thank the
Ombudsperson, Kimberly Frost, and the Monitoring
Team, including its Coordinator, Alexander Evans, for
their tireless efforts, and to wish them the very best in
their future endeavours.

To conclude, I want to re-emphasize that the 1267
Sanctions Committee relies on cooperation from
Member States so that Al-Qaida and its affiliates are
designated, sanctions are implemented and the tragic
toll of terrorism is prevented.

