I would like to thank Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her excellent briefing and her team's hard work in a complex environment. I would also like to welcome the representative of Iraq to today's meeting. Iraq is attempting to rebuild after years of conflict in a very complex environment that has led to many internal crises, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose spread is increasing at an alarming rate. My delegation acknowledges the efforts of the Iraqi Government to meet these challenges and implement reforms, including in the fight against corruption, in order to steer the country towards a brighter future. With respect to the protection of human rights, the Niger welcomes the progress made by the Iraqi Government in this area, although much remains to be done. We welcome the decision to compensate demonstrators who have been injured. However, the increase in the number of killings and attacks on human rights activists and defenders by unidentified armed assailants remains a cause for concern. My delegation therefore calls on the Government to take concrete steps to honour its commitment by making operational the institution responsible for investigating the killings of activists and other human rights defenders and bringing perpetrators to justice. We believe that this will help ease tensions in the country and build trust between the Government and the people. Withregard to the electoral process, the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to the Independent High Electoral Commission remains paramount, in particular with regard to strengthening the operational and logistical capacities of the Commission. The same applies to the support of the international community and all of Iraq's regional and bilateral partners, with a view to ensuring free, fair and credible elections next year. The Niger remains convinced that a sustainable process must include Iraqi women and young people. We therefore welcome the announcement made on 1 October by the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs concerning Government plans to adopt a national development plan that would complement existing legislation on increasing the number of women in high-level decision-making positions. With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return of missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, my delegation commends the action of the Iraqi Government on 16 September to repatriate human remains believed to be those of Kuwaiti citizens, despite the restrictions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We commend UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission and the International Committee of the Red Cross for their determined efforts to move this issue forward and for their logistical support. In conclusion, I would like to recall here that, as Iraq attempts to recover from the deep crisis it has endured in recent years, we must not lose sight of the fact that a victory over the Islamic State in Iraq in the Levant is not synonymous with its elimination from the region. It is therefore ever more crucial for the global coalition against Da'esh and the United Nations to remain vigilant and continue to support Iraq in combating the terrorist hydra so as to thwart its hopes of re-emerging.
