Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Madam President, for
presiding over today's meeting. We also thank Special
Representative Tetteh and Ambassador Mohammed for
their briefings.

Last week, the Security Council held the thirteenth
annual consultation with the African Union Peace and
Security Council, which produced effective results and
sent a positive sign for further cooperation between
the two Councils. This consultation epitomizes the
deepening cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU).

In recent years, there have been frequent interactions
between the United Nations and the AU, and their
relations have undergone considerable improvement.
Cooperation is particularly productive in the areas of
conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The two Councils signed such strategic
cooperation documents as the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security and the Africa Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Secretary-General Guterres and AU Commission
Chairperson Faki Mahamat held the successful third
AU-United Nations annual conference. The pattern
for bilateral cooperation is taking shape and has
multiple layers in several areas at high levels. Thanks
to the support of the United Nations and the AU,
peace and security in Africa today have improved,
although the continent continues to face a series of new
situations and challenges. Now is the time to advance
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU.
Such cooperation should be only be strengthened,
not weakened.

The United Nations and the AU should be the
champions of multilateralism. The two parties
should continue to strengthen cooperation and jointly
uphold multilateralism, the free-trade system and
the international order underpinned by international
law. The international community should support
African efforts to seek African solutions to African
problems. The AU and other regional and subregional
organizations are uniquely positioned with special
advantages, rich experience and the ability and wisdom
to properly address hotspot issues in Africa based on
the situations on the ground.

The United Nations and the AU should explore
innovative cooperation. Because cooperation between
the two parties in addressing hotspot issues in
Africa becomes increasingly close, a more effective
mechanism should be put in place to strengthen their
collaboration in such key areas as conflict prevention,
crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction.
AU-led peace operations, which have become an
important method of responding to African conflicts
and crises, significantly complement United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The United Nations should
help the AU establish a reliable, stable and predictable
funding mechanism for its own peace operations. It is
hoped that the Security Council and the United Nations
Secretariat will heed the views and concerns ofAfrican
countries and support the efforts of African countries
and regional organizations in maintaining peace and
security on the continent, with a keen focus on the
aspirations and urgent needs of African countries.

The United Nations and the AU should be at the
forefront of win-win development. The two parties
should further expand their cooperation in order to
address the root causes of African issues. Since the
key to solving all problems lies in development, and
poverty and underdevelopment are the root causes
of hotspot issues, the way forward is to achieve
sustainable development. The implementation of the
2030 Agenda should be closely integrated with the
African Union's Agenda 2063. Supporting economic
and social development in Africa should guide enhanced
cooperation between the two parties in the future. It is
also an important way to help Africa address the root
causes of conflict.

China actively supports advancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
has made tireless efforts to this end. China will always
adhere to Mr. Xi Jinping's concept of sincerity, practical
results, affinity and good faith and uphold the greater
good, while pursuing shared interests. China actively
participates in African efforts for peace, security and
development. At this very moment, more than 2,000
Chinese peacekeepers are safeguarding peace in five
United Nations mission areas in Africa. In September
2015, President Xi Jinping announced the establishment
of the China-United Nations Peace and Development
Trust Fund, which will support, as priorities, Africa's
peacekeeping, counter-terrorism and sustainable
development efforts. As oftoday, 34 projects benefiting
Africa have been launched. As such, the Fund has
become a new platform for tripartite cooperation among
China, Africa and the United Nations.

The Beijing summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation was successfully held in September last
year. The unanimously adopted Beijing Declaration
on Building a Closer Community of Destiny between
China and Africa identified the peace and security
sector as one of the eight major cooperation priorities
in support of ongoing African efforts to silence the
guns in Africa by 2020. A China-Africa peace and
security cooperation fund will be set up to support the
maintenance of peace, security and stability in Africa,
as well as the two parties in their related peacekeeping
and stabilization endeavours.

China is willing to continue working with
the international community to further promote
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU in
order to bring peace, stability and development to the
African continent.

