Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for this important
opportunity to discuss how to strengthen the role of
mediation. I also want to thank the briefers for their
insightful and very useful input to this discussion today.

In January 2017, the Secretary-General presented
his vision for a surge in diplomacy to the Council in an
open debate organized under the Swedish presidency
(see S/PV.7857). That vision is well on its way to
being realized and should be actively supported by all
Member States. We commend the diplomatic efforts
of the Secretary-General and his envoys and special
representatives in actively using his good offices to
defuse tensions and resolve conflicts, often behind the
scenes, with quiet diplomacy. The Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
and the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation are
also making important contributions to those efforts.
Recently, we saw the crafting of an agreement between
Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and the successful role of the Advisory Board on
Mediation in the holding of Liberian elections through
the deployment of President Obasanjo, as the Secretary-
General mentioned earlier. We continue to encourage a
flexible and proactive use of the Advisory Board.

United Nations diplomatic work concerning the
peaceful settlement of disputes and international peace
and security must have the full support of the Council,
as well as adequate and predictable funding under the
regular budget. International law provides a common
basis for addressing the root causes of conflicts, such
as the violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law, justice and inequalities. Although
significant progress has been made to strengthen the
capacity for mediation, allow me to highlight three
areas where we believe that further efforts are needed.
First, there is the matter of gender mainstreaming
and women's participation in mediation. I am happy
to note that, regarding that issue, there appears to be
a resounding consensus at today's meeting. In that
regard, let me thank Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for her
thoughtful contribution to today's open debate. It is
not a women's issue, but a peace and security issue.
Women's participation is not a box that can be checked
off by adding one or two women to negotiation teams,
or by creating a separate mechanism in which women
have only an advisory role. Women and men must
participate on equal terms at all levels of political and
peace processes. More women should be appointed as
United Nations Special Envoys and senior members
of mediation teams. Member States must make that
possible by nominating more women candidates. The
Swedish Women's Mediation Network was launched
in 2015 for that purpose, and there are now several
women's mediation networks, as the Secretary-General
mentioned. Mediation support teams must also have
adequate gender expertise to understand how women's
rights are part of the issues under discussion.

Secondly, concerning inclusivity and multitrack
diplomacy, as the Archbishop stressed earlier,
mediation should be inclusive so as to consider the
needs of all segments of society. The participation of
local communities and civil society, including youth
organizations, in peace and mediation processes is
essential for solutions to take root and must be given
higher priority. Therefore, mediation capacity must
also be strengthened at the national and local levels.
Regional and subregional organizations play a crucial
role in anticipating conflict risks by responding
quickly, providing robust expertise and establishing
relationships for effective mediation. Examples include
the efforts ofthe Economic Community ofWest African
States to ensure the peaceful and democratic transition
in The Gambia last year and the continued efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in South
Sudan. Regional United Nations offices are critical to
support and complement regional efforts.

Thirdly, and perhaps most important, with regard
to international unity, the Council must stand united
in supporting United Nations mediation efforts, while
providing envoys and mediation teams with the leverage
that they need to succeed, especially in situations that
are politically complex. Regrettably, too often divisions
within the Council add to the challenges a United Nations
mediator must overcome to succeed. Furthermore,
there are also situations outside of the Council's regular
agenda that require preventive diplomacy and mediation
support. Cameroon, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea
and Madagascar illustrate such current situations. In
order to be responsive with mediation when needed,
the Security Council requires additional briefings and
reporting on early warning and looming conflicts,
including on human rights violations. The Council also
must follow through on mediation efforts throughout
the conflict cycle and not relent until durable peace
has been achieved. To that end, agreement, not least
among Council members, on the urgency to do better in
preventing conflict is needed.

Sweden will continue supporting mediation
efforts politically and through predictable funding to
funds and programmes, as well as supporting the DPA
through the Folke Bernadotte Academy by providing
training and capacity-building. We will also continue
to work towards achieving unity of purpose in the
Council in support of the Secretary-General and his
representatives in their respective mediation efforts to
manage and prevent conflict. That is the duty of the
Council as set out in the Charter of the United Nations.

