Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I thank you for your timely
decision to convene this meeting in response to the
requests made by Brazil and Portugal. This is a critical
and tragic moment for East Timor and the international
community. We are dealing with an urgent and serious
threat to international security. No words are needed to
justify this meeting. Facts have already done so. We
gather here today so that violence in East Timor may
come to an end. We gather here today to restore respect
for international norms. For that, we must find ways to
induce the Indonesian Government to comply fully with
the May Agreements. And, if necessary, we must consider
additional action by the Council under the appropriate
provisions of the Charter. We can no longer wait while
there is disorder and chaos in East Timor and people are
being massacred at the hands of criminal militias.

The statement of the Secretary-General offers
effective guidance to our deliberations. We fully share his
assessment on the disturbing events in East Timor. As he
has just stated, these events could amount to international
crimes. We are indebted to the Secretary-General for his
strong leadership. Together with the resolve shown by the
Governments of Portugal and Indonesia, his forthright
initiative made possible the Tripartite Agreements and the
holding of the popular consultation. Our recognition goes
equally to his Personal Representative, Ambassador
J amsheed Marker, and to United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) personnel.

On 30 August 1999, the ballot held under the
auspices of the United Nations clearly expressed the
sovereign will of the East Timorese. Less than 10 days
ago, there was a climate of positive expectation and
optimism that the Timorese people would finally be able
to take on the high responsibilities for their destiny.
However, universal jubilation lasted less than 24 hours. It
was overtaken by Violence and intimidation.

The unfortunate facts are well known. Killings,
looting, burning down of houses, impunity and forced

 

displacements have become daily occurrences in East
Timor. United Nations personnel, who had a mission of
peace, were threatened and besieged. Their attitude was
heroic, and lives were lost. The international community
must not remain passive or hesitant in the face of the
atrocities committed against the East Timorese. Even if we
do not yet have a complete picture of the situation, it is
absolutely certain that the humanitarian crisis is deepening
and the most fundamental right that this Organization stands
for - the right to self-determination - is being denied.

Responsibilities under the historic May Agreements
were freely taken up by the parties. The Government of
Indonesia must maintain law and order in East Timor.
Unfortunately Indonesian authorities have been unable to
contain the violence. We once again call upon the
Government of Indonesia to accept the assistance of the
international community in ensuring the necessary security
conditions for the implementation of the May Agreements.
In this respect, I take note of the recent statement by the
Indonesian Minister of Defense in hope that it expresses a
real willingness to bring this about.

Early next week the Security Council's mission to
Indonesia will present its recommendations. Its mandate has
not yet been completed. We requested this meeting in the
certainty that an open debate would further assist the
mission in its endeavours. Some countries have already
indicated their readiness to participate in an international
force aimed at helping Indonesia bring about peace and
stability in East Timor. Brazil is ready to join in this effort.
We will contribute to any international force as soon as it
is mandated by the Security Council. We expect that the
Government of Indonesia will accept this international force
without any delay.

We have asked for this formal session so that the
Council and the entire membership of the United Nations
can express themselves in no uncertain terms. Violence in
East Timor must stop. The will of the East Timorese people
must be respected and implemented. The Charter of the
United Nations provides the appropriate framework for the
Security Council to take action. No option should be
excluded. Let us be reasonable. But let us be firm and
resolute. The international community must be prepared to
make recourse to all available means at its disposal within
the United Nations Charter to guarantee that peace is
restored in East Timor and that the May Agreements are
fully put into effect.

