Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
managing wisely the work of the Security Council
this month.

We meet today amid critical challenges in the Middle
East. However, the announcement early last week is a
glimmer of hope regarding the situation in Syria (see S/2019/775). My country's Government welcomes
the announcement of the agreement on forming the
Constitutional Committee and the imminent onset of
its work to draft a constitution, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). That is a decisive step towards

achieving a long-awaited political solution that can put
an end to the suffering of the brotherly people of Syria
and ensure the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees.

The Syrian Negotiation Commission, as testified by
all parties, has cooperated with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, whose
efforts we support. In line with current requirements, the
Commission will convene a meeting of candidates and
advisors to the Constitutional Committee in Riyadh on
7 October so as to prepare the constitutional documents.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will ensure a successful
outcome of this meeting and urge the Commission to
seriously and objectively cooperate in the upcoming
phase. The Commission is serious in its work to let the
Committee reach a successful conclusion.

My country's Government calls on the Syrian
authorities to use this opportunity to engage seriously
and sincerely in the Constitutional Committee's first
meeting, to take place at the end of October, and not
to obstruct it. The Syrian authorities must therefore
acknowledge that this first step towards a political
solution requires a serious commitment to the political
process and tangible measures. The voice of reason
must prevail in order to ensure an end to the eight-
year crisis in Syria, which has been exploited by the
enemies of the people of Syria and the Arab world
to implement a foreign agenda aimed at plunging the
region into devastation as part of destructive sectarian
politics based on expansionism within the region, while
keeping it ablaze in the interest of that agenda.

We have to realize that the terrorist sectarian
militias supported by Iran that have infiltrated Syria
have played a major role in Syria's destruction. Any
solution to the Syrian crisis will therefore require that
these militias leave Syrian territory.

Iran must also realize that Syria is an Arab State
and that its natural place is among its brother Arabs.
Iran's blatant interference in Syria clearly shows that
this terrorist regime has transformed it from a normal
State respecting international norms and laws as well
as good-neighbourly behaviour into a rogue State that
sows chaos, heedless of the suffering it causes to the
peoples of the region.

My country rejects and condemns the killing and
displacement of civilians as well as the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, and we call for accountability for
those who have committed such inhuman crimes. The
crimes being committed in Idlib must stop immediately,
without preconditions. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
supports the Syrian people by all means possible to
ensure that Syria gets back on the right track while saving
its people from further destruction and suffering. The
safe return of refugees must be guaranteed as provided
for by international law. We call on the international
community to stand united in supporting the efforts of
the United Nations Special Envoy in order to arrive at
the desired political solution, as set out in resolution
2254 (2015), with full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.

