Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his important briefing. My delegation would also
like to congratulate Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga on
his appointment as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Horn of Africa. We thank him for his
informative briefing and encourage him to continue to
engage with all parties. My statement today will focus
on three key messages.

First, the presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains essential to
stability in Abyei and along the border region between
the Sudan and South Sudan. Indonesia is pleased that
the security situation in Abyei remains generally calm,
with the exception of sporadic incidents of violence,
as documented in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/319). My delegation attaches great importance
to UNISFA's continued efforts to facilitate engagement,
mediation and confidence-building among communities
in Abyei. Indeed, improved intercommunal relations
have resulted in the establishment ofthe Amiet common
market, which has become a vibrant economic hub

and provides opportunities for peaceful coexistence
among different communities in Abyei. Indonesia
also commends the important role of UNISFA's police
component in strengthening law and order, including by
providing capacity-building to community protection
committees in response to the increase in criminality
and in the absence of an Abyei police force.

Earlier this month, our Ambassador in Khartoum
had an opportunity to visit Abyei and witness at first-
hand the fruits of UNISFA's work. In a similar vein, my
delegation also acknowledges UNISFA's support for the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(JBVMM), which is an important tool for maintaining
stability along the border region. We are pleased to
see marked improvement in the implementation of
the JBVMM, compared to previous years, including
towards meeting the benchmarks outlined in the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, we need to continue our strong
encouragement to the Sudan and South Sudan to
resolve their outstanding issues. My delegation regrets
that little progress has been registered to implement the
20 June 2011 Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
for the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area,
including the formation of joint interim institutions.
Concerning the JBVMM, Indonesia also notes a lack
of progress on critical issues, including the complete
withdrawal of forces from the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone and the establishment of customs and
immigration offices. We have also yet to see the
regular holding of meetings of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism. The Sudan and South Sudan need
to capitalize on the stability created by the presence
of UNISFA, as well as the significant improvement in
their bilateral relations, to resolve the Abyei and border
issues. The international community should support
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel in
its engagement with the two countries to promote the
timely implementation of their obligations under the
2012 cooperation agreement.

That brings me to my third point. We are cognizant
of changes in UNISFA's operating environment since
its establishment in 2011. We must also not lose sight of
a wide range of difficult challenges that both the Sudan
and South Sudan are currently facing. For Indonesia,
the priorities are clear - to preserve and build on the
many important gains achieved throughout the work of
UNISFA and ensure that the interests of the civilian
population, including women and children, are taken
into account.

Against that backdrop, we see the merit of the
Secretary-General's proposal to reconfigure UNISFA
in order to reinvigorate the political process. For
such a reconfiguration to be effective, my delegation
underscores the importance of securing the
support of both the Sudan and South Sudan, while
also taking into account the views of troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Indonesia has peacekeepers on the ground in
UNISFA and will continue to contribute more if
needed. We will continue to support UNISFA's
mandate renewal and stand ready to contribute
constructively to the discussion. Indonesia would also
like to commend all United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, together with their partners, which
provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to people
in need in Abyei.

I should like to conclude by expressing our
condolences to UNISFA and the Government and the
people of Ethiopia over the loss of three Ethiopian
peacekeepers who perished in a tragic helicopter crash
in February. May the exceptional brothers whom we
lost that day rest in peace, and we will continue to
honour their contribution to peace and security. My
delegation reaffirms its long-standing support for the
Sudan and South Sudan in finding a peaceful solution
to their outstanding issues, including through their
participation in UNISFA.

By the way, Mr. President, thank you very much for
the quicksand-filled hourglass.

