Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Allow me very sincerely and warmly to join those who
have praised you, Mr. President, and your predecessor.

In late December last, the Secretary-General drew the
Security Council's attention to the danger threatening
Burundi of a humanitarian catastrophe on the scale of that
experienced by Rwanda in 1994. In doing so, the Secretary-
General was duly discharging his responsibilities. The
delegation of France, in the light of the following two
considerations, has studied the report that he subsequently
submitted.

First, we must recall the facts: the situation in
Burundi remains fragile and worrisome. However, the
institutions that emerged from the conclusion in
September 1994 of the Convention on Governance must
be encouraged to pursue their work to promote peace,
restore order and foster national reconciliation. This joint
effort of the Burundi authorities, supported by the
Security Council, the European Union, the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and the entire international
community, has already borne some fruit.

Secondly, the Council must ensure that its decisions
do not run counter to the efforts of the Government of
Burundi. It is normal for the Council to demonstrate its
vigilance by preparing to come to the assistance of the
people of Burundi if the situation so requires. At the same
time, such preparations must not lead extremists of every
stripe to push the country into the abyss. We must
therefore be very mindful of how those primarily
concerned, the inhabitants of Burundi, perceive our
decisions.

France supports the Secretary-General's proposals
aimed at preventive diplomacy, as was also recommended
by the OAU Foreign Ministers at their meeting in Addis
Ababa on 29 February last.

It is thus important to urge the principal players in
Burundi to engage in dialogue and at the same time to
bolster the position of the authorities of Burundi by
encouraging the President and the Government to work
closely together. To that end, the missions carried out by
the various mediators of the international community must
be supported by the Security Council.

It will then be important to implement preventive
measures aimed at defusing dangerous situations. The
harmful role of certain radio stations has long been
denounced by the Government of Burundi itself.
Measures must therefore be taken to assist it in the task
of dismantling these stations. The Government of Burundi
has also asked the OAU to increase the number of its
observers in the field. The OAU Foreign Ministers
recently decided to do just that, and we must welcome
their decision.

Finally and above all, the international community
must be enabled to respond to an emergency humanitarian
situation. We must therefore explore possible options that
would allow the international community to respond in
the most appropriate manner - and hence in a

 

humanitarian manner - to a disaster, should one occur
despite all attempts to avert it.

In the view of the French delegation, the draft
resolution prepared by the members of the caucus is
responsive to the views we have just expressed. That is
why the French delegation will support the draft resolution
when it is put to the vote.

