Mr. Yoda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset, Mr. President, to
thank you and the delegation of the Russian Federation
for having taken the initiative to organize this meeting,
thus giving us the opportunity to consider the
important issue of the situation in the Middle East, of
which the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the main
Gordian knot. We are convinced that our deliberations,
in which Burkina Faso is pleased to take part, will be
fruitful and will contribute to the search for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution.

Allow me, in that regard, Sir, to pay tribute to the
important role that your country plays in that joint
endeavour, which you have reaffirmed by offering to
host an international conference on the Middle East in
Moscow this year. We support that proposal, and we
have no doubt that the outcome of the planned meeting
will be commensurate with our expectations. I would
also like to welcome the presence among us of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who has never spared
any efforts in helping to resolve the conflict in the
Middle East. I also congratulate him on his important
remarks this morning.

No one can deny today that the peace, security
and stability of the Middle East are an important
component - indeed that they are at the heart - of
international peace and security. Thus, it is the duty of
the international community, with the Security Council
in the lead, and in all our interests to make every effort
to ensure that calm prevails in that region.

Unfortunately, the events of recent months have
powerfully shaken the foundations of the admittedly

modest progress that the peace process had so
painstakingly achieved. The war in Gaza and the
attendant grave humanitarian suffering, the ever-
increasing violence and the threats issued by parties to
the conflict are all factors that have complicated,
indeed halted, the momentum of the ongoing dialogue
established by the Annapolis Conference.

However, by adopting resolution 1850 (2008), the
Security Council marked its resolute commitment to
the irreversibility of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiating
process started at Annapolis. For Burkina Faso, in
letter and in spirit, that resolution and the other
relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 1860
(2009), remain relevant, and we call for their full
implementation.

We would also like to reaffirm the importance, in
our View, of the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002, and we welcome the endeavours of
the Quartet. Convinced that those are today the most
appropriate political and legal frameworks for a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East, we urge the parties to abide
by them and once and for all to permanently forsake
recourse to arms in order to resolutely commit in good
faith to direct talks.

Moreover, my delegation believes that those talks
must be irreversible and nurtured by a single vision:
that of a peaceful region, in the building of which an
independent, viable Palestinian State, with secure and
internationally recognized borders, living side and by
side in peace with the State of Israel, itself living in
peace with all its neighbours, will fully participate.

That, we believe, is the price to pay. We know
that the Israelis and Palestinians are capable of paying
it, having, in 2008, proved the desire to resolve their
dispute, including by maintaining ongoing contact and
by diligently pursuing their negotiations. We are thus
convinced that, this time again, they can overcome the
present circumstances and renew the thread of
dialogue, which the whole international community
urges with all its heart.

That involves a first step, perhaps the most
difficult, but certainly the most indispensable: that of
establishing a genuine climate of trust by adopting the
necessary measures, namely an end to extremist
rhetoric by all sides; a halt to Israel's construction of
the separation wall and to its settlement policies; the
lifting of the Gaza blockade; and guarantees of
humanitarian access. It also means Hamas ceasing its
rocket fire and other forms of violence on Israeli
territory.

Furthermore, in order to optimize their
participation in the talks and to draw the maximum
benefit from them, it is essential and urgent that the
Palestinians achieve their unity. That is why we are
particularly grateful to Egypt for its commitment and
its untiring efforts to help the Palestinian brethren
achieve reconciliation, and we call on the international
community to support these initiatives.

While emphasizing the need for medium- and
long-term solutions to the conflict, we cannot ignore
the current situation of the people of Gaza, for whom
the most urgent issues today are resolving the
humanitarian crisis and carrying out reconstruction.
The pledging conference held in Sharm el-Sheikh on
2 March 2009 enabled the donor community to become
involved in those crucial issues. We hope that promises
will be translated into concrete action. Likewise,
humanitarian aid and construction materials should be
able to reach Gaza unimpeded. Similar efforts should
be made throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Clearly, the challenges to be met in the Middle
East are still great and the expectations even greater.
Indeed, with the exception of the hopes aroused by
Lebanon, including the improvement in Syrian-
Lebanese relations, the Middle East, unfortunately,
remains in the grip of many tensions and the option of
political coexistence between Israel and its Arab
neighbours has yet to be put to the test. Nevertheless,
we remain convinced that the aspiration to peace and
security for them and for future generations will
prevail over bellicose behaviour and the mindset of
confrontation.

Because the stability of the entire region remains
dependent on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is
essential to devote unflagging attention to it. In
addition, the countries in the region and beyond must
continue diplomatic initiatives in support of the parties'
efforts. In that respect, the Security Council has a
primary role to play, including by finding ways to
ensure compliance with the many decisions that it has
adopted since this conflict was included among the
priority issues on its agenda. Its credibility and that of
the United Nations system as a whole are at stake.
Finally, the solution of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East is unthinkable without
the determination of the parties themselves. We
therefore invite them to show greater political will and
a heightened sense of their responsibilities.

In conclusion, we should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having submitted to the Council a
draft presidential statement that we support.

