The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; and
Ms. Eunice Apio, Director of Facilitation for Peace and
Development.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
persons to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations; and His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/409, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/402, which contains the
text of a letter dated 1 June 2015 from the Permanent
Representatives of Malaysia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.

