Mr. Morris: May I say that both rounds of
questions have raised profound issues, and that it
means a lot to the World Food Programme and our
colleagues that Council members have all been so
thoughtful about the work we are a part of. Clearly, I
am unable to give Council members the answers they
deserve this afternoon. As we did last time, we will
respond in considerable detail in writing to all the
questions; our responses will be available to everyone.

The representative of Bulgaria asked a question
about Somalia. The situation in Somalia is very
troubled. It is a very, very difficult place to work in,
and it is a difficult place to assess the magnitude of the
difficulty, given the conflict. We have been there for a
long time. It is one of the places where we operate the
United Nations humanitarian air service. Our
programme this year is to feed nearly 3 million people
in the country. We have had good success in the past
raising nearly 75 per cent of the resources that we need
to do our work there. It has been encouraging, in that it
is one of the places where we have a very broad base of
support. Nearly 20 countries help us in Somalia.

There was a question from the United Kingdom.
May I first express our appreciation to one of Sir
Jeremy's colleagues, Anthony Beattie, who is our
Executive Board President this year. He has
extraordinary competence and effectiveness and is very
bright. The question was about structural issues.
Clearly, there are structural issues at every level. There
are structural issues that affect the family farmer, that
affect the marketing operation and that affect the
system in which agriculture can survive and thrive. The
representative of the United Kingdom raised the
question about what the Security Council can do. It is
much the same question as the President raised. First of
all, I think what the Council can do is to help put the
humanitarian issues - food is one of them, and there
are many - at the centre of the world's agenda.
Humanitarian issues are security issues. If people are
treated in a humane way and have the basic ingredients
that lead to a life of hope, opportunity, fulfilment, the
realization of potential and civil behaviour, I believe
security issues will be mitigated or moderated. So what
we are about has an enormous impact on families, on
children and on other individuals, saving lives and
propping up lives in such a way that people can begin
to be productive citizens.

In terms of reducing conflict, what we do is very
important. We need to think more about that. I am
grateful that Council members are thinking about it; as
they communicate with their capitals, this becomes part
of the dialogue. Usually, we relate to the Ministry of
Agriculture. That is very important. When we relate to
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of
Finance, we are more successful in having a stronger
country partner.

On the issue of the politicization of food aid, I
think, strong statements on that subject from the most
important political body in the world, which this
Security Council is, are very powerful and very
important. People have to take what Council members
say seriously. It is important to make the statement that
it is the basic entitlement of a person to be fed if he or
she is down and out - without a personal political
agenda. There is no more important place in the world
for that statement to be made than right here. Food,
health and education are at the base of security and at
the base of a good life for individuals. We will talk
more about this, and we will give members the best
answer of which we are capable. It will be a good
exercise for my colleagues.

The representative of Spain asked a question
about lessons learned. We have learned that we do
indeed know how to distribute food. A couple of years
ago in Ethiopia, before I was there, we did a terrific job
in getting food distributed so that people did not die.
We knew how to do that. We are learning how to use
food as a tool for prevention and investment and
development. We know how to do that. We know how
important small neighbourhood groups are to getting
the job done and how important remarkable community
leaders are. We have also learned how difficult it is to
make the case for non-food aid items. We have learned
that comparable dollars invested in seed, fertilizer and
farm implements in the long run have more of a pay-off
than comparable dollars invested directly in food. For
the life of me, I cannot see why it is so much more
difficult to make that case. It is beyond me. But we do
know that.

We have learned the value of early warning
systems and of being well-informed. We know that
the investments we make at the very beginning of a
crisis - and the sooner we get there the better - are
more powerful and have more leverage than what we
do later on down the trail. We have a good paper on
lessons learned, and we will share it with Council
members.

A question was also asked about capacity-
building policy. I suspect we have not seen ourselves as
capacity-builders. In Afghanistan, we did provide food
to pay the compensation of 150,000 schoolteachers.
They had nothing else with which to pay them in
Afghanistan. We have also used food to pay for
rebuilding the bureaucracy in Afghanistan. There are
other examples where we have done things like that,
but we generally look to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) to provide
leadership in that sphere.

Here I must mention the issue of coordination and
how we all work together. Rebuilding the capacity of
education, agriculture and health in that part of the
world is so critically important that we are all going to
have to be a part of it.

The representative of France asked a question
about coordination. I am not going to try to answer the
question generally, but may I tell you that in Southern
Africa the level of cooperation has been extraordinary.
All of the United Nations agencies, plus the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), the
regional organization in Southern Africa, plus the
International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) and
non-governmental organizations, have come together
into something called the United Nations Regional
Inter-Agency Coordination Support Office (RIACSO).
This is the regional coordinating arm of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), UNDP, the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), WFP, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO); there are about 100 people working
together to coordinate and cooperate on a regional
basis. The response to the initiative in the six countries
is that it works superbly well.

The Southern Africa crisis will be a food crisis
for a few more months. I am hopeful that we will work
our way out of the agricultural predicament. Going
forward, there will be an enormous crisis in Southern
Africa related to governance and related to HIV/AIDS.
What form the lessons learned from RIACSO will take
and how our work is re-formulated going forward are
very important questions. Maybe, in part, this answers
the question of the representative of Guinea.

The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
raised a question as it relates to Iraq, and a new role for
WFP. May I express our gratitude to Syria and to the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Both countries have made
their own food reserves available to WFP to use in
Iraq, where we can borrow from them as we need it,
urgently and in a timely way. We will always repay
them, but having the reserve right at hand has been a
blessing to us.

The WFP, as I said, has been in Iraq for 12 years
now. We have been a major implementer of the oil-for-
food programme, directly implementing it in the north
to about 4 million Kurds every day and helping to
monitor it in the central and southern parts of the
country. As we have been getting prepared for the
conflict at hand, we have pre-positioned enough food
in the countries on Iraq's perimeter to feed up to 2
million people for 30 days. So we have essentially
focused on refugees or internally displaced persons
who would make their way to the perimeter. We are
now looking at a six-month programme that, in the first
month, would focus on refugees and internally
displaced persons - somewhere between 2 million and
4 million people. We are looking at ensuring that food
is available in the second, third and fourth months to
feed the entire population of Iraq - 27 million people.

Iraq is interesting in that 60 per cent of its people
rely entirely on the central Government for food, and
100 per cent of its people rely on the central
Government for part of their food. The country has had
a successful public distribution system, with 44,000
outlets distributing food proceeds from the oil-for-food
programme. So we would look at helping to ensure that
there was a steady pipeline of adequate food resources
available to feed Iraq's entire population for the
second, third and fourth months. As the fifth and sixth

months come along, we would assume that the oil-for-
food programme would be fully back in place,
administered by the Government of Iraq, and that our
responsibility would be to continue to look after
refugees, internally displaced persons and people who
are very vulnerable. We feed about 700,000 people in
Iraq who are very vulnerable, including those in
orphanages, pregnant women and lactating mothers.

The World Food Programme is also the logistical
arm of the United Nations. We run the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service, we manage the
communication systems in Afghanistan - we went in
with Ericsson and installed an entire communication
system in Kabul - and we manage transportation,
trucks and the fuel supply, among other things. As a
part of the consolidated appeal process, in which the
United Nations family came together to request $2.2
billion in the short term for humanitarian issues in Iraq,
we have asked for $1.2 billion for food and $100
million for logistical activities.
Under resolution 1472 (2003), the oil-for-food
resolution that the Security Council adopted a week
ago Friday, the Council kindly gave us authority to
have access to proceeds already encumbered through
the oil-for-food programme as long as they were under
transport within a period of 45 days. We have had only
a short period of time in which to analyse the contracts,
but our best estimate today is that $110 million of
value will be available from the oil-for-food
programme during that 45-day period to feed the
people of Iraq. We are obviously very hopeful that the
Council will find a way to extend the 45 days to a
longer period of time and that it will address other
footnote issues that are significant in terms of costs
associated with transportation of those items.

That means we will need to ask the donors for at
least $1.1 billion in help to fund the rest of the
programme, and we are in the process of doing that
now. We have had dozens of conversations with many
Council member countries and with all of our donors,
and those conversations are going very well, if I may
say so. I suspect that we have more than half of what
we will need under the current negotiations, and we
have people in Rome - where we have our
headquarters - and, in fact, all over the world working
around the clock to put this package together.

The World Food Programme is a bit different in
that sometimes it can take two, three or four months
from the time a commitment is made until food is
purchased, transported and delivered to someone. So
timing is absolutely of the essence. But many countries
have made generous commitments; we now have
commitments from 11 countries. And I should say that
commitments come from countries that have very
different views of the conflict. One of our strengths has
been that we keep a narrow focus on humanitarian
issues. People may have one View or another of the
conflict, but no one wants human beings to starve,
especially very vulnerable people who are severely at
risk. So countries that have different views of the
conflict will be comfortable about helping us. Last
week, we had a tremendous commitment from
Germany to help. I had a wonderful two days in Berlin,
and I am profoundly grateful for that.

My friend from Angola raised a question about
the green revolution. I was saluting the Secretary-
General for raising that issue and making that
commitment. Worldwide, the trend is away from
investment in basic agricultural infrastructure: in 1988,
the world committed $14 billion to that programme;
last year, it committed $8 billion. Now there is some
good news: the United States and the United Kingdom
have both begun to turn their investments around in
this area. Last year, the United States committed $200
million more to investment in basic agricultural
infrastructure than it had the year before. So the trend
had been downward, but now there is a bit of hope that
it is beginning to head in the other direction.

With regard to the question concerning Ethiopia, I
am asked, "Jim, how can this happen again?" Well, our
investments had been made in emergency relief as
opposed to prevention and development, and I think we
are beginning to learn that lesson. We are working
closely with the FAO, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development and other organizations.

Concerning the question from the representative

of China, we have had a relationship with China for 40
years, and it is an extraordinary success story. China is
one of the great success stories in the world in terms of
letting the market function; hundreds of millions of
people there who were not fed years ago are now fed.
The agencies of the United Nations do work well
together; we cooperate on these issues, and the notion
of capacity for self-reliance is basic.

Mr. President, when I tried to address the
question of the representative of the United Kingdom, I
tried to answer your question as well, but we will
provide a thoughtful answer as to what the Council
could do to help us and how we could work more
closely together. I am grateful for the offer, and we will
try to provide a good answer.

