Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset, on behalf of the Kingdom of
Morocco, to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
You represent Gabon, a friendly and brotherly country
with which Morocco has historic warm, deep-rooted
and special relations at all levels. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your decision to
have the Council debate the important subject of the
impact of small arms and light weapons on security
and stability in Central Africa, a region close to our
hearts.

I also thank Ms. Megiro, Mr. Costa, Mr. Duarte
and Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their important
contributions.

The control of illicit arms trafficking is essential
to maintaining international peace and security. The
international community must therefore strive to
reinforce the existing international regime on
combating the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
small arms. This legal framework but must be
complemented by comprehensive and binding
international instruments. In that context, my country
believes that all regional and subregional policies to
address this problem would benefit from having a
robust international legal system to tackle the illegal
trade in these destructive weapons and to mark them in
order to ensure that the can be rapidly traced.

Of course, the establishment of such a legal
regime took a major step forward in 2001 with the
adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
in 2005 with the adoption of the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. The regime should now be enlarged
and consolidated to encompass illegal brokerage and to
limit effectively and efficiently the scale of the
uncontrolled circulation of those arms and its impact
on international and regional peace and security. Until
that regime is strengthened, Morocco believes that the
implementation of those instruments makes a crucial
contribution to limiting the disastrous effects of the
illicit traffic in small arms. Those efforts at the
international level will no doubt have a positive impact
on Africa overall, and on Central Africa in particular.

In that connection, despite its failure in 2006, the
Review Conference served to emphasize the broad
prevailing consensus on the importance and relevance
of the Programme of Action, which has made it an
essential point of reference for international action to
regulate the circulation of light weapons. Moreover,
based on that result, in 2008 the Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action was able to adopt a regional
approach to the implementation of the Programme. The
Conference also called for the convening of regional
meetings to harmonize efforts to implement the
Programme of Action, and acknowledged the
importance of international cooperation and assistance
for the effective implementation of that instrument. In
that context, the June 2010 Biennial Meeting will be an
important international gathering to consider the best
ways to implement the Programme of Action.

The efforts of the countries of Central Africa
should be recognized and supported. In that spirit, my
country encourages the initiatives undertaken by the
countries of the Central Africa to strengthen
confidence-building measures and to develop a binding
legal instrument and modalities for the control of these
weapons at the subregional level, with the support of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.

Moreover, the development in the context of the
Economic Community of Central African States of an
instrument similar to the Bamako, Nairobi and
Economic Community of West African States
conventions, declarations and protocols - aimed at
setting up a legal and institutional framework to call
upon the member States of the Central African
subregion to harmonize their positions and pool their
efforts to combat the traffic in light weapons - could
be a useful avenue to pursue.

To that end, of course, it is necessary to
strengthen the capacity of that subregional body to
clearly identify the specific problems and needs of
each member country. Moreover, it is necessary for the
international community to provide meaningful
support, including heightened assistance and
cooperation, to the countries of the region that request
it in order to allow them to confront the challenges
posed by the illicit traffic in light weapons.

It was altogether logical for Morocco to join,
from the outset, in the efforts of various countries that
led to the adoption, in June 2006, of the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development. That
initiative, whose relevance has been recognized by a
growing number of countries, was perfectly in line
with the efforts of the United Nations. In that regard,
strengthening the international partnership to allow
donor countries, development agencies and
disarmament bodies to integrate the issue of armed
violence into their programmes of action would make it
possible to orient existing strategies towards an
innovative and harmonized approach that is tailored to
each situation and geared around targeted goals to
address and prevent the underlying causes of armed
conflict and to mobilize and channel the necessary
development resources.

Addressing the problem of light weapons, whose
worrying impact also touches upon the serious global
threats posed by terrorism and transnational organized
crime, is of crucial importance today and underscores
the urgent need for the international community to
provide a global response. There is no doubt that this
type of debate in the Council contributes to
strengthening the efforts of the international
community in this area. We commend Gabon for its
initiative to organize it.
