Mr. Eler (Turkey): Allow me, at the outset, to
thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening this
timely debate.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I will now make some further remarks in my national
capacity.

Freedom of expression and of the media constitute
vital foundations for democracy, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. We must all ensure that that
freedom is upheld. Journalists and media professionals
carry out a particularly significant task in promptly
delivering accurate and credible information, often
from increasingly dangerous environments. In doing
so, they increasingly face risks of intimidation and
violence, especially in situations of armed conflict.

Regrettably, the growing threat to the safety of
journalists in conflict situations has manifested itself
in the form of killing, kidnapping and hostage-taking
by various actors. The abhorrent acts perpetrated
against journalists by terrorist organizations such as
Daesh portray the gravity of the challenge at hand.
Such acts systematically targeting journalists not only
deserve every condemnation, but must also lead us all
to take vigorous steps to prevent violence and promote
a safe environment for journalists and other media
professionals.

We believe that particular attention needs to be
paid to ensuring accountability for crimes committed
against journalists in armed conflicts. Impunity for
such crimes remains a paramount challenge that needs
to be addressed. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
of the United Nations, including the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity, led by UNESCO. The General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council have also focused on
that issue through the adoption of annual resolutions on
the safety of journalists and impunity. The initiatives
of the Council of Europe are also noteworthy in that
regard.

Peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as appropriate and relevant, could also play
an important role in international efforts to promote
and protect journalists and media professionals in
conflict situations. In that framework, monitoring and
reporting violations and abuses against journalists
could contribute to international endeavours to end
impunity.

Creating the necessary working environment for
journalists and ensuring their access and freedom of
movement are essential components for safeguarding
the delivery of credible information to local populations
as well as to the wider international community.
Turkey hosts a significant number of international
journalists covering conflict situations in our region.
We facilitate their activities by providing a safe
and secure environment in which to carry out their
work. As a matter of fact, media centres established
by Turkey close to some of its borders have enabled
international journalists and media professionals to
access information and to report without interruption
in a safe setting in close proximity to conflict zones.

Let me conclude by underscoring that the
international community should spare no effort to
address the disturbing trend of intimidation and
violence againstjournalists in conflict situations.

