Mr. Feltman: Once more, we meet today amid
reports ofa dangerous escalation ofthe crisis in Ukraine.
The 26 August official meeting between President
Putin and President Poroshenko, as well as a round of
multilateral talks, have quickly been overshadowed by
alarming new reports of intensified fighting in south-
eastern Ukraine.

This morning, Ukrainian President Poroshenko
asked the world "to pay attention to the sharply
worsening situation in Ukraine". We are here because
we are paying attention, but we must also find a
constructive way to urgently address the crisis, the
implications of which go far beyond Ukraine and the
region.

Illegal armed groups operating in the Donetsk
region have reportedly intensified their activities over
the past two days, spreading violence along Ukraine's
southern coast in the direction of the key strategic port
of Mariupol. It has further been reported that several
small towns and villages in the area are now in the
midst of heavy fighting, while the town of Novoazovsk
has been seized by the armed groups. The southward
spread of fighting, along the border with the Russian
Federation and the Sea of Azov, marks a dangerous
escalation in the conflict. The battle for Luhansk
continues, and hostilities in Donetsk in several key
strategic areas have been spreading.

We cannot ignore the deeply alarming reports
of Russian military involvement in this new wave of
escalation. lf confirmed, it would constitute a direct
contravention of international law and of the Charter
of the United Nations. The United Nations has no
independent means of verifying that information, and
the Russian Federation has staunchly rejected those
reports.

Today we have been in touch with Ambassador
Apakan, head of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission. He informed us that there is currently no
Special Monitoring Mission presence in Mariupol and
Novoazosk, although the OSCE is in the process of
deploying a team to those areas. That will be critical
as we seek factual information as to what precisely is
unfolding on the ground.

The situation on and around the border between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation is a particular
concern and remains a key obstacle to the de-escalation
of the situation on the ground, as arms and heavy
weaponry reportedly continue to flow unabated
into Ukraine from Russia. There is an urgent need
to ensure a secure border between the two countries
with international verification, as discussed in the
Minsk talks. In that regard, we take note of the recent
statement made by President Poroshenko that the first
bilateral consultations between the border guards of
Ukraine and the Russian Federation is scheduled for
Saturday, 30 August.

It is also critical that the elections announced for
26 October can take place throughout Ukraine and
become a unifying and reconciliatory mechanism that
will ensure that people throughout the country feel
represented in Kyiv.

Let me from quote the Secretary-General's
statement of earlier today:

"The international community cannot allow the
situation to escalate further, nor can a continuation
be allowed of the violence and destruction that the
conflict has wrought in eastern Ukraine".

The Secretary-General notes the recent multilateral
talks in Minsk on 26 August, as well as the first official
meeting between the Presidents of Ukraine and Russia.
He calls for continuity of those talks, with a view to
forging a peaceful way out of the conflict, based on
President Poroshenko's peace plan. All must do their
part to contribute to the peaceful resolution of this

conflict, in a manner that upholds Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

We have to redouble our efforts to resolve the
conflict in Ukraine. Lives have to be saved. Peace in
Ukraine means peace in the region and beyond.

The Secretary-General remains committed to
using his good offices to help resolve this crisis. We
will keep the Council informed of the collective efforts
of the Organization to help the Ukrainian people and
Government restore peace and stability to their country.

Last week, the Secretary-General sent me to
Kyiv to consult with Ukrainian officials on the way
forward. Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos,
whose visit overlapped with mine, discussed how
to bolster humanitarian efforts. In her field visit to
eastern Ukraine, she reported on impressive efforts by
the Ukrainian authorities to restore normalcy in areas
regained by the Government from the armed groups.
Currently, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights lvan Simonovie is in Ukraine, and the United
Nations country team remains engaged in working
with Ukrainian counterparts on humanitarian and
development issues. And we continue to coordinate
with other international partners, including the OSCE
and the Netherlands, on the aftermath of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.

But the immediate focus must be to find ways
to reverse the dangerous escalation of the fighting
that has occurred over the past 48 hours and to move
quickly away from armed conflict and towards political
solutions and dialogue.

