Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative to convene this open debate, which gives us
an opportunity to consider an issue of great importance:
inclusive development and the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
welcome the preparation of the concept note (S/2015/6, annex), which provides us the background information
for participating in this debate. We also thank the
Secreted-General, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Nobel Peace laureate Leymah Gbowee
for their briefings.

The Charter of the United Nations puts the
tasks of the Organization into three fundamental,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing categories:
ensuring international peace and security; achieving
development, which we now understand as sustainable
development; and promoting and protecting human
rights.

Many of today's armed conflicts have deep-
rooted structural causes, which in some cases have
been developing over a long period of time. There is
consensus among the international community on
the urgent need to address the deep-seated causes of
conflicts, including exclusion or discrimination on any
grounds, which generates instability and can therefore
become a factor for confrontation and violence.

In these times of increasing demands for political
and economic participation by groups that have been
historically excluded in different societies, there is
an urgent need to implement social and economic
inclusion policies to reduce inequalities and disparities
that generate dissatisfaction, as well as to create
the conditions for inclusive development with equal
opportunities. This is particularly important in societies
that are ethnically and culturally diverse, where there is
a greater risk of discrimination and exclusion. Cultural
diversity at the national and international levels require
governance structures that are based on recognizing
our differences and the value of those differences. On
the basis of that recognition, intercultural dialogue,
inclusive development and strengthening social
cohesion become possible.

Given this scenario, social inclusion policies make
it possible to build stable, fair and peaceful societies,
help to promote the enjoyment of and respect for
human rights, empower people by enabling their active
participation in the political, social and cultural life of
their country and, above all, they guarantee peace.

Peru is committed to building inclusive societies.
That is why my country promoted and facilitated General
Assembly resolution 66/122, entitled "Promoting social
integration through social inclusion", which calls upon
States to promote sustainable, inclusive and equitable
development, and to implement social inclusion
policies to combat inequality in our societies. We have
also promoted the theme of social inclusion in the
framework of the post-2015 agenda.

Peru believes that combating economic inequality
and social exclusion, promoting respect for the rule
of law, ensuring the full and effective enjoyment of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
individuals, and safeguarding and promoting cultural
diversity contribute to stability and social cohesion,
which in turn promotes a climate ofpeace. This holistic
View is reflected in the multidimensional mandates of
many of the peacekeeping operations established by the
Council. The work aimed at developing and restoring
the rule of law occupies an increasingly important
role in the mandate of those missions and promotes
the missions' working together with United Nations
agencies directly involved in development work.

The United Nations also supports the work of
inclusive development and social inclusion during the
peacebuilding process in post-conflict situations in
order to break once and for all the cycle of conflict
by directly attacking its root causes. In that regard, I
would stress the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in providing support to States that have suffered
from conflict, while always bearing in mind the
interdependence of security, inclusive development and
respect for human rights.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize Peru's
commitment to building inclusive societies, not only
domestically, but also at the international level. My
country will remain an active partner in building an
international community that promotes equitable
participation without any discrimination among
all States and in which international relations are
based on respect for national sovereignty, good faith,
international cooperation, respect for the rule of law
at the international level and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. The existence of an inclusive international
community will be the best guarantee for maintaining
peace and security.

