Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate New Zealand
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for all its efforts to ensure transparency
in the conduct the Council's work in July. I also thank
Malaysia for its similar efforts during its presidency
of the Security Council in June. I also welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq, Mr. Jan Kubis, head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I thank him and
all his team for all their efforts, particularly in the very
difficult circumstances currently facing Iraq.

Iraq attaches great importance to the work of
UNAMI. Once again, we reiterate the importance
of the key role played by the United Nations in its
support to the Government and the people of Iraq, and
in its efforts to foster democratic institutions, provide
support to refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), and promote human rights - including those of
young people, children and women - and judicial and
legal reforms in the country. We thank them for all that
broad-based support.

The Government of Iraq submitted to the Secretary-
General and the Security Council a letter calling for an
extension of UNAMI's mandate, in line with the wishes
of my country that the Mission's mandate be extended
until 31 July 2016, on the basis of the principles of
resolution 1770 (2007). We believe that it is important
for the Mission to continue to provide aid and advice to
the Government of Iraq in order to guarantee a dignified
life for the families of displaced persons in particular.

As we have in the past, we underscore once again
today the need to address terrorism and for international
cooperation to achieve that goal. Any procrastination
allows terrorist organizations to further infiltrate other
countries and regions, and to entrench their presence
in those areas where they are already operating. The
deplorable and tragic events that have taken place in
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Tunisia, Syria, France
and elsewhere attest to this. We would therefore like
to reiterate once again the importance of promoting
international cooperation and for States to honour
their commitments under resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2014), which condemn the activities
of Daesh and foreign terrorist fighters, and identify the
obligations and commitments of States in combating
terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and in cutting off the funds available to Daesh,
for example through oil funds and trafficking activities.

We therefore welcome the Additional Protocol to
the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, adopted by the Council of Europe on 19 May.
Our hope is that all the members of the Council of
Europe will move swiftly to implement the provisions
of the Additional Protocol and that they will duly enact
corresponding domestic legislation.
The Daesh attacks on cities and villages in the
provinces ofIraq have led to huge internal displacements;
more than 2 million Iraqis have had to flee Daesh
Violence. The Iraqi Government is working hard to
meet their needs and to create relevant mechanisms
to provide assistance to the Victims of Daesh attacks,
in particular the displaced and vulnerable persons,
such as women, children and members of ethnic and
religious minorities. We are also working hard to create
the conditions for a safe and secure environment to
allow the return of those displaced persons. The Iraqi
Council of Ministers has earmarked half a billion
dollars for support in meeting the needs of displaced
persons. We look forward to providing more according
to our ability.

We pay tribute to the role played by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which has been working closely with the Council of
Ministers and the Government of Iraq in supporting
IDPs and refugees. We are also grateful to the agencies
that have been working hard to ensure that humanitarian
aid is supplied to those in dire need.

We call on Member States to support the
humanitarian response plan for Iraq and to work
with the Government of Iraq to provide the necessary
assistance to victims who have endured the terrorist
scourge. We welcome the efforts of Member States and
their contributions to supporting humanitarian efforts
in Iraq thus far, which we hope will continue. We are
also very grateful to Japan, the United Arab Emirates,
the United States of America, Australia and Kuwait for
providing Iraq with human and humanitarian resources
to alleviate the humanitarian suffering, particular
that experienced by displaced persons in Iraq. The
Government of Iraq also thanks all members of the
international alliance and the European Union for all
their help in combating terrorism. We welcome their
military and logistical assistance in support of the
operations of the Iraqi security forces. We thank the
Security Council for its persistence in calling upon
the international community to provide the necessary
support to Iraq to combat Daesh and other armed
non-State groups affiliated it.

We call on the countries of the region to agree to
exert greater efforts and vigilance in combating the
terrorist threat and ensuring that we can extirpate it. We
reiterate terrorism can be effectively countered only if
we are persistent and unified. States and international
and regional organizations need to work together and
towards the same ends. That is the only way we can
effectively and efficiently tackle the terrorist scourge.
The efforts undertaken to tackle Daesh have been
supported by the Iraqi army and police, as well as by
members of the popular mobilization forces and the
tribes. That is proof of the courage of the Iraqi people
and their rejection of Daesh's occupation of their cities
and Villages. All of these people and groups have been
mobilized to support the efforts of the the international
forces that are already working hard to combat and
to extirpate those terrorist groups. We are working to
liberate Fallujah and Ramadi in a two-front. We believe
that this is proof of the power of the anti-terrorism
coalition.

Over the past few years, Iraq has made considerable
progress in the promotion of women's rights by adopting
various national strategies, policies and programmes
of action to that end. As for the fight against violence
against women, the promotion of women's rights and the
appointment of women to senior posts in Government
institutions, we have established a unit within the
Ministry of Human Rights to monitor and follow up
Violations of the rights of women in Iraq. We have also
rolled out a directorate for the promotion of women and
women's rights, which works at the level of the Council
of Ministers, and a number of gender-specific units
within various ministries and institutions. Today women
are seen as essential partners in the decision-making
process and we have appointed women to key posts in
State institutions. Women are also represented in the
Iraqi Parliament and in various decision-making posts
in ministries and State institutions.

Iraq faces challenges of great magnitude as a result
of the ferocious attacks carried out by terrorist groups
on major urban centres, markets, schools and hospitals.
In other words, they target civilians, including women
and children. The armed groups are also recruiting
children, which we are working hard to prevent. It is a
source of great concern. We are also working to address
the underlying causes of child recruitment. The Iraqi
penal and counter-terrorism codes lay out general rules
and regulations for sanctioning and punishing anyone
who recruits children as fighters or participants in
criminal terrorist activities.

There have been very positive developments
recently in the bilateral relations between Iraq and
Kuwait, as demonstrated by high-level Visits between
both countries aimed at promoting and encouraging
improved links between them. We are currently
discussing the establishment of an emergency fund to
support rebuilding and reconstruction in areas that have
been liberated from Daesh. The fourth joint ministerial
meeting between Iraq and Kuwait saw significant
progress in our bilateral relationships, including the
signing of memorandums of understanding promoting
cooperation in the areas of security, maritime issues
and trade links, all of which should have a very positive
effect on political, economic and other links between
us.

In the context of the importance we attach to
implementing resolution 2107 (2013), particularly
paragraph 4, which focuses on efforts to follow up
on missing Kuwaiti nationals and property, we have
set up various units within our Ministry for Human
Rights aimed, where necessary, at finding the grave
sites and exhuming the remains of Kuwaiti citizens.
Our efforts have also been supported by international
expertise. Iraq will continue to make every effort to
provide support for finding such disappeared Kuwaiti
nationals and to find witnesses who can provide us with
credible information on their possible burial sites so we
can exhume their remains. The Iraqi people understand
that the relatives of those who have disappeared are
suffering from not knowing the fate of their loved ones,
so we continue to make every possible effort to discover
the fate not only of Kuwaitis but also of the thousands
of Iraqis who lost their lives under the former regime,
in order to give their families closure.

Regarding the restitution of Kuwaiti property and
the Kuwaiti national archives, every three months
the Minister for Foreign Affairs has published
announcements in various journals, newspapers and
elsewhere in the press requesting information on
missing Kuwaiti nationals and goods. We believe
this to be a key humanitarian issue. We will pursue
our efforts to develop the capacity to streamline and
improve the process of searching for and investigating
missing persons and property. We welcome the support
of UNAMI in that regard and hope that it will continue
to provide the technical support and cooperation
necessary to improve Iraq's capacity in that area.
Also, we are continuing to work with Kuwait and with
specialized agencies of the United Nations to complete
the mapping of the border.

It is crucial that we find a way to deal with events
in Syria and end the carnage being endured by the
Syrian people. We must do whatever we can to find a
political solution that will satisfy the demands of all
parties to the conflict while preserving the country's
territorial integrity and unity, which can best be
reached by establishing assurances of non-interference
from outside Syria in its internal affairs. We must also
do all we can to cut off the flow of foreign fighters
into the country. We must find a solution that is fair to
all Syrians and that will enable them to pursue a life
of dignity in a democratic country, achieve national
reconciliation and deal with the armed groups in the
country. We believe that will have the added effect of
improving our fight against terrorism in Iraq, since
terrorism does not respect borders and can be found in
every region and country in the world.

We welcome the agreement on nuclear capacity just
signed in Vienna between the P-5+1 and Iran. Iraq is
making every effort to support them, as we have been
since they began working to find a peaceful solution to
the Iranian nuclear issue, and we look forward to giving
them our support in the future. Baghdad was one of the
cities hosting meetings of the P-5+1 and Iran, because
we were convinced of the importance of the meetings
for peace and security in the region as a whole. The
agreement is also another weapon in the arsenal that can
help us to end all possibility of war in the region. We
welcome the Council's unanimous adoption this week
of resolution 2231 (2015) in support of the agreement
and call for its implementation.

In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
Mr. Jan Kubis, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team for their tireless
efforts to provide information and advice and to support
displaced Iraqis, and for working with the UNAMI and
country teams to enable us to establish the capacity we I now invitc Council members to informal
need to implement our mandate. consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

