The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

First, I want to thank our briefers: Assistant
Secretary-General Titov, Assistant Secretary-General
Nakamitsu and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura for their very comprehensive
briefings. I must acknowledge that we have all been
greatly enriched by their perspectives on our very
important discussion this morning.

Our meeting today offers the Council an opportunity
to advance the enduring discourse on security sector
reform (SSR) and to explore ways of giving practical
and effective application to resolution 2151 (2014),
which provides a clear and common basis of guidance
for United Nations support to SSR. We believe that the
implementation ofthe resolution would benefit from a
prioritized plan of action that could form the basis of
periodic reports of the Secretary-General. That, in our
View, would allow the Council to monitor progress in
the implementation of the resolution. We are pleased
to note that there has been a steady increase in the
demand for SSR. Today, as we speak, the number of
Security Council resolutions that reference SSR stands
at 37. SSR has become more integral to peacekeeping
with a significant number of peacekeeping operations
supporting the reform of security institutions.

The Security Sector Reform Unit of the Office
of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, whose
Assistant Secretary-General we have just listened to
this morning, has been instrumental in the effort to
mainstream SSR. We want to commend the unit for
that important achievement. We also welcome the work
of the Office of Special Representative Bangura and
the Team of Experts in providing support to national
authorities, including in SSR processes. Indeed, the
United Nations Development Programme must also be
recognized, particularly as the co-chair of the United
Nations inter-agency Task Force on Security Sector
Reform, and its valuable contribution to advancing both
the rule of law and SSR.

The modest experience acquired so far indicates
that the quality and impact of United Nations support
to SSR depends on its coherence and effective
coordination within the United Nations and between
the United Nations and other stakeholders supporting
SSR processes. With the multiplicity of actors
supporting SSR in situations where national capacity
for coordination is often limited, it is imperative to
establish clarity of rules and division of labour among
those involved in the reform process.

That is why we encourage the concept of an SSR
compact among peace operations, international partners
and the host State, as espoused by Mr. Titov. Such a
compact would foster predictability, prevent duplication
and ensure mutual accountability and transparency in
the implementation of the United Nations mandate.
It would also strengthen the effectiveness of United
Nations assistance by setting out focused and time-bound
priorities, as well as provide an enabling framework for
partnership between international partners and host
Governments. In clarifying roles, it is important to
emphasize that States - as most speakers have noted
this morning - bear the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security within their borders.
States must continue to take the lead in determining
their own security sector priorities. That is the essence
and primacy of the idea of national ownership.

The global normative frameworks on SSR
expounded by the United Nations must be placed
within the specificity of the sociopolitical realities of
the particular country that is undergoing reform. In
that regard, the SSR policy framework of the African
Union, adopted only in 2013, aptly addresses the
complicity of the relationship between the former
security institutions of the State, on the one hand,
and the resilience of traditional and often informal
customary African security institutions, on the other.
The future viability of SSR in Africa will depend to a
large extent on how effectively we are able to balance
the relationship between the statutory formality and
customary informality of security institutions in Africa.

National efforts at ensuring security must take
into consideration regional and global threats to
security. That is more poignant in the current global
environment, where transnational threats increasingly
emanate essentially from non-State actors. In specific
terms, the link between national SSR processes
and various regional and global initiatives must be
emphasized at this point. The adoption of the African
Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform
provides opportunities for increasing cooperation with
the United Nations and other regional organizations.
In turn, the adoption of an Economic Community of
West African States SSR policy framework would
complement that process at the subregional level.

Several speakers before me this morning have
emphasized the need to remain cognizant of the
preventive dimension of security sector governance and
how that could promote peacebuilding.

I would like to say that Nigeria encourages
continued engagement with SSR on the part of other
United Nations organs, notably the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. We welcome
the attention the General Assembly accords to SSR-
related issues, especially under goal 16 ofthe post-2015
sustainable development agenda. That underscores
the important link between security and development.
It is our collective responsibility not only to guard,
guide and protect that nexus; we must cultivate their
symbiotic relationship as well.

It is gratifying to note that considerable progress
has been achieved in taking the SSR agenda forward.
But we believe that much more can and indeed must
be done to support SSR processes. In resolution 2151
(2014), we already have a platform for action. What
is needed now is for all hands to be on deck at the
global, regional and national levels. Only a collective,
collaborative and concerted effort will ensure our
success in this important endeavour.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 12.30p.m.
