Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for your kind words addressed
to me. I am pleased to be here today for this first
Security Council briefing in my capacity as Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

This briefing will focus on the situation in the
Abyei Area. The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/603), which provides an
exhaustive overview of the situation there in the past
two months. I plan to brief the Council on the most
recent developments relating to the security situation
on the ground as well as on the status of the
deployment of United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) and of political negotiations. I
will also present the recommendations of the
Secretary-General calling for a modification of the
UNISFA mandate aimed at incorporating the border-
monitoring mechanism established by the Sudan and
South Sudan. I will then respond to questions, should
there be any.
The security and humanitarian situation in the
region has remained unchanged since June 2011. The
humanitarian community continues to assist about
110,000 displaced persons in Agok and in Warrap
State, in South Sudan. Unfortunately, the delivery of
humanitarian aid remains hampered by flooding and by
restrictions on flight authorizations and security
clearances. The Sudanese Armed Forces (SAP) and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement are present in the
north and the south, respectively, of the Kiir/Bahr
el-Arab river. Although UNISFA has not observed any
significant movements across the river or skirmishes
between the two forces, tensions remain high.

Mines also remain a cause for concern, as was
made clear by the tragic deaths of four Ethiopian
soldiers on 2 August following a landmine explosion.
With respect to the human rights situation, as has been
reported earlier, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights deployed an
evaluation mission to Abyei to investigate allegations
of human rights abuses following the May hostilities.
However, the mission did not receive authorization to
go to Abyei.

A total of 1,780 UNISFA troops are currently
deployed on the ground, including a small contingent
in Kadugli, where, on 2 October, UNISFA took over
the logistics base that had been used by the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan. Military observers have
taken up positions in Abyei, Agok and Diffra. Liaison
officers have been designated for deployment to
Khartoum and Juba, and a small team is in place to
facilitate the mission's deployment. Since 23 August,
UNISFA has been patrolling the city of Abyei and
Agok, Diffra, Banton and Noon, as well as the main
roads. The mission has also undertaken patrols and air
reconnaissance operations. It has also undertaken
demining operations, pending the deployment of the
United Nations Mine Action Service. Preparations have
been made to repair the Banton bridge when weather
and road conditions improve. As Council members
know, the Banton bridge is a strategic point linking the
south and the north parts of the Abyei Area. It is
therefore essential for the return of displaced persons
and also for the delivery of supplies to UNISFA as well
as its operations.

We could say that the deployment of UNISFA is
an important success story given the many obstacles
the mission has faced: delays in the issuance of flight
authorizations and road access clearances, which have
11-53430
led to a shortage of fuel and rations, as well as delays
in the issuance of visas and residence permits; and, of
course, heavy rains.

We continue to address these problems so as to
deploy 900 additional troops by the end of October to
strengthen the mission before the migration of
Misseriya nomads. In order to enhance our cooperation
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan,
and in an attempt to resolve operational problems
related to the deployment of UNISFA, a consultative
mechanism has been established between the United
Nations and the Governments of Ethiopia, the Sudan
and South Sudan. This quadripartite consultative
mechanism held its first meeting on 26 September in
New York and was able to make progress in several
areas, including land allocation for deployment follow-
up, the opening of supply routes and demining. In
addition, I spoke with the State Minister of the Sudan
and received guarantees as concerns the issuance of
Visas.

(spoke in English)

Council members will recall that, under the terms
of the 20 June Agreement on temporary arrangements
for the administration and security of the Abyei Area,
all armed forces are to withdraw from the area, and
UNISFA is to provide the sole military presence in
Abyei. The withdrawal is essential to facilitate the
return of displaced persons, create conditions for a
peaceful Misseriya migration and build confidence
among the parties.

Following a lack of progress on the withdrawal of
armed forces in July and August, we were encouraged
when on 8 September the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee agreed on a timeline for the redeployment
of Sudan People's Liberation Army and SAP forces, at
a meeting facilitated by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, in Addis Ababa. The parties
agreed that the withdrawal would begin on
11 September and conclude by 30 September. In recent
weeks, the UNISFA Head of Mission, Lieutenant-
General Tesfay, has continued to engage the parties on
actions required to effect the spirit of the agreement.

Unfortunately, as of today UNISFA has not
observed significant progress on the withdrawal of
armed forces from the Abyei Area. A second meeting
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, scheduled for
15 and then 30 September, has been further postponed.
On 30 September, according to media reports, a
11-53430

Sudanese Armed Forces spokesperson stated that
Sudanese troops will remain in Abyei until UNISFA is
fully deployed. The Government of South Sudan
accused the Sudan of retaining its troops in order to
prevent the return of the displaced. The two parties
have yet to make further progress on the formation of
the Abyei Area administration, which has been stalled
by a disagreement on the chairmanship since early
July. In the context of UNISFA's role, a functioning
Abyei Area administration is also essential to the
establishment of the Abyei police service, which
UNISFA is mandated to support.

The lack of progress towards implementation of
the 20 June Agreement is of particular concern as we
approach the upcoming seasonal migration of the
Misseriya. Council members will recall that, due to a
number of political and security issues, last year's
migration through the Abyei corridor was blocked. In
this context, and given the violence of May this year
and the fact that the Misseriya will be traversing an
international border, we are concerned that this year's
migration will be more sensitive and a test of the
relationship between the two countries. It could
become a potential source of serious tensions in the
Abyei Area if armed forces remain in place and the
Ngok Dinka internally displaced persons are unable to
return before the end of the planting season, which has
already begun.

UNISFA is already being configured to provide
support, within its capacities, for a peaceful migration
and the protection of civilians, but the mission's best
efforts cannot compensate for the progress urgently
needed on the political track. The parties must
therefore redouble their commitments to withdrawing
their armed forces, establishing the joint administration
and allowing recovery and reconciliation efforts in
Abyei to begin.

Council members will recall that on 30 July, the
Sudan and South Sudan signed the latest in a series of
agreements on the border, recommitting themselves to
the establishment of a border monitoring mechanism
and envisaging a key supporting role for UNISFA. In
line with this Agreement, Lieutenant General Tesfay
conducted a reconnaissance mission with both parties
in early August, to define the possible structure and
modalities of a border monitoring support mission. The
results were discussed during a meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism on 18 September,
under the chairmanship of President Thabo Mbeki.
3
While that meeting did not deliver a formal agreement
on all the technical details, it was held in a constructive
atmosphere, and we hope that the locations of the team
sites and mission headquarters will be formalized at the
next meeting, which will take place in Juba on
18 October.

On the basis of these positive developments, the
Secretary-General has proposed an amendment of
UNISFA's mandate to incorporate support for the
border monitoring mechanism and implementation of
the parties' security commitments along the border,
under a Chapter VI mandate. As laid out in detail in the
report, UNISFA's new tasks would include support for
the operational activities of the parties along the safe
demilitarized border zone, such as verification,
investigations, monitoring, arbitration, coordination,
information exchange and patrols, as well as the
maintenance of charts and maps, liaison between the
parties and support for capacity-building for effective
bilateral management mechanisms along the border.
We propose that this be achieved within the existing
troop strength of 4,200 military personnel.

Our proposal envisages the reconfiguration of
UNISFA into two pillars with separate and distinct sets
of tasks, albeit of course under a common leadership
and management structure. The new pillar would
comprise a dedicated capacity of 297 force protection,
90 military observers - subject to a final agreement
between the parties on the number of team sites - and
146 enabling elements for support to the border
mechanism. These elements would be deployed into
four joint border verification and monitoring sectors,
each comprising a sector headquarters and up to 10
permanent joint border verification monitoring teams
composed of personnel from the Sudan, South Sudan
and UNISFA, under a UNISFA lead. The mission
would avail of existing operating bases, assets,
infrastructure and supply routes established by the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan and UNISFA.

In order for UNISFA to deliver this support to the
border mechanism, a number of conditions must be in
place. First, it is critical that the parties continue to
move forward to formalize the technical arrangements
of the border mechanism, including the locations of the
team sites and headquarters. Secondly, UNISFA must
have the full support of the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan, including unrestricted freedom of
movement by air and land and full cooperation for the
deployment of the mission's remaining troops. Thirdly,
given the fact that the border is 2,100 kilometres long,
and due to limited road infrastructure, UNISFA will
also require additional air assets, including four utility
helicopters and two specialized reconnaissance fixed-
wing aircraft. I urge the Council to work with the
parties to ensure that the conditions for successful
implementation of the mandate are in place.

The two Governments have shown that they can
come together to make progress, most recently in
relation to the border. International engagement
towards the implementation of existing commitments is
therefore essential to building trust and fostering an
environment conducive to the negotiation on the final
status of Abyei. It is in this spirit that I would
encourage the Council first, to authorize UNISFA
support for the establishment of the border monitoring
mechanism, and secondly, to engage the parties on the
withdrawal of their forces from Abyei so as to enable
internally displaced persons to return and ensure a
peaceful migration in order to prevent a serious
deterioration of the situation in the coming months.

(Spoke in French)

In closing, I would like to thank the Government
of Ethiopia for its commitment to UNISFA and to its
troops for their proactive efforts to deploy and to start
implementing the mandate in very challenging
circumstances.

