Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let
me begin by joining colleagues and expressing our
deepest condolences in connection with the passing
away of the Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Lieutenant General
Jose Luiz Jaborandy, Jr. I know that his presence and
leadership will be greatly missed by all who knew and
worked with him in the Mission.

In the approximately 70 years since the Security
Council was first created, we and our predecessors before
us have convened in various forums focused on various
vulnerable populations impacted by conflict - children
and armed conflict, women and peace and security.
We have also taken action by adopting products aimed
at protecting things - important cultural artifacts
endangered by conflict in general, and the barbarity
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in particular. Even as we have acted to respond to
ISIL's barbaric attacks on some of our civilization's
great cultural artifacts, we had not acknowledged
ISIL's gruesome targeting of people it perceived to
be different, people it perceived to be gay. Last week
that changed. If ancient relics deserve our focus - and
they do - certainly so too do vulnerable populations
being specifically targeted for stoning, torture and
execution in conflict. This is not a cause of the West or
a campaign ofthe left. To advance the protection of the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT)
persons in conflict is to live up to our obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations. To borrow the recent
words of the highest court of this country, "the nature
of injustice is that we may not always see it in our own
times".

Fighting the injustice of human rights abuse is a
cause to which all of our nations have committed. It
is now time for us to both recognize what that means
in its entirety and to champion it. The founders of the
Organization envisioned - indeed, mandated - that
the United Nations, in the words of the Charter, "be
determined to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person".
Last week, by convening, with Chile, the first discussion
of the Security Council under the Arria Formula on
ISIL's targeting of LGBT persons, we collectively
took an important step towards realizing the Charter's
ambition and living up to our responsibilities to stand
up for those who are vulnerable in conflict. The first
step of doing so is being willing to speak openly about
it. Last week we began that important conversation.

This month wejoined United Nations Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura and Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien in condemning the Al-Assad's
regime's deadly air strikes against a market in Duma,
a suburb of Damascus, one that came almost two years
to the day after the regime used chemical weapons in
the same area. The latest attack was appropriately the
subject of the Council's focus, and the latest victims
joined of thousands of innocent Syrians who have been
killed by the Al-Assad regime's deliberate targeting
of civilian areas, including mosques, schools and
hospitals.

In South Sudan, we have worked together to ensure
that a peace agreement was signed by the relevant
parties in support of the regional efforts made in that
regard. We heard from the Deputy Secretary-General,
to whom we express our gratitude for his leadership,
and we worked to ensure that all actors were well aware
of what the Council was prepared to do if progress on
advancing peace was not made.

On 26 August, due to the unified message of
the international community, including the Security
Council, a peace agreement the South Sudanese have
been seeking for more than 20 months was finally
signed. That, in and of itself, is not enough. Now
begins the hard work of implementing the agreement.
The Security Council must maintain the unity we
have demonstrated on this issue over these past weeks
and ensure that all the parties know there is only one
path ahead, namely, the full implementation of the
agreement that has been signed. Any derogation from
this path must be met with a resolute and firm response.
That is how we can collectively and best support this
young nation at this critical time, as it has the chance to
walk away from a bloody war.

This month we have also been confronted by
multiple horrific reports of sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers sent to protect some of the
world's most vulnerable people. Those reports require
us to grapple with the shortcomings in how the
Organization and some of its Members deal with the
problem. If zero tolerance is to mean anything, we have
to change our tolerance for the results of our collective
efforts thus far. There is clearly much more that needs
to be done, and done urgently.

In Burundi, the United States continues to express
its deep concern about the absence of any meaningful
dialogue. The Government of Burundi continues to
dangerously frustrate restarting an open, comprehensive
dialogue. This rejection of talks, coupled with the
Government's obstructions of the activities of the
African Union human rights and disarmament monitors
and its divisive rhetoric, is extremely dangerous.
It is time for the Government of Burundi to actively
de-escalate the rhetoric and begin to advance peace
through dialogue. The parties concerned, including the
East African Community, agree that an inclusive and
comprehensive political dialogue is the only credible
route to re-establishing peace and stability in Burundi.

I would like to thank you, Madam President, and
your delegation for convening the 13 August briefing
on Ebola (see S/PV.7502). The United States welcomes
the collective efforts of the region and beyond to
combat Ebola and its ongoing impact on communities
across West Africa. We remain committed to getting to,
and staying at, zero, as well as to helping the affected
Governments rebuild and recover. We were especially
moved by the briefing of Liberian epidemiologist and
community activist, Dr. Mosoka Fallah, who spoke
about the compassion and determination with which
ordinary Liberians confronted the Ebola Virus head on.

Finally, I would like to thank the Nigerian delegation
for its leadership of the Security Council this month.
Madam President, by my team's count, this is your fourth
time at the helm of the Security Council. One would
have to go back to former Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright's tenure as the United States Permanent
Representative to find a Permanent Representative who
has overseen the Council's operations as many times
as you have yourself. We have benefitted from that
wisdom and experience and we thank you, Madam, and
the Nigerian delegation, for your leadership.

