Ms. Keltosova (Slovakia): Allow me to express, on
behalf of the delegation of Slovakia, my appreciation for
the convening of this meeting on such a timely and urgent
subject. I sincerely welcome the initiative to organize an
open debate on children in armed conflict, something that
is taking place in the Security Council for the first time.
Slovakia fully supports and has aligned itself with the
statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union. Let me now
briefly touch upon several aspects of the issue before us
which are of particular importance to my country.

It is our moral duty to make every effort to prevent
all forms of abuse of children and to seek effective
measures for the protection of children. Children are the
fragile wealth of mankind, as well as of every nation and
every human being. Their well-being is not the internal
matter of any single country. The abuse of children in
armed conflicts, and particularly their recruitment and use
in hostilities, not only prove the low moral and ethical
profile of the persons responsible for these activities but

 

also constitute a serious breach of international law. Despite
the efforts made by the international community through the
adoption in November 1989 of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, negative phenomena persist in a
number of countries. Many post-cold-war conflicts have
taken the form of internal factional violence, civil strife and
ethnic clashes that have significant external repercussions
and disastrous humanitarian implications. They are using
more sophisticated and brutal weapons and fighting
methods, and affecting growing number of civilians,
particularly children, who are the most vulnerable target in
a conflict-torn society and who are unable to protect
themselves.

Clearly, there is a need to update existing legal
instruments in order to reflect the altered nature of a threat
and to strengthen human rights standards in this respect.
Therefore, Slovakia supports and welcomes the results
achieved so far by the working group of the Commission
on Human Rights on a draft optional protocol to the
Convention,on the Rights of the Child, regarding the
involvement of children in armed conflict. This effort
should bring about more specific guidelines for the
implementation of articles 38 and 39 of the Convention. We
hope that the draft optional protocol will be completed
expeditiously and will create a sufficient legal framework
to prevent the abuse of children in armed conflict.

A legal instrument, no matter how brilliant, is only a
piece of paper without an efficient monitoring and
enforcement mechanism. Governments should not only be
encouraged to ratify relevant international treaties and
incorporate them into national law; they should also ensure
full implementations of commitments they have undertaken
and bring to justice persons responsible for illegally
recruiting children. Moreover, efforts to protect the rights
of the child should not ignore the position of children in a
conflict-torn society in a broader social and economic
context. In programmes for children, particular attention
should be paid to those separated from or without families,
to other marginalized groups, to economically and socially
deprived children and to the demobilization of child soldiers
and their reintegration into society. Protection of the family
environment, ensuring access to health care, food and
education, the need to preserve a child's cultural
environment as well as the need to ensure humanitarian
access to children in situations of armed conflict also
deserve our attention. I cannot but underline the role of the
relevant programmes, funds and agencies of the United
Nations system - which should be further strengthened -
in coordination with the activities of non-governmental and
humanitarian organizations involved in this area.

Slovakia recognizes the importance of the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. The recommendations of
the Special Representative, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, by
whose presence we are honoured today, deserve our full
attention. As a growing number of armed conflicts with
the direct participation of children have occurred in recent
years, we have to solve this painful and shameful issue
together.

Slovakia is a party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and fully lives up to commitments stemming
from the Convention. We devote special attention to all
necessary measures to protect children against any
physical and mental violence, offence or misuse. In
Slovakia, legal, financial and institutional conditions have
been created for this purpose, whether on the State level
or through State support to non-governmental
organizations, civic associations and foundations involved
in activities aimed at the protection of children and youth,
along with the local authorities and police and military
forces. A good basis has been established for the effective
protection of children and young people against any kind
of abuse, and we intend to develop it further. Slovakia is
ready to cooperate on the international level in this area,
and to contribute to achieving the common goals of the
international community in the name of humanity and
progress.

