We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths; the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock; the Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme, David Beasley; and the Founder and Executive Director of Solutions for Sustainable Society, Omer Badokhon, for their briefings. South Africa continues to support Special Envoy Griffiths in his quest for a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen, despite the continuing violence and the unyielding coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We would like to reiterate that the tragic humanitarian situation in Yemen, deepened by the COVID-19 pandemic, is inextricably linked to the political impasse. As such, our intervention will focus on these two elements, namely, the humanitarian situation and the political situation. On the humanitarian front, South Africa continues to express concern regarding the devastating effect on the people of Yemen, in particular women, children, older persons, internally displaced persons and those with disabilities. South Africa remains dismayed at the fact that the escalating violence is aggravating the widespread man-made hunger crisis in Yemen, a grim reality in which two thirds of the population is confronted with food insecurity. Acute malnutrition rates among children under 5 are the highest ever recorded in the southern districts, which is home to 1.4 million children. Hard-won gains are being lost as the escalating conflict and economic decline, coupled with the overwhelming impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, have pushed an already exhausted population to the brink. South Africa urges all authorities in various governorates to agree to a unified set of measures to counter the spread of COVID-19 in Yemen. South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to improve the delivery of humanitarian aid and provide impetus to the overall political negotiations to end the war in Yemen and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. The conflict is not only affecting the people and the nation of Yemen but is also having a negative impact on all neighbouring States and the greater region. It is in the interest of all Yemenis and all citizens of the region that the conflict be brought to an end. We continue to stress the importance for all parties to abide by their obligations and responsibilities under international humanitarian law and _ international human rights law and to take all measures necessary to end and prevent violations against civilians. The report of the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen (A/HRC/45/6) highlights the dangers of the parties opting for military solutions above political negotiations and dialogue, which have the greatest potential for the development of peaceful long-term solutions. On the political impasse, South Africa remains concerned that the continued fighting, with several cross-border attacks, air strikes and gun battles in Al-Hudaydah and several other cities, threatens to halt the overdue peace process and deepen the world's worst humanitarian catastrophe. We further call on all parties to show a willingness to compromise and not to be set on gaining absolute positions. After five years, it is clear that there can be no military solution and that both sides should seek to compromise in order to secure a negotiated political settlement. South Africa calls on all parties to engage with Special Envoy Griffiths in good faith and without preconditions in order to reach a comprehensive negotiated settlement to end the conflict, and that this be done in parallel with continued efforts to implement the agreements made in Stockholm and Riyadh. South Africa commends the progress made under the Stockholm Agreement in October, when part of the prisoner-swap agreement was implemented and applauds the parties for their success in this regard. This is a valuable confidence-building measure that could move the parties closer to a negotiated settlement and provide impetus towards the much-anticipated implementation of the Hodeidah Agreement and the statement of understanding on Taiz. South Africa urges all parties involved in Yemen to conclude the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker by allowing for critical repairs that would avert a human- made disaster in the Red Sea, including the removal of the oil from the vessel, in order for it to undergo substantial repairs. We urge all parties to the conflict to display a willingness to resolve this matter and remove this pending environmental disaster from the Red Sea. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only solution to the conflict in Yemen is an inclusive Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political settlement that delivers on the hopes of the Yemeni people for a strong economic and political future. In this context, we also call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of an inclusive political process.
