Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My statement is in line with that to be
delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

The participation of a large number of high-level
speakers in this debate is ample testimony to the critical
and major importance of the item under discussion.
We therefore thank His Excellency Mr. Miguel Vargas
Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic, and his delegation for convening
this debate to address the worrisome topic ofthe impact
of climate-related natural disasters on the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Likewise, we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Mr. Achim Steiner, Mr. Pavel Kabat and Ms. Lindsay
Getschel for their participation and excellent briefings,
which provided the Chamber with all the information
necessary to address this issue.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is aware that
climate change is a phenomenon of global dimension
whose effects pose a direct and obvious threat to the
existence of humankind. In that context, it is one of the
biggest challenges we face in the coming decades. In
that regard, our delegation considers this phenomenon
to be not only an environmental issue, but also a cross-
cutting matter that affects many areas, including
the economy and international peace and security,
among others. It not a direct cause in and of itself, but
its environmental aspect is a multiplier of the threat
posed by its cross-cutting nature, as we can understand
from the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change.

It can be deduced from the same report that
the effects of climate change are more evident and
pronounced in the most vulnerable places, such as
island States, countries in conflict or those that do
not have adequate resources to address the problem.
Therefore, we believe that one measure to address
this phenomenon is the promotion of policies designed
to promote development and eradicate poverty; to
establish a system of assistance and global cooperation
on environmental issues so as to ensure the efficient and
sustainable management of natural resources linked to
a sustainable political, economic and social system that
also and above all benefits the most vulnerable areas
and with less resources; and to create strategies for
the fight against climate change that can be applied
nationally and globally.

In this regard, we believe that the United Nations
should play a relevant role in the early and effective
creation and implementation of such measures by,
inter alia, providing the technical, legal and political
assistance necessary to prevent, combat or resolve
crises caused by the adverse effects of climate change.
We are interested in the Council's views on the
expansion of conflicts, which requires it to play a role
in raising awareness of the issue and to be the driver of
related measures.

Africa is probably the continent most vulnerable
to climate change, as the effects of climate change are
having an impact on peace and security. Despite the
fact that it is one of the regions that produces the least
greenhouse gases, Africa continues to strengthen its
efforts to work towards the implementation of measures
aimed at sustainable development, translating them into
long-term climate actions based on national processes
and that are in keeping with the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union's Agenda 2063.

At the national level, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea has no doubt whatsoever about the reliability
of the data clearly showing an alarming rise in global
temperature, which will have sweeping negative
consequences, including in terms of access to potable
water, reduced agricultural productivity, loss of
livelihoods and migration. That is why our Government
has adopted a series of measures aimed at mitigating
the threat of climate change and integrated them into
policies and planning processes at the national, regional
and local levels. It is also implementing risk-reduction
strategies and adaptation measures and strengthening
technical capacity in order to tackle climate change
risks and manage the areas most affected.

All of this clearly shows the iron-clad commitment
of the African continent to the struggle against climate
change, a threat that, generally speaking, affects the
entire planet and requires joint, multilateral and early
action to be taken by all without exception involving
a series of globally agreed, transparent and effective
measures that guarantee a future for coming generations.

We must take into account the fact that no State can
grapple with this phenomenon without the necessary
tools and resources. That is why it is important to stress
the aspect of cooperation and unity in this regard. Joint
action is necessary, especially in the most polluting
countries, or the response to climate change will not
be effective.

I wish to say in conclusion that the world already
has the necessary tools to face this threat. Now all it
needs is unwavering political determination to begin
the fight and address this phenomenon.

