Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I warmly welcome President
Benjamin Mkapa and thank him for today's briefing
and for his important work at the head of the Secretary-
General's Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan. I ask
him to kindly convey our appreciation to his fellow
panellists as well.

I note with appreciation the statements made by
Minister Mutrif Siddiq and Mr. Pagan Amum and
extend my thanks to Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his detailed and comprehensive briefing.

We welcome the recent positive developments in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) The voter registration for the
Southern Sudan referendum has been completed in a
peaceful manner and seems to have reached a
substantial portion of Southern Sudanese voters.

Statements and efforts have been made and are
being made by both sides to prevent the use of force to
settle disputes between them, including an agreement
to employ Joint Integrated Units in the protection of oil
fields. Although slow, negotiations on post-referendum
issues are progressing, and the CPA parties seem to
remain engaged in them.

However, there remain important concerns, such
as insufficient funding for the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, the recent instability in the
north of Bahr el Ghazal and the mounting tensions in
Abyei.

In Darfur, there are also reasons for concern. It is
worrisome, for instance, that the Darfur Peace
Agreement has been further eroded with the resumption
of hostilities between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Mini Minawi. Also to be
lamented are the continued hostilities between other
parties, as well as restrictions to humanitarian access.
Those and other concerns must be urgently and
properly addressed by the parties, so that the referenda
can take place in an atmosphere where there is at least a
minimum level of political and security stability.

We are confident that the Sudanese leadership
will rise to the challenge of navigating the difficult
waters of the coming weeks and bringing Sudan safely
ashore. That requires, first and foremost, that all
possible measures be taken to hold a timely, free and
fair referendum in Southern Sudan and implement its
results. That is the foundation for sustainable peace in
Sudan and is therefore indispensable.

Also key is to find a peaceful solution for Abyei.
We call on the parties to show maximum flexibility and
statesmanship in addressing the issue.

Ensuring the safety and respecting the rights of
minorities in the North and the South is of utmost
importance. The people of Sudan have the right to
safety and peace.

Lastly, the parties will need patience and courage
to successfully negotiate a number of key post-
referendum arrangements.

In all those demanding tasks, the United Nations
role is an important one. We hope that all Sudanese
parties will continue to cooperate with this
Organization. The partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is also crucial. We
reiterate our support for the work of the AU High-
Level Implementation Panel.

As this is probably the last time the Council will
meet in the presence of the CPA parties before the
referendum, I hope those central messages will be
heeded and fully taken into account when they make
decisions in the next weeks that will shape the future of
Sudan and the subregion. We are confident that they
fully understand their important responsibility and are
willing and able to play their historic role as
peacemakers.

