Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, we
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. Portugal welcomes the opportunity to
participate once again in the Council's deliberations. I
extend to President Jose Ramos-Horta a very cordial
and warm greeting. I thank him for his presence here
today and for his laudable efforts for the cause of
peace, reconciliation, democracy and development in
Timor-Leste. We are very happy to see him fully
recovered.

Portugal, naturally, concurs with the statement
delivered by the presidency of the European Union.
However, as a representative of a country that has had
a shared history with Timor-Leste for nearly 500 years,
I should like to raise some points in my national
capacity.

Portugal praises the encouraging advances
achieved over the past year in Timor-Leste. The leaders
and the people of Timor-Leste have made remarkable
progress in overcoming the most visible reminders of
the 2006 crisis. The majority of the internally displaced
persons have returned to their homes, the petitioners of
the Falintil-Forcas Armadas de Defesa Timor-Leste
have been reintegrated into civilian life and the
continuing stable security environment is a credit to
Timor-Leste's determination to create conditions
conducive to long-term peace, stability and
development.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and all the staff of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) for their tireless work. UNMIT continues to
play a critical role in assisting Timor-Leste, and we
fully support a decision by the Council to extend its
mandate for an additional period of 12 months at the
Mission's current composition and strength.

Portugal recognizes the underlying challenges
still to be met: poverty and unemployment, urban
centres struggling with migration and the lack of an
effective land and property regime, along with a
judicial system that needs to be strengthened and
security institutions requiring further capacity and
training.

Dialogue is central to addressing those issues, as
it is to ensuring unity of effort, if not broad consensus,
in matters of national concern. Portugal is encouraged
by the efforts of President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmao in that regard and urges all major
Timorese political groupings to pursue a constructive
political dialogue, thus helping to meet the country's
challenges.

Along with others, Portugal considers that long-
term security and stability will depend on the capacity
of the Timorese security institutions to function in an
effective, responsible and accountable way, with due
respect for the rule of law and benefiting from public
confidence and support. Further efforts are needed to
ensure a clear articulation of strategies and plans
within and across State institutions. A clear vision of
the relationship between the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa
de Timor-Leste and the national police is crucial. Also,
we share the view that additional steps should be taken
to facilitate the coordination of the international
community's support, including that of bilateral
partners.

Portugal encourages the Government of Timor-
Leste to continue working with UNMIT on the process
of the resumption of police executive responsibilities.
Portugal fully agrees with the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/72)
on the need for a continued robust UNMIT police
presence across the country, both to support the
handover of responsibilities and to help guarantee
public security while that process is under way. We
note that the challenges facing the police in Timor-
Leste should not be underestimated and will take
several years to address. The resumption of
responsibilities by the national institution is only one
step, albeit an important one, but also one that marks
the beginning of a new phase for which the
commitment of the Government and the support of the
international community will prove essential.

Portugal also welcomes the Government's
commitment to obtain an independent assessment of
the needs of the judicial sector. We are ready to
support, with other partners, all efforts to achieve
national ownership of the entire rule of law system.

I would like to assure the Council that Portugal
remains deeply engaged in supporting Timor-Leste in
its efforts to consolidate democracy and development,
both as a sister-country within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and as a major
development partner of my country in a number of
significant areas.

