Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Sir, as your presidency
of the Council comes to an end, I wish to express the

full esteem and appreciation of my delegation for the
skilful manner in which you have steered the Security
Council's debates during the month of March. I would
also like to thank you for giving me the opportunity
to take the floor before the Council at this meeting
regarding the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

My delegation is duty-bound to welcome
the presence of His Excellency, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and East African Cooperation of the
United Republic of Tanzania. I highly appreciate
his participation in this meeting. I thank him for his
personal support to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which he has provided on behalf of his country
and on behalf of the States of the Southern African
Development Community.

Finally, I want to convey to the Council the gratitude
of the Congolese people for the efforts undertaken
over the past few years by the United Nations, which
continues to seek to restore peace and stability in
my country.

Before continuing, allow me to share the sorrow of
my Government and to convey to the Governments of
the United States of America and of Sweden, as well
as to the United Nations, in particular the Secretary-
General, the Security Council and the group of experts
on the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, its feelings of
profound sadness following the death of the two United
Nations experts in the province of Kasa'1' Central. My
Government, which conveys its profound condolences
to their families and to their loved ones, deeply regrets
the deaths of these experts, who for many years were
committed to the cause of my country and who died
while trying to help it to restore peace. My country
is committed to pursuing the investigations already
launched to shed light on the tragic circumstances
of their death and to identify the perpetrators of that
heinous act, as well as to exact the necessary punishment
against them.

My delegation takes note of resolution 2348
(2017) just adopted. We thank you, Sir, once more for
your commitment to the cause of our country. That
commitment is reflected in the firm willingness of the
United Nations to spare no effort in putting an end to the
situation prevailing in the east of my country, which, as
is known, has caused millions of deaths and remains at
the heart of the many abuses from which the population
in that part of the country continues to suffer. It is in
that spirit that my delegation welcomes with satisfaction
the renewal of the mandate of MONUSCO, as well as
the arrangements made to improve its effectiveness, in
particular for the Force Intervention Brigade.

My delegation hopes - as was also highlighted
by the Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country, Mr. Le'onard She Okitundu,
before the Council - that the implementation of this
mandate will reflect the expectations of the Congolese
people and will be conducted effectively so as to allow
us to achieve the goals assigned thereto, and to allow
for the swift restoration of peace in my country.

However, my delegation is somewhat concerned
by the failure to take into account among the
strategic priorities of the new MONUSCO mandate,
certain important sectors - such as disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration,
as well as security and justice sector reform. The
implementation of those sectors has been deferred
until after the elections. With respect to disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration, our
concern is based on the belief that this process should
go hand in hand with eradicating armed groups. We
think that by intensifying operations to eradicate
armed groups, this process could have provided greater
encouragement to combatants in the two groups to lay
down their weapons and to receive the guidance that
would facilitate their reintegration into society.

Along similar lines, in this important phase the
success ofsecurity and justice sector reform could have
been promoted by the restoration of the rule of law in
troubled areas and the vital support of MONUSCO.
However, the Government will do its utmost to safeguard
the gains achieved together in that sector by ensuring
their implementation. Moreover, my Government
reassures the Council of its determination to complete
the investigations launched by the high court to shed
light on the recent events in Kasa'i Central.

Before closing this chapter, my delegation would
be grateful to the translation services to make the
corrections necessary to bring the French version of the
text of the resolution in line with the English-language
original, in particular as concerns paragraph 10.

My Government takes note of the downsizing of
the MONUSCO contingent by 3,600 Blue Helmets,
and will continue its strategic dialogue with the United
Nations and international and regional partners in
order to determine the schedule leading to the orderly
and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Allow me to come back to two points that we
think are important and that we think deserve greater
attention. I will begin with the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO). As we know, CENCO
received a mandate from His Excellency, Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic, to carry
out good offices with the political class and the civil
society of our country to reach a consensus with a view
to peaceful elections. Its mandate came to an end three
days ago, as the CENCO reported the results of its
mission to the President.

With regard to objectives of the CENCO mission,
as the Council has surely learned, in spite of the
efforts of many the parties were unable to agree on
two main points of discord and thus did not sign the
specific arrangements, which would have culminated
in an agreement on 31 December 2016. The two points
of discord are related to the methods by which the
Prime Minister is appointed, as well as to the origin
and appointment by consensus of an individual to
chair the national council for the monitoring of the
agreement, following the death of Mr. Tshisekedi.
In spite of the points of discord, CENCO has made
suggestions to which the Head of State has pledged his
full commitment.

For the President, the current deadlock should
not be viewed as a failure; talks will continue with a
view to taking the most appropriate steps at the earliest
opportunity to implement the 13 December 2016
agreement. The Head of State has thus acknowledged
that the Prime Minister should be a member of the
opposition, which is not a signatory of the 18 October
2016 agreement, and in particular ofthe Rassemblement,
and has called on the parties to select by consensus a
chairperson of the Council of Elders. Because he is
in charge of ensuring that the country's institutions
function effectively, the President will address the
nation in both houses of Parliament, in accordance with
article 77 of the Constitution.

The second point of discord is related to the
combatants of the Sudan People's Liberation
Army in opposition in our country. My delegation
cannot understand the reasons for the Council's
procrastination on that issue. The Council was given
detailed information about the situation involving those
combatants, for which MONUSCO alone is responsible
because it brought them into our country. That is why
my Government, drawing on past experience, continues
to ask the Security Council to take the steps necessary
to remove those combatants from our country, return
them to their home or find a suitable third country to
host them.

The Council is well aware that, at that time, the
international community had asked my country's
Government to open a humanitarian corridor to allow
Rwandans fleeing their country during the genocide
into our territory. Today, resolving the controversial
matter involving the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR) - a situation that the international
community created and for which it should assume
responsibility - is a burden borne by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As the Council knows, that
situation is not only responsible for instability in the
east of my country, but it has also claimed the lives
of more than 6 million of our fellow citizens. In the
quest for a solution to the issue of the South Sudanese
combatants, resolution 2348 (2017) should have put the
United Nations at the forefront of that endeavour, rather
than the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Before I conclude my statement, Iwould like to point
out that the countries of the region that bear witness to
the recurring conflict in the east of my country do not
understand why, after so many years in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has been unable to
put an end to the conflict situation. Those countries not
only work together; they have also brought that concern
to the attention of the United Nations. This time, they
would like MONUSCO's mandate to yield results and
restore peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, as recommended by the framework agreement,
allow them to live harmoniously in peace and to begin
development projects that foster regional integration.

I would like to end on that note and, on behalf of
my Government, warmly thank all MONUSCO troop-
contributing countries - in particular the Intervention
Brigade - for the many sacrifices they make daily to
allow peace to be restored in my country. Once again,
on behalf of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
would like to profusely thank all of the members of the
Security Council.

