Let me first of all extend a very warm welcome to Her Excellency the Foreign Minister of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. Let me also thank our two briefers for their very insightful and comprehensive briefings. With regard to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, we very much welcome the Colombian Government's commitment to ensuring the continued implementation of peace-related programmes in this difficult context. We also welcome the swift manner in which the Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtin (FARC) have taken preventive actions for the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. Balancing the consequences of COVID-19 is an extremely challenging task, and the stakes are especially high with regard to the peace process. It is therefore encouraging to hear that the implementation of the peace process is now also being pursued through a wide range of virtual meetings and conferences. At the same time, it is evident that the COVID-19 pandemic will have consequences for the implementation of that process. It is therefore all the more important to do everything possible to keep the political momentum alive and on track. It is good to hear that Colombian actors are united in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. On the peace process, I would like to make three more specific points. First, the security situation in general remains worrisome, especially in rural areas, aS we have also heard today from our briefers. Social leaders and human rights defenders who support the peace agreement, indigenous leaders and women's rights defenders, as well as former combatants, continue to be at particular risk. We are very concerned about the recent killings that we have once again heard about today. We therefore fully concur with the Secretary-General that no efforts must be spared with regard to those facing specific risks, given their roles in the promotion of human rights and the implementation of the peace agreement, and those who laid down their weapons and remain committed to the peace process. We would therefore very much like to encourage the Government to make full use of the existing bodies and institutions to ensure security for those individuals and their communities. It is crucial to extend the presence of State institutions to remote and conflict-affected areas in order to end impunity and create a secure and stable environment for all Colombians. The second point concerns the reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo. We very much welcome the progress made in reaching consensus between the Government and FARC on the reintegration road map, and we encourage the parties to continue to work jointly in the spirit of constructive dialogue during its implementation. Now that the transition of the former territorial areas for training and reintegration is under way, the focus must shift towards ensuring the sustainability and comprehensive nature of the process. In that context, we would also like to recall that more than two thirds of all former combatants reside outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration, and are therefore facing even greater challenges in terms of security, basic services and productive opportunities. My last point is about support for the institutions of the peace agreement. The impressive work of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non- Repetition gives rise to the hope that Colombia can overcome a deeply entrenched legacy of conflict and achieve true reconciliation. Its autonomy remains crucial, and we would like to echo the Secretary-General's call on all actors to contribute fully to the system's work, including by being forthcoming in contributing to the truth and empathetic acknowledgement of the suffering of victims, whose voices must indeed be at the centre of the peace process. Before concluding, let me say that we remain confident that Colombians can succeed in consolidating the peace that they have begun to build. Its fully comprehensive peace will ultimately have to include the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN) as well. In that context, we welcome the ELN's announcement of a one-month unilateral ceasefire. While we regret to note that violence continues in some regions, we nevertheless hope that this could be and will become a point of departure for future constructive engagement that leads to more confidence-building measures and, in the end, to future negotiations. The international community will continue to assist Colombians in realizing their aspirations for a more peaceful future. We commend the key role that has been played by the United Nations Mission and the United Nations agencies working in Colombia.
