Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank Special
Representative David Shearer for his briefing and
commend him for his good work in the past few months.

It is very understandable that we all remain
extremely concerned about the situation in South Sudan
on the security, political and humanitarian fronts. What
we continue to see is lives lost and major displacement
of the civilian population. If we fail to avert what may
otherwise end up being a descent down a slippery
slope, the consequences will be horrendous in both
their geopolitical and humanitarian implications. At the
moment, there is no greater priority, as the representative
of the United States has said, than making sure that
all the parties to the conflict take genuine steps to
immediately cease all hostilities and violence in order
to end the suffering of the South Sudanese people. In
that context, we applaud the critical work of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and thank
Special Representative Shearer for his lucid briefing on
the issue. We do not have much to add to what he said
with regard to the Regional Protection Force.

We also welcome the unilateral ceasefire and
release of political prisoners declared by President
Salva Kiir on 22 May. It is our hope that the Government
will honour its commitments and take the necessary
confidence-building measures. It is important that the
Council acknowledge that development and urge all
other parties to follow suit by immediately stopping
the fighting. We would also like to underscore that the
dire humanitarian situation still requires our urgent
attention. Every possible measure must be taken to
save lives and forestall famine. The international
community must step up its humanitarian assistance.
All parties on the ground should also facilitate safe
and unhindered access, without conditions of any kind,
so that humanitarian actors can reach those in need of
lifesaving assistance.
But all of this - the ceasefire and the efforts to
alleviate the humanitarian situation - can have durable
meaning only ifwe can see a light at the end ofthe tunnel
where the peace process is concerned. That continues
to wallow in inconsistencies and confusion, to a large
degree because of the lack of coordination among the
parties that are attempting to help South Sudan achieve
peace. Of course, that in no way implies that the lion's
share of the responsibility does not belong to the parties
of the conflict.

Lasting peace and security in South Sudan
can prevail only through genuine dialogue and
reconciliation. We reiterate our conviction that the
2015 peace agreement still remains an important
framework for ending the conflict in South Sudan,
and that its full implementation, through greater
inclusivity, forgiveness and reconciliation, can restore
peace and stability in the country. The parties have to
be committed to implementing their agreement in good
faith and keeping the national interest above all other
concerns.

We still think that the national dialogue has real
potential to facilitate the reinvigoration of the peace
process. In that regard, the launching of the national
dialogue and the swearing in of the Steering Committee
members on 22 May represent, of course, steps in the
right direction, but we want to emphasize once again the
need for that process to be undertaken in all-inclusive
manner in order to achieve the desired objective. We
call on all parties to seize the opportunity to participate
in the dialogue constructively and in good faith. The
Security Council and the international community at
large must contribute to making the national dialogue
a success.

We are probably in a somewhat better situation
now than we were months ago for moving ahead in
the peace process. Regional efforts are being made
to try to revive the peace process in South Sudan,
and we believe that it is important to support those
efforts. There is, in particular, a promising effort being
deployed by President Museveni of Uganda, to which
Mr. Shearer alluded broadly and which deserves close
follow-up and support. President Museveni knows that
he has the full support of the Ethiopian Prime Minister
and the Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as other members of that
regional organization.

The Kenyan effort is designed to support that
initiative. We look forward to the convening of an
IGAD summit when it is appropriate and deemed to
offer added value. In our view, the most critical element
is that the region continue to speak in one voice, so
that the international community and, above all, the
Security Council can be on the same page. There is no
greater damage that can be inflicted on a peace process
than conflicting messages. They are the bane of any
peacemaking effort.

We are pleased in that regard that the African Union
(AU) and IGAD have always made sure that their efforts
are always fully coordinated. We are now encouraged
by the personal involvement of the new African Union
Chairperson, as witnessed by his visit to South Sudan.
The same is true of the Secretary-General and the active
engagement of his Special Representative, Mr. Shearer,
and Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom.

All of those efforts call for greater cooperation and
closer coordination. That is why we continue to attach
indispensable value to a unified approach by the AU,
IGAD and the United Nations in efforts to ensure a
speedy and peaceful settlement to the conflict in South
Sudan. In that connection, the joint press statement of
29 January by the AU, the United Nations and the IGAD
still represents a useful framework for cooperation
among those three organizations in their joint efforts to
reinvigorate the South Sudanese peace process - the
implementation of which remains the key to addressing
the issue of South Sudan.

