Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.

The Security Council referred the situation in
Darfur to the International Criminal Court in 2005.
Since then, the instability, insecurity, violence and
suffering in Darfur have continued unabated. But it is
too facile to simply recall the acts of violence that recur
year after year. That ignores the way in which these
acts compound each other. This year, for instance, we
see not only that the conflict between the Government
of the Sudan and armed opposition groups has reignited
in Jebel Marra, including such incidents as an attack
by a group of unidentified armed men that wounded
a peacekeeper from the African Union/United Nations
Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID), but also the
downstream consequences of repeated bombings
including against civilian targets.

The United Nations has verified that 68,000
people have been displaced since January of 2016 due
to the fighting, raising the total number of internally
displaced persons in Darfur to more than 2.7 million,
with 5.8 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance. Further compounding the problem has been
the obstruction of humanitarian assistance, including
food and critical medical care. We remain deeply
concerned by the Government of the Sudan's de facto
expulsion of the head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in the face of this
critical humanitarian situation.

Likewise, access restrictions and other impediments
imposed on UNAMID have hampered the Mission's
ability to perform its most basic tasks. For instance, on
15 April, to cite just one example, UNAMID aircraft
en route to Misteri, West Darfur, had to modify
their usual flight route following a warning from the
Government of the Sudan that United Nations flights
over the Sudanese-Chadian joint forces camps would
be shot down.

The Secretary-General has reported for months
that the vacancy rates in UNAMID's human rights
and protection-of-civilians sections are 50 and 40 per
cent, respectively. These vacancies in the human rights
and protection staff of UNAMID are unacceptable and
they are due to the systematic denial of visas by the
Government of the Sudan.

Restrictions and impediments imposed by
Khartoum have also precluded United Nations agencies
from ascertaining the scale of civilian casualties and
displacement from fighting, and from otherwise
comprehensively reporting on the situation on the
ground. These provocative acts - acts like kicking out
the head of OCHA - have also done little to awaken
the Security Council's readiness to respond. That is
not how the system was supposed to work. Indeed,
the Security Council's inability to agree on even the
most basic responses to extraordinary provocations is
a collective failure.

As we consider this Vicious cycle and our seeming
inability to agree on how to stop it, we at least must
remain committed to reaffirming our commitment
to justice for the victims of genocide and atrocities
in Darfur. Failure to provide accountability for the
injustices the victims and survivors have incurred
emboldens further abuses in the Sudan and outside of
the Sudan. It is in that spirit and, I think, appropriate
to our discussion today about the importance of justice,
that we were surprised and disappointed to read the
op-ed that appeared in the New York Times on Tuesday,
attributed to South Sudan's President Salva Kiir and
Vice-President Riek Machar, which called for halting
the very hybrid court both leaders agreed to support
when they signed the peace agreement in August 2015.

This op-ed offered a variety ofreasons for opposing
the efforts being led by the African Union to bringjustice
to the victims of South Sudan, perhaps most notably that
"building a nation is not an easy task". Indeed it is not,
and these two leaders certainly have an immense task
in front of them, but part of that difficulty - part of
the challenge of rebuilding a nation - lies in pursuing
both justice and reconciliation, not one at the expense
of the other. The argument in this op-ed thatjustice will
"destabilize efforts to unite our nation by keeping alive
anger and hatred" could not be further from the truth.
As we have seen in countless other settings after
widespread Violence, reconciliation and justice are
mutually reinforcing, not mutually exclusive, and that
is precisely why both are included in the August 2015
Peace Agreement, and it is precisely why the United
States will continue to make every effort to both
support the African Union in its establishment of the
hybrid court and to promote reconciliation among the
people of South Sudan. Neither in South Sudan nor
in the Sudan is justice an impediment to unity and
sustainable peace. Indeed, in both countries, justice is
essential to it.

It is in that spirit that we thank the Prosecutor for
her Office's continued investigations into abuses in
Darfur and for her long-standing efforts to promote
justice for attacks on civilians, including humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers by Government and armed
opposition groups. We also continue to support
UNAMID and its work, which is crucial to efforts to
alleviate the suffering of civilians and to ensurin that
allegations of atrocities can be investigated, as in the
numerous cases of conflict-related sexual violence
documented by UNAMID in 2015, and to which the
Prosecutor refers in this report.

It is critical that the Security Council, for its part,
do more to help ensure compliance with resolution
1593 (2005) and press Sudanese authorities to fulfil the
Sudan's obligation to cooperate fully with the Court
and with the Prosecutor. While, as the Security Council
noted in a letter to the ICC, the decisions of pre-trial
chambers on the situation in Darfur have been brought to
the attention of members of the Council, this is far from
enough. We also continue to call on all Governments
not to invite, facilitate or support travel for individuals
subject to arrest warrants in the ICC Darfur situation,

and for the Sudan to fully cooperate with the ICC, and
we continue to believe that the Court's arrest warrants
in the Darfur situation should be carried out.

History has shown that the road to accountability
can be long and difficult but that justice can ultimately
triumph against long odds. The developments in the
Extraordinary African Chambers in Senegal, including
the recent conviction of former President Hissene
Habre', are but one testament to the idea that the tenacity
of Victims of mass atrocities in seeking justice should
not be underestimated, and this example shows what
is possible when Governments, regional bodies and
victims' groups cooperate to ensure that justice is done.

I would like to emphasize this point because,
indeed, it is not just institutions and Governments that
have a role to play. Individuals can help too, and they
are essential. We are heartened by those in civil society,
from South Africa to Uganda, who have continued to
show their solidarity with those who have suffered so
much, and while it is easy to be daunted by the obstacles
to accountability, the International Criminal Court's
investigation in Darfur has brought some measure of
hope to Victims of atrocities there.

There can be both purpose and dignity in coming
forward and speaking out about atrocity crimes. We
commend the bravery of these victims and look forward
to the day when they, like the Victims of the Habre
regime, seejustice delivered in a court oflaw. The United
States will continue to work with this Security Council
and other partners in the international community to
promote an end to Sudan's many conflicts and a just
and sustainable peace.

