The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the lack of progress of the voluntary
disarmament process of the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), as assessed by the
joint International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region-Southern African Development Community
communique of 20 October. The Security Council
recalls its press statement of3 October and stresses
again that there should be no further delay beyond
the 2 January 2015 end date set by the region for
the voluntary disarmament process. The Security
Council calls on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO)and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government to immediately
update operational plans for military action that
should begin no later than January against the
FDLR. The Security Council reiterates once again
its call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in coordination with
MONUSCO, to immediately undertake military
action against those leaders and members of the
FDLR who do not engage in the demobilization
process or who continue to carry out human rights
abuses.

"The Security Council further recalls that the
swift neutralization ofthe FDLR is a top priority in
bringing stability to and protecting the civilians of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region, in line with the wider commitments
made in the Peace, Security and Cooperation (PSC)
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. The Security Council recalls
that leaders and members of the FDLR were among
the perpetrators of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda, during which Hutu and others

who opposed the genocide were also killed, and
recalls that the FDLR is a group under United
Nations sanctions operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and which has continued
to promote and commit ethnically based and other
killings in Rwanda and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Security Council reiterates its
call on the region to comply with the commitments
under the PSC Framework and to neither tolerate
nor provide assistance or support of any kind to
armed groups, and to neither harbor nor provide
protection of any kind to persons accused of
violations and abuses of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, in particular war crimes,
crimes against humanity, and acts of genocide, or
persons falling under the United Nations sanctions
regime. The Security Council further reiterates its
readiness to consider targeted sanctions against
any individual or entity found to be supporting the
FDLR or any other armed group in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
recent attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) in the Beni territory, brutally killing over
100 civilians, mostly women and children. The
Security Council takes note of President Kabila's
statement to immediately engage further military
action to neutralize this group permanently, with
the support of MONUSCO. According its resolution
2147 (2014), the Security Council underlines the
importance of ensuring effective protection of
civilians. The Security Council emphasizes that
any effort to undermine MONUSCO'S ability to
implement its mandate will not be tolerated and
that those responsible for threats or attacks against
peacekeepers must be held accountable.

"The Security Council recalls the importance
of completing the permanent demobilization of the
former Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) combatants
and calls for the acceleration of the implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement programme, in
coordination with the regional States concerned.
The Security Council stresses the need for all
parties to overcome barriers to repatriation at the
7 November meeting in Kinshasa and reminds
former M-23 combatants of their commitments
under the Nairobi declarations.
"The Security Council stresses that the durable
return of stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region also requires the swift
fulfilment of implementation of the reforms
committed to by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the PSC Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. The Security Council stresses the strategic
importance of this agreement and called upon all
signatories to work together in a reinvigorated way
in order to ensure delivery of the commitments
made under the Framework. The Security Council
expresses concern over the continued slow progress
on security sector reform (SSR) in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the establishment
of an FARDC rapid reaction force, and calls on
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to consolidate progress on the restoration of
State authority and the wider governance, economic
and SSR reforms needed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support to the mandate ofgood offices ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General as outlined
in its resolution 2147 (2014). The Security Council
also welcomes the engagement of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region
and calls on him, in coordination with the Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to continue to lead, coordinate and assess
the implementation of the national and regional
commitments under the PSC framework.

"The Security Council recalls that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its national partners bear responsibility
for ensuring a transparent and credible electoral
process. The Security Council calls for the
publication of a comprehensive electoral calendar
and budget and underlines the importance of full
and timely planning and preparation for upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections. The
Security Council reiterates the importance of a
free, fair, inclusive and peaceful election process
that respects the will of the Congolese people,
in line with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's national commitments made under the
PSC agreement aimed at furthering the agenda
of reconciliation, tolerance and democratization.
The Security Council underlines that successful
and credible elections in line with the Democratic

Republic of the Congo Constitution would be a
key element in the continuing work to promote
democracy, human rights and the rule of law in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and form
a key part of efforts to build long-term peace and
stability in the region.

"The Security Council also recalls that logistical
support could be provided by MONUSCO only once
the electoral cycle road map and budget have been
adopted. The Security Council also recalls that this
support will be continually assessed and reviewed
according to the progress made by the Congolese
authorities in the steering of the electoral process,
in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph
16 of its resolution 2053 (2012).

"The Security Council recalls the importance
of promoting and protecting human rights and
fighting impunity. The Security Council notes with
deep concern the persistence of serious human
rights abuses and international humanitarian law
violations against civilians in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo committed by armed groups,
including the FDLR. The Security Council also
expresses deep concern at reports and allegations
indicating the persistence of serious human rights
and international humanitarian law violations
committed by Congolese security and defense
forces, and reiterates the need to fight against
impunity in this regard.

"In this context, the Security Council expresses
its grave concern at the decision of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to expel
the head of the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Security Council further expresses
concern over recent threats made against other
staff members in the Office. The Security Council
recalls that monitoring, reporting and follow-
up on human rights violations and abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law are
fully part of MONUSCO'S mandate and expresses
its full support to the Joint Human Rights Office,
to MONUSCO and to United Nations personnel.
The Security Council recalls the importance of the
obligations and commitments of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in terms
of the promotion and protection of human rights
and the fight against impunity, and calls on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
to investigate the allegations included in the
report. The Security Council calls for continued
cooperation and dialogue between MONUSCO and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In this regard, the Security Council takes
note of the letter of the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
Security Council of 20 October 2014 and of the
willingness expressed by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to
work with MONUSCO, including the Joint Human
Rights Office.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for MONUSCO and calls on all parties
to cooperate fully with the Mission and to remain
committed to the full and objective implementation
of the Mission's mandate. The Security Council
commends the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
