Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). We also
appreciate your efforts to maintain and improve the
performance of the CTC since assuming the
chairmanship in April.

Pakistan shares the international concern about
terrorism. We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism. Decades of
exposure to terrorist acts - which have led to the loss
of thousands of innocent lives, including those of our
law- enforcement officials - as well as economic
losses, have reinforced our conviction that this problem
needs to be tackled resolutely. Accordingly, our
counter-terrorism efforts continue apace.

Since its establishment about two years ago under
resolution 1373 (2001), the CTC has made a significant
contribution in the field of counter-terrorism. The
dialogue it has maintained with Member States and its
role in the facilitation of the provision of technical
assistance to States have been helpful in enabling them
to improve their domestic capacity to counter
terrorism. However, the Committee needs to further
intensify its efforts to encourage donors to extend
technical assistance to States to enhance their
capacities.

We appreciate the CTC's efforts to promote
transparency and efficiency in its work. Its efforts to
improve coordination with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) will further facilitate that process. Its initiatives
to enhance coordination with regional and international
organizations are also appreciable. In addition, we have
noted the CTC's efforts to increase coordination with
specialized agencies to counter the threats of terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction.

The fight against terrorism is a long and
multifaceted process. The objectives of shielding
humanity from threats of terrorism and of
strengthening international peace and security can be
realized if our efforts address the problem of terrorism
in its totality. It is time we move away from mere
symptomatic treatment to more basic and structural
issues. Issues of socio-economic justice, the rule of
law, political freedom and human rights cannot be
dismissed as unrelated to the discourse on terrorism.

The denial of basic rights and other prerequisites
of a civilized life leads to situations which breed
intolerance and extremism. We would be remiss if we
did not analyse and address the factors which, if not
directly responsible, facilitate the growth of and
support for terrorism.

Terrorism is an international concern requiring
global cooperation. Our vision of security should not,
therefore, hinge solely on security within national
boundaries, but should also embrace international
security. To achieve that, the need to resolve
longstanding international disputes cannot be
overstated. Similarly, the need for a definition of
terrorism that maintains a distinction between the right
of people to self-determination and terrorism is even
greater today than in the past. Such legal clarity would
be extremely useful in providing a legal framework for
our common struggle against terrorism.

It would be a travesty of justice if we could not
protect and uphold the principles of human rights in
our fight against terrorism. We should therefore be
sensitive to threats emanating not only from
individuals and non-State actors but also from States.

International security would be reinforced by
promoting mutual tolerance, cultural diversity and
inter-religious harmony. As these elements are essential
and indispensable constituents for peace and security,
the Security Council should play a leading role to
ensure that they are protected and promoted.

