Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jenea for his technical
and useful briefing.

We stress once again that the current situation
on the Korean peninsula remains one of the main
challenges to the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Egypt expresses its great concern at the continued
escalation and tension on the Korean peninsula as
a result of the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which represents one of the
main threats to international peace and security. We
call once again on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to comply fully with all its commitments, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions;
to eliminate its entire nuclear arsenal; and to re-join the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as
a non-nuclear State without delay or preconditions.

Egypt is fully committed to make every possible
effort at the national level to implement all Security
Council sanctions on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. Egypt supports fully all efforts aimed at
reaching a peaceful solution to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea nuclear programme issue and at
achieving durable peace on the Korean peninsula,
including all reunification efforts, especially in light of
the special and historic relations between Egypt and the
countries of the region.

Egypt calls on the international community and the
Security Council to deal in a comprehensive manner
and without selectivity with all challenges facing
the Non-Proliferation Treaty so as to preserve the
credibility and effectiveness of the non-proliferation
regime and relevant Security Council resolutions.
That is especially important in therefore light of the
continued erosion of the credibility of that regime, which
represents the main pillar of the broader international
security architecture. That erosion is the result of the
non-universality of the Treaty and the double standards
applied when addressing challenges thereto.

In conclusion, my country encourages all parties
to exercise self-restraint and to resume discussions
aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement as soon as
possible. We take note of some of the positive proposals
made by China in order to achieve a gradual detente.
In that regard, we again urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to cooperate with all efforts to
promote dialogue and to cease any measures that
may lead to further escalation and intention. We call
on all international parties to provide the conditions
necessary to reach a mutually agreed settlement that
would guarantee regional and international peace and
security, in line with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

Egypt stands ready to make every possible effort to
support a peaceful settlement to this crisis in a manner
that would preserve regional and international peace
and security.

