Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for your important initiative in
convening this debate. I fully appreciate the exceptional
role played by the police components of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. I also thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
exhaustive briefing on the challenges encountered by
United Nations peacekeeping police. I also thank the
Police Commissioners of the peacekeeping missions in
Liberia, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
for the information they have shared on the importance
of expertise, training operations and capacities to
ensure the success of peacekeeping operations. We
are also grateful for the briefing on the protection of
civilians and women.

We commend the men and women of all nationalities
who have served under the United Nations banner to
keep the peace. We hail the Blue Helmets who have
assumed the noble duty of helping to prevent armed
conflict, including in the Middle East. We Jordanians
are proud to be among those nations that have made
significant contributions to international efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are fully vested in this noble approach at the highest
level. Our commitment to this duty is rooted in our
unswerving devotion to respect for human rights and the
rule of law in the establishment of a safe and sustainable
environment that offers stability and a decent life for
peoples suffering through war and conflict.

Since 1983, Jordan has participated in more than
20 United Nations peacekeeping operations and several
special political missions. We have participated under
various peacebuilding and peacekeeping mandates
focused on police reform and capacity-building. Our
experienced officers have contributed to those efforts.
We have deployed 21,556 troops and 5,254 police
officers to such missions.

There is an urgent need to improve the performance
and capacities of police components to implement the
mandates of Security Council resolutions, especially
in the light of the recent surge in demand for police,
in terms of both numbers and quality, in peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding exercises. Given the
complexity of these tasks, the role of the police has
evolved from its traditional oversight and monitoring
tasks to diverse capacity-building efforts. Resolution
2185 (2014), adopted today - for which we thank the
delegation of Australia - represents a cornerstone of
our work and is strictly aligned to the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping
adopted and updated by the Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Resolution 2185 (2014) underscores the criticial
role played by the police components of peacekeeping
operations and addresses practical measures to improve
police performance in the implementation of mandates.
Through the resolution, the United Nations will be in a
position to ensure the adequate participation of Member
States in peacekeeping operations by providing officers
and formed police units with specialized skills that
meet international criteria for the implementation of
mandates with professionalism and expertise. That will
allow us to promote security and reduce the catastrophic
impact of conflicts on civilians, while protecting them
from a range of physical and psychological torments
and threats. It will also help to strengthen security
capacities in all their aspects.
Jordan is considered to play a lead role through its
participation in peacekeeping operations. Above and
beyond the expertise that our country has developed
in this area, our officers have accumulated years
of experience in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
My Government is striving to further develop these
capacities by enhancing specialized training so as to
respond to the growing and diverse needs in undertaking
the broad array of tasks assigned. A higher degree of
expertise will also increase the trust of citizens and
civilians in our police. Jordanian police officers make
use of United Nations training curricula to enhance
the skills they deploy in formed police units and as
advisers.

I have a question for Police Commissioner Hinds
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. What are
the lessons learned by and value added to the police
experience of the Ebola crisis? We know that police
components do not work in the medical field, yet they
have had to meet this additional challenge.

Next, I have another question for the Police
Commissioners in general. What is the level of
exhaustive and complementary planning between the
military and the police, on the one hand, and the local
administrative authorities on the ground, on the other,
in implementing mandates while increasing efficiency
and avoiding duplications of effort, wherever possible?

Lastly, we wish to thank the Government of
Australia for this very important initiative, which
will have a positive impact on the ground and in the
performance by the police components of their various
duties.

