Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having found
time in your crowded programme, in the last week of
your presidency, to organize this thematic debate on
the Great Lakes region. It is a reflection of the
importance you attach to the issue of peace and
security in that part of Africa.

My delegation welcomes the report by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, and extends its profound gratitude
and congratulations to him for his dedicated and
valuable service in the joint secretariat of the United
Nations and the African Union in Nairobi, which
supported the countries of the region in preparing for
the Second Summit of countries of the Great Lakes.
Mr. Fall has delivered his services with distinguished
professionalism.

I also welcome Ambassador Mulamula, the new
Executive Secretary for the Great Lakes secretariat,
about whom I shall say a few words in a moment.

The long-awaited but meticulously prepared Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region was signed by the 11 countries of East
and Central Africa in Nairobi, Kenya, on 15 December
2006. It was the culmination of an inclusive two-year
process whose vision and foundation is the Dar es
Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development, adopted and signed at the first Summit
of the countries of the region on 20 November 2004.

The Pact provides a legal and political framework
for peaceful coexistence, cooperation and sustainable
development among the members of the Conference.
The Pact has 10 protocols, including on non-aggression
and mutual defence, human rights, as well as the
prevention and curbing of the crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity and crimes of war. The Pact
further provides for collective humanitarian
responsibility to protect civilian victims of violent
conflicts and of the systematic human rights violations
which have characterized the region and their attendant
consequences in terms of human internal displacements
and massive exoduses of refugees across national
boundaries.

The International Conference on the Great Lakes
will have a permanent secretariat based in Bujumbura,
Burundi. The Summit appointed its first Executive
Secretary, Ambassador Liberata Mulamula of the
United Republic of Tanzania, who is sitting with the
delegation of Tanzania in the Chamber this afternoon.
Ambassador Mulamula is an accomplished diplomat
who has been closely associated with the evolution of
the Great Lakes Conference, since its inception in
2004, as National Coordinator for Tanzania, working
closely with the secretariat in Nairobi.

Ambassador Mulamula will need the
accompaniment and support of the Council, the United
Nations system, the Group of Friends and the
international community at large beyond the three-
month transition from a United Nations-African Union
(AU) secretariat to a regionally owned institution. Such
support and partnership could take many forms,
ranging from capacity-building to information-sharing
and regular consultations on issues of mutual concern
regarding peace and security in the region.

It will be recalled that the Council has been
seized of issues relating to the Great Lakes region for
more than 10 years. Indeed, more than half of the
African issues of concern to and on the agenda of the
Council have related to the countries of the Great
Lakes - Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, northern Uganda, the Sudan and the
Central African Republic. It is with much satisfaction
and gratitude that we wish to recognize the role of the
Council in shepherding the peace processes in those
countries to the stages at which they are today.

Rwanda is no longer on the agenda. Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo have gone
through democratic elections, and the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement is being implemented in southern
Sudan. Although northern Uganda is not on the agenda
of the Council, there is concern by the Council
regarding the political and humanitarian situation
there. It is for that reason that the Council is following
with keen interest and anticipation the peace talks
between the Government of Uganda and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) in Juba, under the facilitation
of the Government of Southern Sudan.

The Great Lakes Conference will be an
indispensable partner of the Security Council in
ensuring the restoration and maintenance of peace and
security in East and Central Africa once the Pact is
ratified and implementation begins. It heralds a
promising future for the peace agenda in Africa. It is an
edifice standing on four pillars. The first pillar is peace
and security, based on renouncing the use of force,
settling disputes peacefully and the prohibition of
insurgent activities in each other's territories. Peace
and security is also viewed as a basis for sustainable
development.

The second pillar is political stability, based on
democratic principles, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and good governance.

The third pillar is development in support of
peace and security and democratic institutions -
sustainable development based on economic
cooperation in the use of natural resources - and
regional integration. The Great Lakes region has been
designated as a specific reconstruction zone with a
special fund for contributions from Member States and
the international community.

The fourth pillar is international cooperation and
partnership with other institutions in the maintenance
of peace and security and the promotion of economic
and social development and environmental
sustainability. The United Nations and the African
Union are foremost partners in this endeavour.

The International Conference draws its mandate
and strength from the inclusive nature of its
stakeholders, which include civil society, women,
youth, the business community and Government at
various levels of participation. All of them converge in
a special follow-up mechanism to ensure accountability
in implementation and in the delivery of peace
dividends.

This new institution in Africa bears all the
hallmarks of what the United Nations stands for: the
pursuit of peace, security, development and respect for
human rights, and the attainment of larger freedom in a
comprehensive manner. We should give this institution
our unqualified support.
