Lebanon commends Estonia for having organized this open debate. The high- level participation therein testifies to the centrality of this item on the agenda of the Security Council and of the United Nations in general. The topic is timely because even a pandemic could not stop conflicts around the world or stop civilian suffering. The Security Council should prioritize this agenda and make it central to all peace and security issues under its consideration, since the number of civilian deaths, injuries and trauma as a result of armed conflict continues to be staggering, as illustrated in the latest report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366). Compliance with existing international legal instruments, particularly international humanitarian law, international human rights law and Security Council resolutions, remains a crucial way to ensure the protection of civilians. The Security Council should therefore ensure that those instruments are implemented and respected. It can do so through greater coordination with the relevant regional organizations and concerned Member States. But this is not a matter of legality and international law only; it is a moral issue and goes to the heart of what makes us human and decent. Ethics and morality have to be integral to human behaviour, especially during conflict. We need to insert morality into the language of protection and of the prevention and resolution of conflicts. When we in Lebanon speak about the protection of civilians, we do so from our long experience with wars and invasions. Lebanese civilians have paid the heavy price of years of blatant violations of international law, with countless indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks by the Israeli forces. The shelling of a United Nations compound in the village of Qana in 1996 resulted in the deaths of more than 100 Lebanese civilians - including children - and injuries to hundreds more, including United Nations peacekeepers. Ten years later, in 2006, Qana was once again bombed by the Israeli forces, which resulted, again, in the deaths of children and civilians. Millions of cluster bombs were dropped on Lebanese territory. Even the environment was not spared, with the destruction of the Jiyeh power plant, which resulted in a massive oil spill on Lebanese shores and beyond. And yet all those crimes against the civilian population, against the environment and against the territorial integrity of a country were committed without any accountability or remedy in sight. Accountability is fundamental to putting an end to impunity and to giving victims the justice that they deserve. Accountability mechanisms must be put in place and supported by the Security Council, without double standards. The same could be said of the situation in the occupied Palestinian State, where Palestinian generations have grown up living under the constant violations of their rights by the occupying Power, in total breach of its obligations under international law, hence the importance of ensuring respect of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the application of the Fourth Geneva Convention to protect Palestinian civilians and guarantee their rights. In the absence of specific legislation and standards regarding the use of new technologies and weapons in a context of armed conflict, we believe that the principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution should apply. Prevention must continue to be at the core of our efforts, and we must continue to address the root causes of conflicts. National policy frameworks that are consistent with regional and international strategies can help in that regard and could be developed through an inclusive approach, with the participation of the Government, the United Nations, civil society, youth and women representatives. Security Council and regional organizations could support States in the implementation of such frameworks. As stressed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 67 of his report, "The most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflict." It also brought into better focus the Secretary-General's call for a humanitarian ceasefire. He rightly pointed out that the pandemic has shown the folly of war. However, it also showed how vulnerable humans are and that protecting them should be the highest responsibility today and tomorrow.
