Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Since this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of February, I would like to congratulate the
delegation of Kuwait on the commencement of its
presidency and wish it great success in implementing
its ambitious programme of work. I am grateful to High
Representative Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.

Our position on this issue remains unchanged.
We strongly condemn any use of chemical weapons
and advocate that such threats must be eliminated
in the future. We firmly believe that there must be
accountability for perpetrators of such crimes. Today I
would like to concentrate on three major points.

First, we support the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as
reflected in its fifty-second report (S/2018/84, annex).
The speedy destruction, probably in two months, of
the remaining chemical-weapon production facilities
and resolving all outstanding issues relating to the
declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic are of the utmost
importance. That would help to dispel all existing
doubts on many principal issues and to comprehend
the real situation in the country. It is commendable
that, during the inspection of Barzah and Jamrayah, all
samples were sealed, packaged and shipped to OPCW's
laboratory and were received there in the presence of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, observing
all established rules. We look forward to the follow-up
to the OPCW's work, and we will also await the results

of a thorough analysis of the documents submitted by
Syria by the Declaration Assessment Team.

Secondly, the continuing reports on the alleged use
of chemical weapons in Syria are extremely alarming.
But the most alarming fact is that the Council has not yet
restored its investigative potential to properly respond to
such cases. I recall the words of the Secretary-General,
who pointed to the serious gap that had arisen at the
end of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which leaves one with the feeling that
impunity will continue without any strict monitoring.

Thirdly, and lastly, considering the current
developments, it is also most critical that a new
mechanism be established as soon as possible. We
here in the Council are not experts on chemical
weapons - neither to judge or blame anyone - but
must act on the basis of credible evidence provided
to us by an independent, impartial and representative
investigative body we can all trust. In that regard, we
support the ongoing consultations on creating a new
investigative instrument, in order to prevent any further
use of chemical weapons and to bring perpetrators
to justice. We are ready to participate actively and
contribute to the earliest revival and ultimate realization
of our investigative potential.

