Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important meeting on the
situation in the region of the Sahel. I am grateful for
your personal presence in leading our discussion. I
would also like to apologize on behalf of our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Harold Caballeros, who was
unfortunately unable to attend, as was his intention
and desire, due to scheduling conflicts. I would like in
particular to express our appreciation for the concept
paper that your delegation circulated (S/2012/906),
which contains important ideas for organizing today's
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Envoy for the Sahel and the High Commissioner for
Refugees for their briefings. I listened with interest
to the statements by the Minister from Cote d'Ivoire,
speaking on behalf of the Economic Community of
Western African States (ECOWAS).

The theme of today's debate could not be more
relevant. In the Sahel region, a number of problems
converge, including recurrent droughts with their
resulting famines, intermittent plagues, extreme
poverty, migration, and the internal as well as the
trans-border displacement of persons. Those problems
are exacerbated by other phenomena that have recently
been explored in the Council in a variety of contexts
with universal implications. I refer, for example, to
the illegal activities associated with organized crime,
and also to the consolidation of havens for terrorist
organizations.

Moreover, events in the Sahel are not unrelated
to the Libyan crisis of 2011, as we learned earlier this
year from the report (see S/2012/42) by an assessment
mission of the Secretariat. Consequently, the thematic
reach of our debate covers a wide range of issues. I
would like to limit my remarks to six short points.

First, a few words about Mali, which is the focus
of the Council's attention when we speak of the
region of the Sahel. This is where we come closest
to the threshold of a threat to international peace and
security. The disruption of constitutional order last
March led to predictable consequences. Longstanding
demands for greater autonomy by the Tuareg peoples
of the north grew more pronounced, and today no less
than the territorial integrity of Mali is at stake. In
the governance vacuum, extremist armed forces have
gained significant territory. In that manner, havens
have been created where terrorist groups and criminal
cartels are able to operate at will. A regime of grave
human rights violations against the population has
emerged, and religious and cultural monuments are
being attacked, which has led to a humanitarian crisis
of the first order.

All that is taking place in a broad geographical
area that is today a no-man's land. In addition, given
the multiple links between the countries of the Sahel,
as well as of the Maghreb, the chaotic situation that
reigns in northern Mali is at great risk of spreading to
neighbouring countries. We therefore support a robust
reaction from the Council to address that situation along
the general lines of the proposal that the Secretary-
General presented to us just a few days ago.

That leads to my second point, which is that, apart
from its specific characteristics, the Sahel region offers
a new opportunity to draw lessons from the diverse
modes of partnership between the United Nations and
African multilateral agencies, as countenanced by
Chapter VIII of the Charter. At least so far as Mali is
concerned, the earliest initiatives, as is well known,
originated in the Economic Community ofWest African
States, with the support of the African Union. As in so
many other cases - Darfur, Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - partnerships were established
between the United Nations and regional or subregional
entities that offer important potential benefits based
on the comparative advantage of each party. However,
they also generate potential obstacles derived from
the eternal problem of who does what, how the chain
of command and control functions within a complex
peacekeeping operation and who picks up the tab. In
the case of Mali, we welcome that kind of partnership
in principle, but without compromising the functions
assigned to the Council in the Charter.

Thirdly, in the Sahel, especially northern Mali, the
international community as a whole, and the countries
of the region in particular, face new challenges from
extremist or armed groups that use violence against
innocent civilians to further their own destructive
agendas. Given the size of the territory in question,
there is also a threat that havens will emerge there for
groups such as Al-Qaida, the Mouvement pour l'unicite
et le jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest, Ansar Dine and Boko
Haram. Preventing the establishment of havens for such
groups is thus a priority, and will require the Malian
Government to regain full control over its territory. We
support the backing of the international community for
this effort.

Fourthly, we are concerned about the reports of gross
violations of the human rights of the civilians living
in areas close to where extremist groups are operating.
Extrajudicial executions, amputations, beatings, rape,
kidnappings and the recruitment of child soldiers seem
to be the order of the day in communities previously
characterized by neighbourliness and tolerance. This
situation has also provoked a mass exodus that is
giving rise to a new humanitarian crisis just as the
previous crisis, attributable to climatic conditions,
was beginning to abate. In other words, humanitarian
assistance remains a priority in the Sahel, and we
commend the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Sahel, as well as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their activities in that regard.

Fifthly, another rapidly growing sector in the Sahel
is that of local and transnational groups dedicated to
organized crime, including trafficking in illicit drugs,
arms, persons and contraband. This is a subject we
discussed in February, during Togo's presidency of
the Council, under the rubric of peace consolidation in
West Africa (see S/PV.6723), which led to the adoption
of resolution 2039 (2012). We can certainly relate to
the need to combat this scourge, which requires solid
international cooperation, since the countries of Central
America in general, and Guatemala in particular, are
dealing with the same challenge.

Lastly, given the complex and multifaceted
characteristics of the situation in the Sahel, it is clear
that an integrated and coordinated approach is required
on the part of the entire United Nations system. We
therefore eagerly await the presentation as soon as
possible of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel that we requested in July, and concerning
which Mr. Romano Prodi has informed us. We trust
that this document, with its revisions, will provide a
road map for the strategy's subsequent implementation.

For all these reasons, we also call on all international
stakeholders, regional and subregional organizations,
and development partners to redouble their efforts to
support and assist all the countries of the Sahel.

