Mr. Cheok (Singapore): Allow me to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his recent progress
report (S/2006/251) on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). I would like to commend
UNOTIL and to hail the leadership of Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. Their work has been exemplary.

It is often said that successful endeavours have
many parents, while failed ones are orphans. In this
context, I am glad to note that Timor-Leste has a large
family. Since Timor-Leste attained full independence,
its story has been one of determination in the face of
adversity, perseverance and success. The Timorese
have worked hard to create the conditions for a viable
State. Their neighbours have shown foresight and
magnanimity. The international community has been
generous with its assistance and its support. The United
Nations has been invaluable.

This commitment has underpinned Timor-Leste's
progress. But, while Timor-Leste's development has
been impressive, we need to stay the course. As a State
that also had independence rather suddenly thrust upon
it, Singapore knows that nation-building is a fragile
thing, a delicate thing where nothing is irreversible,
especially in the formative years. That is not a cliche.
The Secretary-General's report makes reference to the
fragile security situation. As we all know, recently
there were demonstrations in Dili involving Timorese
armed forces personnel and others. Senior Minister
Ramos-Horta and Mr. Hasegawa have given us
insightful and detailed briefings on the current
conditions.

In addition, the first parliamentary and
presidential elections are scheduled for next year.
Timor-Leste will require electoral, organizational and
security-related advice prior to the elections. The
Secretary-General's report also mentions other areas
where the United Nations can still help in capacity-
building. These include defence, the police, border
control, the legal system, finance and development
planning. Indeed, while commending Timor-Leste for
its "impressive progress" (S/2006/251, para. 50), the
report adds that "many of the country's institutions are
at a nascent stage and will require the continued
assistance and support of the international community"
(Ibid.).

Timor-Leste's leaders seem to share those views.
They have asked for a continued United Nations
presence after the completion of UNOTIL's mandate.
Today, the Council has been privileged to hear a first-
hand assessment from Mr. Ramos-Horta. In turn, the
Secretary-General has proposed a small integrated
United Nations office that would address the areas
where help is needed. We urge the Security Council to
support that recommendation. It is a realistic proposal
that takes into account Timor-Leste's needs and current
conditions. It is not a blind continuation of a mandate.
It is the convergence between a new nation that wants
follow-up help in its nation-building and an
international community that can provide that
assistance.

This is about commitment. We should not
jeopardize what we have all achieved so far in Timor-
Leste. Were we to do so, the phrase "penny wise,
pound foolish" would come to mind, especially given
statistics showing how easily societies that have
experienced civil strife can return to those situations.
We all speak of successful peacebuilding. Well, this is
an opportunity for us to remain engaged and help
ensure that Timor-Leste is a continued success. If the
circumstances warrant it, Timor-Leste could even be
included in the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda so
that it can be supported beyond the next 12 months.

