Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting to address the growing problem of piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. I also welcome
the presence of Mr. Lynn Pascoe here today and thank
him for his briefing on the issue. I am also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his report (see S/2012/45),
which both contains the results of the United Nations
assessment mission and forms the basis for today's
debate. We also express thanks for the briefings that
were made by Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga.

The mission to which I have just referred was
needed in order to assess the extent of the threat of
piracy and evaluate the national and regional capacity
to safeguard maritime security in the region. We take
note of the recommendations contained in the report
and believe that efforts at the national, regional and
international levels are necessary in order to address
and fight the phenomenon of piracy.

The Gulf of Guinea is home to countries that
have abundant natural resources and basic goods.
Those resources and their trade represent the
livelihoods and source of employment for millions of
people, and they will not cease to be an attractive
target for criminal acts until a strategy to fight against
them is put in place.

The growing number of recorded cases of armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea constitutes unequivocal
evidence that the problem must be addressed with
holistic initiatives and strategies of a regional nature.
Special attention must be given to countries such as
Benin because, due to the intense fight against piracy
initiated by neighbouring countries, the problem has
spread to the most vulnerable countries of the region.
That is why efforts such as the joint maritime patrols
being carried out by Nigeria, Benin, Cameroon and
Chad can potentially serve to share the burden and
fight the scourge effectively.

The fight against the phenomena of transnational
organized crime, armed robbery at sea and piracy
surpasses the national capacity of affected countries to
eradicate them. It is therefore both a threat to the
stability of the entire region as well as a collective
responsibility. The response to those threats
jeopardizes socio-economic development, international
trade and foreign investment in the region.

In addition, we echo what was said by the
representative of the Gulf of Guinea Commission on
the necessity for the Security Council to use more

precise terminology, since the Council has sometimes
used the terms "piracy" and "armed robbery at sea" as
if they were interchangeable. When piratical acts are
committed within the territorial waters of a State, they
are not qualified as piracy under United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, but instead as
armed robbery at sea. The report before us suggests
that we are mostly dealing with the latter. We therefore
believe that greater attention should be paid to the
precise context and circumstances of each situation, as
well as to standards shared by all the countries in the
region.

The expected regional summit of the States of the
Gulf of Guinea on piracy should receive all the
necessary support from the international community, as
it has the potential to jumpstart and accelerate the
efforts and different initiatives in order to better
coordinate the procedures that the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) are endeavouring to set up. The goodwill
and readiness of the affected countries to address the
threat is not in question, but the lack of resources for
implementing those various initiatives and the
weakness of institutions are indeed worrying.

The lessons learned and best practices that may
arise from the ECCAS maritime security strategy can
help the initiatives put forward by ECOWAS to be
more on point and more effective in the fight against
piracy and in achieving the needed maritime security,
despite the lack of existing resources.

We believe that the Gulf of Guinea Commission
should be composed of more West African countries in
order to fulfil its goal of serving as a bridge between
both economic communities. We invite ECOWAS and
ECCAS to continue their efforts to work together and
formulate the broad and integrated regional strategy
needed to fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, in
close collaboration and coordination with the Gulf of
Guinea Commission and the Maritime Organization of
West and Central Africa.

We believe that all progress must be made on the
basis of the memorandum of understanding on the
establishment of a subregional integrated coast-guard
network in West and Central Africa. That memorandum
serves as the basis for the national and regional action
plans that should be drawn up by the States of the
region in order to expeditiously implement the creation
of the subregional integrated coast-guard network in
West and Central Africa.

Finally, the threat that the problem poses to the
stability of the affected countries and to the potential
for trade in those countries to bring about economic
development and the subsequent eradication of poverty
is a cause for concern. We agree with the Secretary-
General that the fight against piracy must not be
limited to attacking the problem at sea. Efforts must be
made to address the underlying causes that generally
arise on land. Although we acknowledge that progress
has been made in the ongoing discussions in the region
and we recognize that assistance from the United
Nations and the international community is needed, we
believe that concrete steps must be taken, such as the
holding of the regional summit of States of the Gulf of
Guinea on piracy and the continuation of the joint
maritime patrols.

In conclusion, my delegation is ready to
contribute to international efforts to implement
effective cooperation among States in tackling the
threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea.

