Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Egyptian presidency for convening
this open debate.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their valuable insights
and recommendations.

Bangladesh attaches importance to its value-driven
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We underscore the need for pursing
peacekeeping mandates within a broader political
process for resolving conflicts and seeking lasting
peace. We therefore subscribe to the comprehensive
and coordinated response to the entire continuum of
conflicts through the engagement of all three pillars
of the United Nations. From that perspective, United
Nations peacekeeping missions have a critical role to
play in the broader goal and process of sustaining peace.
Against that policy approach, we wish to underscore
the five following points.

First, it is amply supported by evidence that United
Nations peacekeeping operations serve a critical
purpose in maintaining international peace and security,
including by protecting civilians, in most cases. It is
therefore crucial that peacekeeping mandates focus on
areas where the missions concerned can realistically
achieve the desired results with the resources at their
disposal. It may often prove counterproductive to keep
increasing the length of Security Council resolutions
without giving a clear, focused and strategic direction to
the missions with regard to their potential contributions
to the overarching aim of sustaining peace.

Secondly, as a troop- and police-contributing
country, we often find ourselves in constrained
circumstances to keep our personnel deployed on the
ground and apprised about conflict analysis and the
broader political processes at play, owing to a lack of
timely information and coordination. We remain seized
of the issue of developing a regular and systematic
approach to triangular consultations among the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat so as to address those gaps. We believe
that such an institutional mechanism would lead to
qualitative change in mandate design and review.

Thirdly, peacekeeping missions need to be
sensitized to the fact that it is not only their traditional
peacebuilding tasks that relate to sustaining peace.
Peacekeeping missions can effectively establish the
basis - in tandem with the national authorities and
the communities that they serve - for contributing
to the broader objective of sustaining peace and
development through an integrated and sequential
approach to mandate delivery. Seamless country
coordination with the United Nations entities engaged
on the ground remains critical for transitions during
mission drawdown and exit. The advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission for complementing the
Security Council's work in that regard also need not be
overly emphasized.

Fourthly, the design and implementation of
peacekeeping mandates are underpinned by a set of
principles pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations.
It is fundamental for the perceived integrity and
credibility ofpeacekeeping missions that their mandates
align with those principles. Furthermore, peacekeeping
mandates need to be achievable in consideration of
the expertise and resources available to peacekeeping
missions. We suggest that challenges beyond the
capacity of peacekeeping missions be addressed
through other competent means, without risking the
credibility and security of peacekeeping personnel.

Fifthly, the issue of predictable and sustainable
resources for peacekeeping missions remains a priority
for their continued efficiency and effectiveness. We
acknowledge the potential merit of the Secretary-
General's nine-point reform agenda in streamlining
resource deployment with clear and achievable
mandates. We look forward to bold, ambitious and
forward-looking recommendations on financing for
sustaining peace in the Secretary-General's report,
which should also take into consideration the potential
contributions of peacekeeping missions to that effect.

This open debate has been a good opportunity
for the Security Council, along with the broader
membership, to revisit the possibilities for further
enhancing the performance and contribution of
peacekeeping operations in the broader context of
the reform of the United Nations peace and security
architecture. The overarching recognition of the
primacy of politics in sustaining peace makes it
evident that a coherent and coordinated application of
the various tools available to the United Nations can
also help enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations in specific situations.

