Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement that will be delivered shortly
by the Permanent Representative of Germany on behalf
of the European Union. I shall therefore limit my
statement to a few additional comments.

At the outset, Mr. President, I wish to commend
your initiative to convene this open debate on the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In our view, this is
an important and timely opportunity to explore ways
and mechanisms for interaction between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
strengthen the synergy of efforts aimed at helping post-
conflict countries to manage the difficult transition
from war to peace.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
could benefit from more structured interaction with the
relevant principal organs of the United Nations. In
addition, the Council could benefit from a proactive
approach and the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission in dealing with specific post-conflict
situations.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
to bridge a critical gap in the peacebuilding
architecture. In that respect, the first results of the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission demonstrate
that the decision to create that new United Nations
body was a step in the right direction. At the same
time, we must continue to seek its proper place in the
system of United Nations institutions, so as to avoid
unnecessary duplication of effort and to efficiently
utilize its unique capabilities and comparative
advantages.
The Peacebuilding Commission should continue
to develop its mechanisms to better serve as a forum
for coordination and exchange of views among major
stakeholders, donors and countries with experience in
peacebuilding, with a view to defining integrated and
tailored country-specific post-conflict strategies. In
that regard, we share the belief that, as the Permanent
Representative of Italy rightly pointed out, the best

added value will come not from formal reports or
decisions, but rather from operational outcomes
envisaged in the interaction stimulated by
Peacebuilding Commission meetings in the field that
bring together all stakeholders and donors. That will be
more helpful, in our View, than trying to reach
negotiated agreements on formal decisions and reports.
The measure of its success should be gauged by fewer
numbers of countries relapsing from fragile peace to
conflict, and not by a greater number of reports and
more paperwork.

In our view, the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be most effective in the country-
specific mode in the field, where its work should be
focused. We also believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission should be oriented towards seeking
practical solutions to complex problems in the area of
post-conflict peace consolidation. In that respect, we
support the idea of establishing working groups to
comprehensively discuss some of the specific aspects
of peacebuilding in country-specific meetings, such as
the rule of law and other crucial elements of peace
consolidation processes. These working groups could
bring together different parts of the United Nations that
have been involved in the peacebuilding process, major
stakeholders and donors.

During its presidency of the Security Council in
February, Slovakia will organize an open debate on one
important aspect of peacebuilding, and that is security-
sector reform. We believe that a more coherent and
systematic approach by the international community is
needed to address this issue and to secure the proper
functioning of security forces and institutions in a post-
conflict country. We believe the Commission might
play a crucial role in this regard in helping countries to
address this problem in a comprehensive manner and
could generate long-term support and resources to
ensure the coherence and sustainability of the process
over the long term.

Last but not least, we believe that in the future
the Security Council should make better use of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a source of advice on
peacebuilding strategies and mandates. Finally, we
believe that the number of situations on the
Commission's agenda could be gradually expanded to
include such countries as Haiti, Timor-Leste or the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. An important
prerequisite for this would be proper definition of the
Commission's role and mechanisms to manage an
increased number of highly complex situations. Here
again, we want to underline the importance of country-
specific mechanisms in the field as a way to meet this
goal.

Based on the concrete proposals and observations
we have heard this morning, we believe that today's
discussion will generate useful ideas that could help to
bring new dynamics to the work of the Commission
and strengthen the interaction of the Council with the
Commission.

