Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries Iceland, Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

I first wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fernandez, for his briefing
to the Council. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for the comments he has just
made.

Last September, during the previous debate
(S/PV.6618) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), we welcomed the
peaceful and democratic election of a new President
and called for the creation of a new Government. Four
months later, our predictions of a period of political
stability and reconstruction have been undermined by

the recent resignation of the former Prime Minister,
Mr. Garry Conille. The executive and legislative
branches must engage in a constructive dialogue in
order to work in a spirit of compromise and move
effectively towards the appointment of a new Prime
Minister.

In the coming months, Haiti's Parliament will
lose a third of its senators as their terms expire, while
the mayors are already working beyond their four-year
terms of office. The timely organization of partial
legislative and municipal elections is therefore
essential to the effective functioning of Haiti's
democratic institutions and local administration.

In the context of a new reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH's forces, it will be important for the
Mission to remain focused on its core mandate of
supporting the political process and strengthening the
rule of law and security institutions. The European
Union and its member States will continue to work
hand in hand with the relevant authorities to support
the transition process so that they can take increasing
responsibility for the country's stability, in particular
the training of a strong and effective National Police.
Progress in this respect should not be undermined by
the establishment of a second security force.

The criticisms of MINUSTAH based on
allegations of serious professional misconduct remain a
reason for grave concern. It is important that the
Mission continue to demonstrate the highest standards
of integrity. It should respond to those allegations with
appropriate investigations and disciplinary measures.

Over the past two years, the European Union has
made an significant contribution to Haiti. In 2010,
€522 million were pledged from the European Union's
budget to assist the Haitian Government. Today, more
than €358 million have been disbursed. Our assistance
has brought immediate relief to over 5 million Haitians
and aims to ensure the long-term recovery of their
country.

Today, half a million Haitians still live in camps
and cholera persists. Women and children are
particularly affected. The efforts of donors, including
the European Union, to reduce the risk of natural
disasters have increased the country's ability to better
cope with those disasters. Nevertheless, the country
remains vulnerable.
The current political stalemate must end. Haiti
and its citizens cannot afford further political turmoil
and instability. The European Union and its member
States remain fully committed to supporting Haiti in its
efforts to build a brighter future for the Haitian
population. The European Union Development
Commissioner, Mr. Piebalgs, was in Port-au-Prince
yesterday for a two-day visit in which he announced a
new contribution of €100 million aimed at
strengthening the reconstruction process.

