The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. The European Union (EU) and its member States thank Indonesia for pursuing this subject and leading us to focus on the need to better understand and address any evolving linkages between international terrorism and organized crime, recognizing that motivations and legal regimes for both are different. The Addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles, adopted in December 2018, called upon all of us to continue to conduct research and collect information to enhance knowledge and better understand the nature and scope of the links that may exist between terrorism and transnational organized crime. As stated in the recent European Council conclusions on EU External Action on Preventing and Countering Terrorism and Violent Extremism, adopted on 16 June, the EU recognizes the importance of continued monitoring and of an effective response to the threat emanating from linkages between organized crime and terrorism. There is a need to strengthen international cooperation in order to improve information exchange and cooperation among counter-terrorism, law enforcement, judicial and border control authorities. That includes mitigating the security risks of linkages in prisons between organized crime and terrorist inmates. In that regard, the EU strives to achieve a multidisciplinary, multi-agency, integrated approach to effectively tackling crime, including terrorism, while ensuring that any measures taken respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as principled humanitarian action and international humanitarian law. To ensure that and find best solutions, we need cross-sectoral cooperation among humanitarian, financial and counter-terrorism experts. It is crucial for various law enforcement and other agencies, specializing in either field, to work together, share information and intelligence and coordinate efforts at all levels in order to effectively respond to the challenges posed in both areas. A new EU Security Union Strategy for the period 2020 to 2025 focuses on priority areas where the EU can bring added value to support member States in fostering security. From combating terrorism and organized crime to preventing and detecting hybrid threats and increasing the resilience of our critical infrastructure, to promoting cybersecurity and fostering research and innovation, the Strategy lays out the tools and measures to be developed over the next five years to ensure security in our physical and digital environment. It also recognizes the increasing interconnection between internal and external security. In the EU, legislation to prevent and combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism is designed to prevent the financial markets from being misused for those purposes. Legislation must aim to address both issues simultaneously. It is imperative that we bar criminals from gaining access to capital by effectively fighting money laundering and disincentivizing terrorism and organized crime. That legislation increases transparency about the beneficial owners of companies and trusts in order to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing via opaque structures and improve the work of financial intelligence units, with better access to information through centralized bank account registers; tackles terrorist financing risks linked to the anonymous use of virtual currencies and prepaid instruments; and improves the cooperation and exchange of information between anti-money laundering supervisors and with the European Central Bank; among other things. With regard to drugs, the new EU Agenda and Action Plan on Drugs 2021-2025 sets out the political framework and priorities for action for the next five years. It aims at enhancing security measures that focus on all aspects of illicit trafficking of drugs, from organized crime groups to external border management and illicit distribution and production. It is also increasing prevention, including through raising awareness on the adverse effects of drugs, notably the intersection between drug use, violence and other forms of crimes. Moreover, the EU Agenda and Action Plan on Drugs 2021-2025 addresses drug-related harms through access to treatment, risk and harm reduction, and a balanced approach to the issue of drugs in prisons. More significantly, the EU commits to tackling drug-related financial flows, as the EU member States have agreed to increase the number of financial investigations and encourage their relevant authorities to focus on the seizure, confiscation and recovery of proceeds of crime, particularly money-laundering, corruption and other criminal activities, including organized crime. On 24 July 2020, a new EU action plan on trafficking of firearms between 2020 and 2025 was published. To safeguard the legal market for firearms and avoid diversion, it focuses on the enforcement and modernization of EU legislation on controlling acquisitions and movements of firearms. To improve our knowledge of the threat of firearms trafficking, it proposes measures to develop comparable statistics on firearms events and seizures across the EU. To improve the crackdown on firearms-related crime, it proposes to give a new push to national firearms focal points, develop new tools to better detect weapons in fast parcels and modernize legislation on sanctions and police cooperation. Finally, it proposes to step up international cooperation, in particular with South-Eastern Europe, for which the action plan includes a number of specific actions. We highlight the important role played by the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation, which contributes to improving judicial cooperation in the fight against serious crime, including terrorism and the role of the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol), which supports member States in preventing and combating all forms of serious international and organized crime and terrorism. Europol prepares a terrorism situation and trend report every year. In the latest report, which has just been published, the entity noted that EU member States observed that a substantial number of terrorists have prior criminal records, mainly in different forms of non-organized crime. The illicit acquisition of material resources, such as theft of weapons and documents, has been identified as directly contributing to terrorist activity. The EU will strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations, including its offices, in particular the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - for example, on the annual report questionnaire to monitor the world drug situation - and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in this area. As we stated last year, the EU and its member States continue to consider it useful to increase efforts to better understand further linkages between terrorism and organized crime (see S/PV.8569). For these reasons, we welcome today's debate and the opportunity it affords to sharing and highlighting experiences.
