Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to extend our gratitude to Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, for their invaluable briefings. We also thank the other briefers for their in-depth remarks. We commend the Niger for organizing this very timely and important debate today. We also commend the Niger and Belgium for their hard work in the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and for the preparation and negotiation of the presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/8) adopted today. Children are our future and the next generation of hope, peace and development of each nation and the world. Yet an increasing number of children today are still suffering from impacts of armed conflicts on a daily basis, with limited or no access to education and other essential services. As shown in the latest report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/525), in 2019 more than 25,000 grave violations against children were verified, 494 of which were attacks made on schools. We are deeply concerned over the increasing acts of violence against children, notably attacks against schools and the use of schools for military purposes. We remain further concerned, as these situations have been further exacerbated due to the global outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We join other Member States in strongly condemning attacks on objects protected under international law, especially schools. We call on all parties concerned to put an end to such practices. The protection of children in armed conflicts is the crucial work of the Security Council within the framework of its mandate in maintaining international peace and security. More important, it is the primary role and responsibility of each Member State to enhance protective measures for children. In that regard, we emphasize the role of education as an important means of preventing armed conflict and addressing violations against children in conflict areas. Every child deserves an opportunity to attend schools so as to be equipped with knowledge about their rights and ways to ensure those rights. It is imperative that we continue to make concerted efforts to enhance concrete measures to immediately address attacks against schools, rebuild school facilities and ensure access to education for children in conflict- affected situations. Schools must be a safe space in conflict zones to shelter children. We must not allow schools to become targets of attacks, or be used for military purposes. While immediate action is urgently needed, it is also vital that we address the root causes of attacks against schools in a comprehensive manner, focusing on conflict prevention, mediation and the creation of an environment that promotes and protects children's rights in situations of armed conflict. As we just discussed a few days ago, the coronavirus disease pandemic has further complicated our joint efforts to address conflicts and humanitarian issues. In that regard, it is also important to maintain and galvanize political will and resources to protect children and schools. In doing so, we call on parties to armed conflict to fully respect and abide by international law, including international humanitarian law. In that connection, we would like to highlight the key international frameworks on the protection of children and education, including the Safe School Declaration and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We call on countries that have not done so to consider joining these frameworks. In this vein, I would like to join our colleague from Belgium in congratulating Saint Vincent and Grenadines on recently joining the Declaration and the Optional Protocol. For its part, Viet Nam reaffirms its strong commitment to the protection of children and their essential education. We welcome the adoption today of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/8, which once again reaffirms our commitment towards safeguarding and protecting children in armed conflict. We look forward to working actively with the international community in this endeavour.
