Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to join previous speakers
in welcoming the participation of the new Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Peru in the present meeting. We
wish Mr. Meza-Cuadra every success in his important
new post.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for presenting the final report on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(S/2019/805), which represents a milestone - the
conclusion of 15 years of a United Nations presence
in the country under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Throughout those years, the Blue
Helmets and Berets, as well as the civilian personnel
of the two United Nations of peacekeeping missions,
helped the Haitian people address acute issues. Starting
tomorrow, not only will Haiti's people, political
leaders and law enforcement bodies assume greater
independence from the international community's
provision of assistance, but they will also take on full
responsibility for the fate of their country and the
security of its citizens. However, Haiti's Government
and society are entering a crucial phase of development
that will be no easier than the previous one. The
awareness of national responsibility inevitably ramps
up social action and encourages society to express civic
positions, and that creates the kinds of challenges that
define a mature State.

In the past few months we have been alarmed by
developmentsinthe social andpolitical situation,because
of which the elections planned for October will likely not
even be held this year. That is most unfortunate, since a
peaceful and inclusive electoral process is precisely what
could bring the country some long-awaited stability.
Meanwhile, as the Secretary-General's report rightly
notes, a dire socioeconomic situation has unfolded in
Haiti, with a food crisis, a bleak humanitarian situation
and institutional paralysis. Under these circumstances,
the first order of business is approving the nomination
of the new prime minister and forming a Government
capable of achieving national reconciliation and
tackling socioeconomic issues head on. We hope that
can be dealt with as soon as possible.

We believe that the prevailing disagreements
can and must be resolved through broad-based social
engagement. Unfortunately, the attempts to hold such
discussions have gone nowhere. The right to peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression and opinion is of
course indisputable, but we should not forget that those
rights should only be exercised with full respect for
national law. We also want to point out that there is
nothing new about disagreement in society, which can
be found elsewhere in the region and indeed all over the
world. We keep on saying that the only effective way
to resolve domestic disputes is through an inclusive
national dialogue, which is the only path to a viable
solution, regardless of the State at issue.

Resorting to armed force has never brought political
stability or economic development to any country. We
call on all forces of conscience in Haiti to consider that
and engage immediately in a dialogue aimed at finding
mutually acceptable solutions. We believe that no one,
neither the Haitians themselves nor the international
community, wants to see a repetition of the negative
experience that followed the withdrawal of the United
Nations in 2000.

We hope that in beginning its work tomorrow, the
special political mission will provide the host State
with the necessary advisory support. We believe that
the United Nations can only give effective support
when it there is full cooperation with the host State,
to which primary responsibility belongs. We therefore
expect that United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
will support the development of Haiti's national
capacity based on the priorities of Haitians themselves
and in strict compliance with its mandate under
resolution 2476 (2019), while avoiding any interference
in the country's domestic affairs. We will be closely
monitoring its work in that regard. The attention of
both the United Nations and the Security Council will
enable the Haitian people to maintain confidence in the
support of the international community.

In conclusion, we want to assure the Council that
the Russian Federation supports Port-au-Prince and will
continue to work to ensure that the Council's efforts
will lead to a genuine normalization of the situation in
Haiti and reinforce the country's sovereignty and self-
sufficiency.

