Mr. Onn (Malaysia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening today's open debate, and Ijoin earlier
speakers in congratulating you on your delegation's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
briefings and insights on today's issue.

Malaysia stands firm in the fight against terrorism.
It is without a doubt that damage to the critical
infrastructure that is essential for the maintenance
of vital societal functions, whether through natural
disasters, terrorism, criminal activity or malicious
behaviour, has a negative impact on the security of a
country and the well-being of its citizens. It is therefore
important that national critical infrastructure be
protected against terrorist attacks.

All Governments recognize the threat posed by
terrorism against critical infrastructure andthe sustained
preventive and mitigation efforts that such threats
demand. While the responsibility for the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks rests
primarily with the State, the implementation of steps
to reduce the vulnerability of privately owned and
corporate assets is also highly dependent on the owners
of such assets.

Nevertheless, private firms may not have
adequate commercial incentives to fund initiatives to
reduce vulnerability. For some, the cost of reducing
vulnerabilities may seem to outweigh the benefits of
reduced risks from terrorist attacks, as well as from
natural and other disasters.

While Governments have a primary role to play in
the protection of critical infrastructure, it is a matter of
responsibility, necessity and good governance for the
owners of such critical infrastructure to address the
security needs of their assets. There is therefore a need
for Governments and businesses to share intelligence
and information on threats and vulnerability and on
measures to protect infrastructure and mitigate the
risk involved.

We believe that the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force's Working Group on
the Protection of Critical Infrastructure Including
Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security
has an important role to play in the international
community's efforts to protect critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks. Those efforts may
include promoting international and public-private
cooperation; capacity-building; the sharing of best
practices; improving responsiveness and resilience
through planning, prevention, crisis management and
recovery; promoting the exchange of information and
best practices; and establishing a network of experts on
the protection of critical infrastructure.

At the domestic level, Malaysia's efforts in the area
of the protection of critical infrastructure are divided
into two levels, namely, the federal level and the state
level. At the federal level, those efforts fall under the
Central Committee on Critical National Infrastructure,
which is led by the Secretary General of the Ministry
of Home Affairs. At the state level, the Committee on
Critical Infrastructure is led by the State Secretary.
Under these committees, the audit or monitoring teams
have been tasked with monitoring the level of security
at all critical infrastructure sites in order to detect any
non-compliance and to advise the operator or owner
accordingly on how to improve the security level in
the entities concerned. National legislation related to
the protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks includes the National Security Council Act 2016
and the Protected Areas and Protected Places Act 1959.
A national cybersecurity policy is also in place aimed
at ensuring the security of Malaysia's critical national
information infrastructure.

Malaysia's sponsorship of resolution 2341 (2017),
adopted by the Council earlier this morning, signifies
Malaysia's commitment to the efforts of the international
community in this field through the sharing of best
practices, experience, expertise and intelligence aimed
at further strengthening our capacities to safeguard and
protect critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks.

