Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I thank
you very much, Mr. President, for convening this very
important debate here in the Security Council.

Let me first thank my colleagues for their words
of sympathy and support for Pakistan. This debate
comes in the wake of the heinous and horrendous act
of terrorism in Peshawar, Pakistan, an act that has been
widely condemned by the international community.
Pakistan also condemns the perpetrators, facilitators
and abettors of such acts of terrorism, including that of
16 December in Peshawar.

Here at the Security Council, let me convey this
message loud and clear: we will defeat terrorism.
Pakistan will prevail, no matter what. Our mourning
today will only morph into a stronger resolve to fight
back even harder. By killing our children, the terrorists
have attacked our heart. I assure you, Mr. President,
that Pakistan will go for their jugular. Allow me to share
the heroic acts performed, even during the cowardly
act of terrorism on 16 December, by the teachers, the
children and in particular the female principal of the
school. They all, instead of trying to save their own
lives, chose to stay back and help their peers and the
children. That is a testimony that makes me proud, and
I am proud to say that that is my nation and those are
my people. I am very proud to represent them here at
the United Nations.

Pakistan possesses an unyielding resolve to fight
terrorism. Our mind is very clear, our policy is on
the table, and we continue to undertake affirmative
action. After all, let me remind everyone that Pakistan
continues to spearhead the international war against
terrorism.

Let me now express the views of my delegation on
the subject under discussion today. We maintain a clear
distinctionbetweencross-bordercrimeandtransnational
organized crime. We feel that not all transnational
organized crimes are cross-border in nature, and cross-
border crimes may not be organized. Nevertheless, we
recognize that terrorists can take advantage of the lack
of effective border control measures and associated
criminal activities. We therefore fully subscribe to the
need for effective controls on transnational organized
crime and for effective border control mechanisms to
prevent the development of any linkages with terrorist
activities. We also acknowledge the complicated linkage
that may exist among terrorism, criminal activity and
effective border controls. We fully share the goals of
the international community to successfully address
them through appropriate national, bilateral, regional
and international measures.

Pakistan believes that an effective strategy to
achieve those goals must take into account the following
points. First, States bear the primary responsibility to
strengthen border controls and take effective measures
against terrorism and criminal activities. Secondly,
bilateral, regional and international cooperation,

including sharing of information, is important for
achieving the desired goals. Thirdly, strategies need to
be tailored to specific challenges presented by dynamics
and conditions peculiar to the region. Lastly, it is vital
to build the capacities and capabilities of States facing
those challenges.

Pakistan is fully aware of and responsive to the
challenges it faces with regard counter-terrorism and
terrorism's conceivable linkage with transnational
organized crimes. Therefore, effective border control
measures continue to remain a major subject of our
bilateral cooperation with the relevant countries. We
have taken a number of initiatives to build regional
cooperation in controlling transnational organized
crime.

Pakistan reaffirms its commitment to counter
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We will
continue to cooperate with the international community
in addressing the challenges emanating from the
factors that complicate our fight against this scourge,
including transnational organized crime. We believe
that international measures taken in this regard must
respect national sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of States and should aim to avoid any duplication of
work undertaken by various United Nations agencies
and organizations. The international community
already possesses the will, the instruments and the
infrastructure to deal with terrorism and transnational
organized crime. What is needed is the effective
implementation by States of the relevant instruments
and meaningful cooperation within the United Nations
bodies and agencies, working within their specific
mandates.

To end, allow me to say that Pakistan mourns today,
but we shall, God willing, ensure the total annihilation
of terrorists and their twisted ideologies.

