Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to express my great
appreciation for the Spanish initiative that you lead as
an able diplomat, innovative minister and colleague.

This important meeting falls under the item of
peace-building - a most important and necessary
item. The successive initiatives in the Security
Council - the Mexican initiative to consider how to
confront the new challenges to international peace and
security; the Romanian initiative on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
for stability; and, finally, the Spanish initiative on the
consideration of civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building - all show the
importance that the Security Council attaches to
continuing dialogue to develop concepts and
mechanisms of complementarity and partnership
between the United Nations and international and
regional organizations, under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and in the service of the
Charter itself - in other words, in the service of
international peace and stability.

In previous dialogues, whether in this Chamber or
in high-level meetings that the Secretary-General of the
United Nations regularly holds with the leaders of
regional organizations, we stressed the need for a
collective, international security regime, the need for
strengthening the multilateral regime and activating the
role of the United Nations in finding solutions to
current problems reflecting the true interests of
different parties, based on a balance and on
international legitimacy and justice that would gain
international, regional and national support for such
solutions.

Previous meetings stressed two fundamental
principles that inform our debate and thinking today.
The first principle is that cooperation between the
United Nations and the Security Council on the one
hand, and regional organizations on the other, is
fundamentally governed by the Charter of the United
Nations and, particularly, by the provisions of Chapter
VIII. Solid norms have been established for those
relations by General Assembly resolutions and
agreements for cooperation, as well as periodic
mechanisms that make up a matrix of relations of
cooperation, partnership and complementarity. What is
needed is to operationalize that system of relations so
that regional organizations may become one of the
main organs of United Nations action in dealing with
regional crises and conflicts, as well as world
challenges, developments and changes. As the
Permanent Representative of Spain said, in his letter to
the Secretary-General of 8 September 2004, the
complexity of present-day crisis management may also
make it helpful to share the burden of crisis
management between different actors, drawing on each
of their particular strengths.

The second fundamental principle stressed in
previous meetings is that threats and challenges in the
international arena need to be dealt with collectively, in
a multilateral manner, with a variety of instruments and
mechanisms available for crisis management, dealing
with both civilian and political aspects, and that
political solutions, not military solutions, must be the
first choice in dealing with crises. A military solution
must be the last resort in the true sense of the phrase
"having exhausted all other means available, clearly,
objectively and in good will".

Coercive measures must, equally, be clearly
authorized by the Security Council. I say this because
the means to solve crises have a great role in the
success of peace-building. If there is a rush to resort to
force, peace-building will be fraught with danger and
difficulties and could even engender a fatal reversal
that would affect regional peace and stability and the
maintenance of international peace and security in turn.
That is, perhaps, one of the main reasons for the
establishment by the Secretary-General of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. Many
intellectuals throughout the world believe that such
changes and developments are not the result of sudden
events. Rather, they have their roots in economic,
social and political problems that go back to the end of

the cold war - problems that have led to
destabilization and an increasing feeling of oppression
and injustice - as well as in poverty,

underdevelopment, disease, violence, armed conflicts,
and terrorism. Hence, Mr. President, you chose the
important theme of civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building for our debate today.

Recent experience shows that, following the end
of hostilities, proper and serious preparation for the
civilian and political aspects of an effective
framework, authorized in all instances by the Security
Council, is necessary if we are to help societies to
rebuild after conflict and to prevent the deterioration of
the situation in such societies to levels worse than
previous ones. Military victory in itself is not the final
victory. It has also become obvious that the military
aspect is but a part of a wider political process, and
military operations must be evaluated by the degree of
success of the peace-building process that follows. The
Secretary-General and the Security Council and its
organs must therefore have a role to play, just as they
play a role in the authorization of military action
within a clear and comprehensive framework.

I fully agree with the presidency's discussion
paper that building peace is more complex than waging
war. Indeed, it is always easier to destroy than to build.
That may be obvious, but the Security Council must
clearly acknowledge that the decision to go to war or to
undertake a military operation in the context of a
conflict must be clearly legitimate and must be based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter, which
permit the use of force only under Chapter VII, with
the authority of the Security Council. Article 51
provides for the legitimate right of self-defence.
In order to ensure success and legitimacy,
political and civilian operations must follow the end of
hostilities. Ensuring public order and operation of
government institutions and civil administration cannot
be considered separately from the decision to go to
war.

It is only logical that collective international
security is strengthened by regional security. That is
fully understood by the League of Arab States, and the
principle has become entrenched in our organization
over the past few years. Many changes are now taking
place in our work. In particular, there is increased
openness to civil society in the Arab world, and we are
opening the doors of the League's Economic and
Social Council to such organizations. We are moving
towards creating an Arab parliament, which would be
the basis of democratic regional order, and adopting a
human rights charter for the Arab world, as well as a
mechanism for the prevention, management and
settlement of disputes in the region.

Because of our geographic position - we are at
the crossroads between Asian and African concerns
and close to Europe, on the other side of the
Mediterranean Sea - the Arab League finds itself
sharing in many of the crises and concerns of those
regional organizations. Thus, we have cooperated
horizontally with many regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the context of peace
negotiations on Darfur, within a troika led by the
African Union in cooperation and coordination with
the United Nations and the League of Arab States, as
well as with regard to the situation in Somalia, where
we are following up and helping to stabilize the
situation. Those issues are of concern to both the Arab
and African regions. At the same time, we are
attempting to continue to act within the Barcelona
process for the security of the Mediterranean.

We agree with the Spanish discussion paper that
the participation of the largest number of parties in the
management of crises requires further coordination
between those parties. We also agree with the need to
designate a lead organization - the United Nations, or
a regional organization, as agreed upon - to
coordinate international efforts for crisis management.
That will also require effective coordination between
crisis management teams and the parties concerned as
regards financing, development and reconstruction, and
that in turn will require a professional strategic plan
that is carefully adopted and implemented.

There is no disagreement whatsoever on the
changing nature of the responsibilities that civilian
parties have taken on in both civilian and military
operations. However, the substance of the issue -
dealing with incipient or current challenges - relates
to the fundamental role of the Security Council in the
wider issue of the maintenance of international peace
and security within this unique forum, as the Secretary-
General has characterized the United Nations.

We have a great deal to say in this regard, as we
have witnessed the reluctance of the Security Council
to face major issues. It has neglected some major
crises, such as the Arab-Israeli conflict, the issue of
Palestine and the continuing Israeli violations of
international law and the principles of the Charter. The
Security Council's approach to the maintenance of
peace and security throughout the world must not be
selective; it must not be subject to pressure or to
special interests and lobbying. Here is the crux of the
matter: if the Security Council is reformed and plays
its proper role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, we will be able to discuss the
civilian aspects of conflict and peace-building more
effectively.

The League of Arab States has made clear its
view of regional stability and security in the Middle
East. We have stressed the need to eliminate all
weapons of mass destruction in the region, without
exception. The issue of weapons of mass destruction
must be dealt with from an integrated, regional
perspective so it will not disturb the balance of
regional security. Thus, over the past 30 years we have
witnessed many initiatives by the Arab States calling
for a zone free from nuclear and all other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East. Paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991) stressed that disarming Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction was a step towards the
goal of ridding the entire Middle East region of all
such weapons. That is a resolution that is enforceable,
because it was adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter. The time has come for the Council to do its
part in ensuring that all the paragraphs of that
resolution are implemented, especially paragraph 14,
as it is of major importance for collective security in
the Middle East and throughout the world.

The core of the issue remains the credibility of
the multilateral international order. Challenges to the
international order in the past few years have made it
clear that the Council's credibility is based on two
fundamental factors: its legitimacy and its
effectiveness. The United Nations must expand the
membership of the Council in order to make it more
democratic and increase its effectiveness and
legitimacy, on the basis of the purposes and principles
of the Charter and in the common interest, crystallised
through consensus. This world is our world. It will not
be safe unless we are all safe and can all feel that our
rights will be maintained through the legitimacy
provided by the United Nations, as well as through
respect for the principles of international law and the
Charter.

