The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

At the outset, I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his
briefing and Mr. De Serpa Soares for his clarifications
regarding the incident in northern Kosovo on 28 May.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku,
Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States, and thank
them for their statements.

We are following with concern the increasing
tensions between Belgrade and Pristina, which could
affect the prospects for the resumption of a productive
dialogue between them. We urge them to refrain from
inflammatory statements and provocative actions that
could hinder the progress that has been made. We
call on Belgrade and Pristina to show restraint, take
all necessary measures to calm the situation, defuse
tensions and overcome obstacles while demonstrating
the political will necessary to reach a comprehensive
agreement, which could ensure the conditions conducive
to a resumption of dialogue and fully normalized
relations between both sides.

We have also been following the latest developments
in northern Kosovo with concern, especially in
the municipality of Zubin Potok, related to the
implementation of a court order by the Kosovo police
to search and monitor a number of locations throughout
Kosovo in order to combat corruption and organized
crime. That led to the arrest of a staff member of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The Government in Kosovo has
declared that the United Nations staff member is now
persona non grata. We emphasize in that regard the
importance of respecting the diplomatic immunity
of United Nations personnel in accordance with the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. We also
emphasize the importance of the neutrality of United
Nations mission personnel and their commitment to
implementing their mandate.

The European Union-facilitated dialogue in
Brussels between Belgrade and Pristina remains the
most appropriate framework for settling all outstanding
issues between both sides. It is the right way to reach
just and lasting consensus solutions. We also welcome
the Berlin Summit convened in April by Germany and
France with the aim of urging both sides to resume
dialogue and implement all existing agreements.

We welcome the recent steps taken by the Kosovo
authorities to combat corruption, especially by
establishing an anti-fraud unit to promote the effective
prosecution of corruption and organized crime. We also
welcome the ongoing efforts of UNMIK, in cooperation
with the United Nations country team in Kosovo and
in partnership with local and international actors, to
implement the recommendations of the United Nations
Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in May 2018 in
support of building confidence among the communities.
It is important that the international community
continue its efforts to urge Pristina and Belgrade to
overcome their differences and reach consensus-based,
just and lasting solutions acceptable to both sides,
which will help to establish the foundations for peace,
security and stability in the region.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Tanin to respond to the question
raised by the representative of the Russian Federation.

