Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation, Sir, is
pleased to see you presiding over the Council and to
thank your predecessor for a job well done.

My delegation will vote in favour of draft
resolution S/2000/ll49 because we support efforts that
will ensure the smooth and unimpeded implementation
of the humanitarian programme for Iraq, which is vital
for ameliorating the plight of the Iraqi people, who
continue to suffer from the effects of the 10-year-old
comprehensive sanctions imposed on their country.

As reflected in the draft resolution, and pointed
out by the Secretary-General in his latest report to the
Council, contained in document S/2000/ll32 of 29
November 2000, the humanitarian programme for Iraq
is temporary and short-term in nature and

"was never intended to meet all the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi population or to be a substitute
for normal economic activity". (S/2001/1132, para. 5)

Also, as the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
programme is not geared to address or remedy the
long-term deterioration of the living standards of the
people or their declining educational and health
standards and the country's declining infrastructure.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for reminding the Council and the international
community of the temporary nature of the humanitarian
programme we are extending for Iraq today for another
180 days. It is important that members of the Council
keep this in perspective and that we remind ourselves
as we renew the programme that this is its fourth year
and that there is a real risk that what was intended to be
a temporary mechanism to provide humanitarian relief
to the Iraqi people may well become a permanent
arrangement, as is the case in respect of the sanctions
regime itself.

The humanitarian programme, however well-
intentioned and executed, cannot be a substitute for the
lifting of the sanctions, which alone can deliver the
Iraqi people out of their present sorry state of affairs,
which has been well documented. As the Secretary-
General himself stated in his report,

"the vast majority of the Iraqi people still faces a
situation of decreasing income, thereby
intensifying the dependency of the poorer strata
on the commodities and services provided
through the programme". (ibid, para. 3)

He goes on to comment on the patterns of
pauperization and growing food insecurity among the
Iraqi people, particularly among the most vulnerable of
them. The majority of the population struggle to
maintain themselves above subsistence level, while
vast numbers of highly trained professionals have
emigrated due to the deterioration of their living
standards as well as isolation from developments in
their respective fields, such as science and medicine.
These are the very people Iraq can ill afford to lose for
its long-term rehabilitation.
It is important that, as the Council extends the
humanitarian programme, members keep in mind the
sobering reminder of the Secretary-General, which he
and the Executive Director of the Iraq Programme
never tire of repeating in each and every one of their
reports and briefings.

My delegation is also grateful to the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of the Office of the
Iraq Programme for drawing attention repeatedly in
their reports and briefings to the problem of the holds
in the Security Council Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990), known as the 661 Committee,
which have become a major impediment to the
programme's smooth running, with obvious negative
effects on the ground. In his report, the Secretary-
General has expressed serious concern over the
excessive number of holds placed on applications. He
observed that the volume of holds had risen drastically
to $2.31 billion as at 31 October 2000, and had
impacted adversely on such important sectors as
electricity, water and sanitation, agriculture,
transportation and telecommunications. The holds have
also adversely affected efforts to deal with the serious
problems of sewage and sanitation.

It is equally true in respect of the deteriorating oil
infrastructure, including the important Mina al-Bakr oil
terminal, which has not shown any marked
improvement since it was highlighted in the Secretary-
General's last report. The Secretary-General has also
drawn attention to the holds on trucks, which are badly
needed for transportation of food supplies. If not eased,
these may soon affect the distribution of food rations.

My delegation strongly supports the Secretary-
General's appeal to all parties concerned to fully
cooperate and address the excessive number of holds
placed on applications.

Many reasons, of course, have been adduced to
explain the holds, but, while some of them are
plausible and will in time be resolved, many others
clearly will require the necessary political will on the
part of Council members. At any rate, whatever the
reasons, what is alarming and of serious concern to the
Secretary-General, and to my delegation, is the
excessive number of holds, which must be urgently
addressed and resolved. It remains our hope that the
Secretary-General's next report to the Council on this
subject will present a more positive picture of the
question of the holds and of the humanitarian situation
in Iraq in general.

My delegation continues to be dismayed by the
current humanitarian situation in Iraq and agrees with
the Secretary-General's characterization of the
sanctions regime as one that enjoyed considerable
success in its disarmament mission but has been
responsible for worsening the humanitarian crisis in
that country as an unintended consequence.

Like him, we too are seriously concerned at the
continuing suffering of the Iraqi people and hope that
the sanctions imposed on Iraq can be lifted sooner
rather than later. For this, all parties concerned must
play their respective roles. In this regard, my
delegation looks forward to the upcoming dialogue
with Iraq in the context of the Secretary-General's
good offices, which, hopefully, will facilitate the early
and amicable resolution of all outstanding issues with
Iraq in the interests of the well-being of the Iraqi
people and regional and international peace and
security.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Ambassador Peter van Walsum, Chairman of
the 661 Committee, for the able manner in which he
discharges onerous duties under very difficult
circumstances.

