Mr. Kim Kyou-hyun (Republic of Korea): I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening today's timely debate on the challenges
faced in the fight against terrorism in Africa. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his comprehensive briefing, and Mr. Abdullahi Shehu
of the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa (GIABA) for his informative
briefing.

Despite the concerted efforts of the international
community over the past decade, terrorism remains a
serious threat to peace and security in the Maghreb
and the Sahel. If unchecked, the formation of the so-
called arc of instability from Mali to Somalia may soon
become irreversible, and transform the entire African
continent into a breeding ground for extremists and a
launchpad for larger-scale terrorist attacks around the
world.

The Republic of Korea believes that efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism will become much
more effective with the adoption of a comprehensive
approach. In this regard, we support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which focuses on
addressing each component of terrorism: terrorists,
weapons, funding and networks.

The natural starting point is to tackle socioeconomic
and environmental conditions, with a focus on youth
and education. In this context, the Republic of Korea
strongly supports the Secretary-General's global
Education First Initiative. Human rights and the rule of
law should be at the heart of global efforts to address
the issue of terrorism.

Defending porous borders to deter the illicit
flows of weapons in Africa is another important
task, as is the prevention and interdiction of terrorist
financing. In collaborating with the Financial Action
Task Force, the role of GIABA is crucial in fostering
closer military and intelligence cooperation among
the countries of the region. These efforts require full
ownership of the countries concerned in establishing
good governance and promoting economic reforms,
while designing and implementing a comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategy. In this regard, the Republic
of Korea commends the work done by the African
Union in adopting its Convention on the Prevention
and Combating of Terrorism of 1999, establishing the
African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism
based on its 2002 Plan of Action, and appointing
its Special Representative for Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation in October 2010.

Keenly mindful of such developments, the Republic
of Korea has been actively participating in global
efforts to prevent and combat terrorism in Africa. First,
Korea is playing an active role in addressing the origins
of terrorism, and seeks the socioeconomic development
of its African partners through a variety of cooperative
programmes. My Government has formulated an Action
Plan for the Third Korea-Africa Forum for 2013-2015,
which includes a whole range of assistance including
human resource development.

Secondly, preventing the use of weapons of mass
destruction for terrorism is another important task
for the international community. As the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the Republic of Korea will seek ways to
mobilize relevant international assistance for African
States within the Committee's mandate. We will
also work together with the other counter-terrorism
committees - namely, the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee - to develop
assistance packages to bolster African efforts to curb
terrorism.

Thirdly, adapting to the terrorist threat in the
digital age is essential. Taking advantage of the high
connectivity made available by information technology,
home-grown terrorists are learning to make bombs
through the Internet and high-profile terrorists are
recruiting members on Twitter. As the host of the Seoul
Conference on Cyberspace 2013, which is to be held
on 17 and 18 October, the Republic of Korea will scale
up its efforts to address the new trend of exploiting
information technology to incite, recruit, and finance
terrorist activities and spread extremism.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stressed,
terrorism has no nationality or religious affiliation and
respects no borders. Our response, too, should reflect
the amorphous and ubiquitous nature of terrorism
today. As a Security Council member, the Republic of
Korea will play its due part in promoting the Council's
work to combat terrorism in Africa and beyond.

