Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Our goal
in discussing the Middle East is to work on peace,
security and human rights for the region. We cannot
talk about stability in the Middle East without talking
about Iran. That is because nearly every threat to peace
and security in the Middle East is connected to Iran's
outlawed behaviour. For the international community's
engagement with Iran, this is a time of clarity and
opportunity. The United States has now embarked on
a course that attempts to address all aspects of Iran's
destructive conduct, not just one aspect. It is critical
that the international community do the same.

Every six months, the Secretary-General delivers
a report on the implementation of resolution to 2231
(2015), which the Council unanimously adopted. The
report has always noted the International Atomic Energy
Agency's findings that Iran is implementing the nuclear
deal, but then it goes on. It lists the regimes multiple
flagrant violations on the resolution's non-nuclear-
related provisions. Every six months, the Security
Council is presented with a laundry list of bad news,
but somehow manages to hear only the good news.
Some countries, to their credit, have called out
Iran for its maligned behaviour, but as a Council we
have adopted a dangerously short-sighted approach.
Judging Iran by the narrow confines of the nuclear
deal misses the true nature of the threat. Iran must be
judged in totality of its aggressive, destabilizing and
unlawful behaviour. To do otherwise would be foolish.
Such clarity brings opportunity. It gives the Council the
chance to defend its integrity. It gives us the chance to
work together as a community of nations to uphold the
provisions of the resolutions we have all worked so hard
to adopt.

The Security Council has repeatedly adopted
resolutions aimed at addressing Iranian support for
terrorism and regional conflicts, but Iran has repeatedly
thumbed its nose at such efforts; worse yet is that the
regime continues to play the Council. Iran hides behind
its assertion of technical compliance with the nuclear
deal, while it brazenly violates the other limits on its
behaviour. We have allowed them to get away with
it. That must stop. The list of the Iranian regime's
violations of Security Council resolutions is too long to
repeat here, so I will confine myself to the highlights.

Resolution 2231 (2015) bans the transfer of
conventional weapons from Iran. Yet today we see Iran
identified as a source of weapons in conflicts across
the region, from Yemen to Syria and Lebanon. The
United States, France, Australia, Ukraine and others
have intercepted Iranian shipments of rocket-propelled
grenade launchers, machine guns and anti-tank
missiles, among other weapons, that are bound for
Yemen. The Iranian regime has been a key source of
arms in strategic military support to the Houthi rebels,
both directly through its military and indirectly through
its Hizbullah proxy forces. Not only is that a violation
of resolution to 2231 (2015), it also violates resolution
to 2216 (2015), which imposes an arms embargo on
the Houthi rebels. Iran has repeatedly and brazenly
violated not one, but two, Security Council resolutions
on Yemen. Yet few on the Council have said anything
at all.

Resolution 2231 (2015) also bans travel outside Iran
by senior Iranian officials, including Major General
Soleimani. And yet the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/515) lists multiple press photos and reports of
the General travelking to Syria and Iraq. There are even
pictures on social media of him visiting Russia. That
is an open and direct violation of resolution to 2231
(2015). And yet where is the outrage of the Council?

There is more, plenty more. In resolutions 1701
(2006) and 1559 (2004), the Council unanimously
called on Hizbullah to disarm. Nonetheless, Hizbullah
is building an arsenal of war in Lebanon, with weapons
supplied by Iran. Again, none of that is going on in
secret. The leader of Hizbullah talks openly about the
support Iran provides. He has repeatedly boasted that
sanctions cannot hurt Hizbullah because

"everything it cats and drinks, its weapons and
rockets, come from the Islamic Republic of Iran".

Those are only the Iranian regime's activities on
which the Security Council has taken a clear position.
What about Iran's support of arms, financing and
training of fighters for the bloody Al-Assad regime
in Syria? There are also the consistent Iranian threats
to freedom of navigation in the Persian Gulf. There
are also the Iranian regime's cyberattacks against the
United States, Israel and other United Nations States
Members. Then there is Iran's imprisoning of foreign
journalists and tourists on made-up charges. Some
Americans, like Bob Levinson, have not been heard
from in over a decade.

Unfortunately, we are not done yet. The Iranian
regime abuses its own people. It imprisons or murders
members of the political opposition. It persecutes
Christians and other religious minorities. It denies
the freedom of speech. It executes gays and lesbians.
There is one more thing. The list of Iran's dangerous
and destructive behaviour that I just outlined does not
even include the regime's most threatening act - its
repeated ballistic missile launches, including the launch
in the summer of an intercontinental ballistic missile.
That should be a clarion call to everyone in the United
Nations. When a rogue regime starts down the path
of ballistic missiles, it tells us that we will soon have
another North Korea on our hands. If it is wrong for
North Korea to do that, why does that same mentality
not apply to Iran?

With our decision to take a comprehensive
approach to confronting the Iranian regime, the United
States will not turn a blind eye to such violations. We
have made it clear that the regime cannot have it both
ways. It cannot consistently violate international law
and still be considered a fit and trusted member of the
international community. The Council now has the
opportunity to change its policy towards the Iranian
regime. I sincerely hope it will take this chance to
defend not only the resolutions, but also peace, security
and human rights in Iran.

