Archbishop Auza: My delegation wishes to thank
the Swedish presidency for convening this special open
debate on children and armed conflict, a theme to which
the Holy See attaches critical importance.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465)
details the shocking scale and severity of violations and
abuses against children in armed conflicts around the
world. Although we might not be able to solve all the
conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council now,
we can do better in protecting the children who are
suffering from their devastating consequences. The
children and armed conflict agenda is an important
framework to that end. It provides us with the tools to
prevent all violations and abuses against children and to
ensure that the perpetrators be held accountable. There
is a unique consensus within the Security Council, and
within the entire international community, on the issue,
and we should spare no effort to implement it fully.

Among the areas where there is ample room for
improvement, my delegation would like to mention three.

First is the great responsibility to act in the face of
attacks on children. Sustainable Development Goal 16
commits us to end abuse, exploitation, trafficking and
all forms of violence against and torture of children The
first step towards achieving that target is to strengthen
preventive measures against human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law that are
occurring against children - and, in our case today, in
armed conflict.

Secondly, there is the need to prioritize the
effective reintegration of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups. Children caught
in armed conflict must always be treated primarily as
victims, even if, under the control of armed groups,
they may have factually committed crimes. Successful
rehabilitation and reintegration are in the best interests
not only of the child, but also of society as a whole.
Children should always be part of the solution, not part
of the problem. The care and rehabilitation of children
saved from armed groups require adequate, long-term
resources to provide them with the greatest chance for
their successful reintegration into their families and
society. We must assure that those children not remain
hostage to the horrors that they survived.

Third is the need to guarantee the right to education
for children victimized by armed conflict. A solid
education is the best way to assure that the victims of
today's conflicts will work to prevent those oftomorrow
and be peacebuilders. Sustainable Development
Goal 4 underlines the important role of children's
education in reducing poverty and inequality. In that
regard, through their various structures operating in
most conflict zones, the Holy See and the Catholic
Church are actively engaged, through educational and
rehabilitation institutions, in taking care of the many
victims of violence, both girls and boys.

Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow. For the children who have fallen victim to
armed conflicts and have survived, let us do everything
possible to give them back their future by helping them
to realize their deepest aspirations and enabling them
to fulfil their dreams, whether as doctors, lawyers,
teachers, social workers, parents or some other
profession or role that contributes to the common good
of every society for the prevention of conflicts and the
building of peaceful and sustainable communities.

