Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Lowcock for his
informative briefing.

We welcome the opportunity to address the
humanitarian situation in Syria and again call for the
immediate implementation of resolution 2401 (2018)
throughout the country.

The dire humanitarian needs of those inside Syria
should be the focus of our attention, irrespective of the
location of those in need. Humanitarian access and the
protection of civilians remain our main priorities. As
many have mentioned, the European Union and the
United Nations will co-chair the second Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, which
will take place in Brussels on 24 and 25 April. It is
hoped that it will help raise funds to address urgent
humanitarian needs in Syria, as well as garner political
support for the United Nations-led peace process.
Both are urgently needed. As the Syrian war enters its
eighth year, we hope for the continued solidarity of the
international community with the more than 13 million
Syrians now in need of humanitarian assistance.
In my statement I will focus on three areas: the
situation in Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin, the situation in
Raqqa and the situation in Rukban.

First, with regard to Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin, the
military offensive by the regime in eastern Ghouta
has led to an additional 150,000 internally displaced
civilians. After fleeing the violence, they are now
hosted in Idlib and immediate surroundings in rural
Damascus. Urgent shelter, food and medical care are
needed for those who were forced out of their homes
in Ghouta.

Reports of sexual violence against women are
cause for great concern. Women, girls and others
voicing concerns about gender-based violence should
be heard and helped. At the beginning of the year, we
held frequent discussions about the growing list of
medical evacuees. There were 1,000 people on the list.
We were appalled to learn that many of the severely sick
and injured were on evacuation buses to Idlib for many
hours. Such a trip is medically irresponsible. Those
are not the kind of medical evacuations that resolution
2401 (2018) called for. Furthermore, those who remain
in Douma need aid.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about
the fact that no facilitation letters have been provided
by the regime for aid convoys into Douma. I recall
resolution 2401 (2018), which demands unimpeded and
sustained delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need.
Access for that aid, as well as access to Douma for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic,
is urgently needed. We call for the independent
monitoring of the collective shelters for internally
displaced persons in rural Damascus. Families should
not be torn apart by separating men from their wives
and children. Where that has happened, the process of
family reunification is needed.

The urgent needs of internally displaced persons
throughout Syria call for a humanitarian surge. To
that end, the United Nations requests entry into the
country to help the Syrian population. We call on the
Syrian regime to provide the additional staff from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with visas as soon as possible. We also call
the attention of the Council to the plight of more than
180,000 people who have been displaced by hostilities
in Afrin district. The massive influx of internally
displaced persons puts a strain on host communities
that are already overwhelmed. We call on all parties to
allow for humanitarian access and for the freedom of
movement of the internally displaced.

Secondly, the liberation of Raqqa from Da'esh
has been a positive and decisive step in the fight
against Da'esh in Syria. It is now important to
contribute to the stabilization of Raqqa and to
promote inclusive governance. The protection of
civilians and of humanitarian organizations and other
non-governmental organizations must be respected at
all times. We welcome the fact that OCHA has been
able to conduct a humanitarian needs assessment
mission. On that basis, a coordinated humanitarian
response can be deployed. The clearance of improvised
explosive devices is a priority. Demining is essential
so that internally displaced persons can safely return
home. The Kingdom of the Netherlands contributes to
demining activities in and around Raqqa and calls on
other Council members to do the same.

My third point relates to Rukban, the so-called
berm. The situation in Rukban, where more than
50,000 displaced people remain, is worrisome. The
last food distribution took place in January. Apart
from food, medical aid is also a necessity and should
be made available to all those trapped in that area. It
is important that aid reach those people through the
fastest and easiest route.

Finally, let me conclude by again stressing the
importance of the immediate implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) throughout Syria. Humanitarian
access, as well as the protection of civilians, remains
a necessity, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

