Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the end of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), but I would like to begin
by thanking Mr. Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General
for Rule of Law and Security Institutions, and the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden for their
very insightful briefings. I would also like to thank
Mr. Chid Liberty for his relevant and particularly
encouraging remarks.

As I mentioned, France welcomes the end of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. Its
withdrawal demonstrates that it has fulfilled the duties
entrusted to it. Although the United Nations is so often
and so unfairly pilloried, this is another peacekeeping
success story for the Council and for the United Nations
as a whole. It can be added to the list of recent success
stories in Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Haiti.

UNMIL was established in 2003 with a mandate
to enforce the ceasefire. Throughout its 15 years in
the country, it has made a significant contribution to
stability in Liberia. I would like to take this opportunity
to pay a well-deserved tribute to all the United
Nations personnel who participated in the Mission
and contributed to its success on the ground day after
day, particularly the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif. I would also like to
pay tribute to the memory of the 202 Blue Helmets who
lost their lives in Liberia. The considerable progress
that the country has made since 2003 goes a long way
to making their sacrifice worthwhile. UNMIL's success
should serve as a source of inspiration to the Council
as it deploys other peacekeeping missions in difficult
situations where they face challenges in fulfilling their
mandates. It reminds us that the recipe for success lies
in a strong commitment on the part of the Council,
which kept the Mission in Liberia for 15 years, as
well as in the implementation of a genuine national
reconciliation process on the ground, without which
long-term stability would be impossible.

UNMIL's departure does not signal the end of the
United Nations in Liberia. On the contrary, it provides
an opportunity for the Organization to adopt new
support strategies with frameworks and instruments
that can better meet the current needs of the Liberian

people. The United Nations country team on the ground,
in close cooperation with the Liberia configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, will therefore continue
to provide support. It is also essential that the broader
international community continue to support Liberia,
alongside the new United Nations mechanism. As
Mr. Liberty so eloquently stated, that is the key to
sustaining the excellent results gained so far, promoting
development in the country and creating jobs. It is also
fully in line with the Secretary-General's vision of
mobilizing the international community throughout the
conflict cycle, which we fully support.

Liberia was recently able to demonstrate how far
it has progressed along the road to democratization
and stabilization. The peaceful holding of the most
recent elections is a major achievement, to the credit
of all Liberian stakeholders. It marks the first peaceful
transition between two democratically electedPresidents
since the civil war began, which tells us that Liberia has
turned the page and is now a truly mature democracy.
The recent transfer of power in Liberia also represents a
response to the deep aspirations of the Liberian people.
It is a truly historic moment. France has expressed its
willingness to support President Weah in achieving the
ambitious goals that he has outlined for his country. We
therefore call on all of Liberia's partners to support the
new Government's national development plan.

Regardless of the progress that has been made
so far, we should not underestimate the challenges
that Liberia still faces on the road to sustainable
development and peace. They include the fight against
corruption and the issues of national reconciliation
and governance, especially through the rebuilding and
operationalization of the Liberian armed forces. Other
challenges include the problem of ensuring respect for
human rights, especially the situation of women, which
cannot be considered satisfactory until considerable
progress has been made in combating gender-based
violence. Liberia's lasting stabilization will also require
major efforts to combat impunity and energetic action
to address the root causes of conflict.

Our meeting today celebrates UNMIL'S true
success in the service of Liberia and its people. That
success, however, is only one stage on the long path
to sustainable development and stabilization in Liberia.
As President Macron emphasized to President Weah
when he visited Paris at the end of February, France
will stand firmly beside its Liberian partners in order to
ensure that Liberia continues advance in that direction.

