Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I will try to heed your
appeal, Sir, and to be brief. I shall not comment on all
the points that are relevant in this case.

First, we are pleased to welcome Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo and the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We thank for the briefing he has
given us on the situation in Kosovo. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report.
We are fully conscious of the huge dimension of
the work UNMIK is shouldering to consolidate peace,
tackle ethnic violence, establish and conduct an
effective administration and prepare Kosovo politically
for the democratic process necessary to its autonomy
within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. These are
important challenges and we are satisfied that UNMIK
is addressing all the issues efficiently. We appreciate
the role of the Kosovo Force in ensuring peace and
security, which are so vital if the work of UNMIK is to
succeed.

We know that there are extremists in Kosovo
whose agenda is not the same as that envisaged under
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). These
elements will, of course, be involved in acts of
violence and desperation in the run-up to the elections
later this year. This should not deter UNMIK from
implementing the mandate of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It is, however, extremely
important that there should be maximum participation
of Albanians and Serbs alike in the elections so that the
outcome is fully credible and a representative
legislative body may emerge following the elections.

We also believe that the Government of
Yugoslavia should be involved in the process leading to
the emergence of an autonomous Kosovo within the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In this regard, it is
important to establish the proposed UNMIK office in
Belgrade as early as possible.

Mauritius, as a multi-ethnic nation, has no doubt
at all that a multi-ethnic Kosovo is an achievable
reality. We would like to see the leaders of the
Albanian and Serb communities in Kosovo impress
upon their communities the need to be fully behind the
UNMIK framework and to discourage the extremists
on their respective sides. At the same time, UNMIK
must take care to ensure that the administration and the
judicial system are absolutely fair to all communities,
totally free and non-discriminatory.

Finally, I would like to assure Mr. Haekkerup that
he has the full support of Mauritius in this important
responsibility.

