Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming the Prosecutor,
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, to the Council and in
thanking him for his briefing on the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005).

The security and humanitarian situation in Darfur
remains worrying. The international community's
efforts to help the Sudan to address the situation in
Darfur are facing mounting challenges, and primary
among them are the continued armed clashes.

Let me reiterate that Indonesia strongly condemns
all gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We condemn those who commit war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Impunity must not
be tolerated, and the perpetrators of those crimes must

be brought to justice without delay. My delegation
deeply regrets and is concerned by the information
contained in the report on the ongoing crimes by all
parties.

A great deal has been said today about problems
in establishing cooperation between the International
Criminal Court and the Government of the Sudan. My
delegation regrets that no progress has been achieved
in this matter. In addressing the matter of cooperation
between the Court and the Sudan, my delegation
reasserts the importance of Viewing it from a broader
perspective. It should be also approached in the context
of a search for a comprehensive solution to the
situation in Darfur, which is comprised of four
dimensions: political, peacekeeping, humanitarian and
legal dimensions. They are all mutually reinforcing and
complementary to one another. Our efforts in all
dimensions need mutual cooperation and reinforcement
rather than division and isolation of certain
dimensions. As the Prosecutor stated this morning in
his briefing, none can succeed in isolation.

In this context, we agree on the importance of
striking a balance and having synergy between the
pursuit of justice and the maintenance of peace and
security. In that regard we fully support the views of
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement on the need to ensure that the
ongoing peace process in Darfur is not jeopardized.

Indonesia reasserts that the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005) and actions of the Prosecutor
shall neither nullify the principle of complementarity
nor absolve Sudan's national court of its
responsibilities, as stated in the presidential statement
of 16 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21).

In line with the communique of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 22 September
2008 and the package solution offered by the Arab
League, Indonesia urges the Government of the Sudan
to urgently take concrete steps to bring to justice the
perpetrators of gross violations of human rights in
Darfur. The Government of the Sudan should also
ensure that its national law does not exempt anyone
from responsibility. It is also important that all the
crimes covered in international humanitarian law will
be covered by Sudanese law. Indonesia is confident
that the Sudanese Government will take up those
responsibilities to meet the requirements of the
principle of complementarity.

In the context of implementation of the principle
of complementarity, my delegation shares the View on
the importance of the contributions of the African
Union, the Arab League and others to the promotion of
an accountability mechanism in the Sudan.

We welcome the conclusion of the investigation
with regard to crimes against peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel in Haskanita. The issuance of
arrest warrants for war crimes in Haskanita is a
significant step that requires further action by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. In that regard, we wish to stress that ensuring
the continued cooperation of all Darfur armed rebel
movements is essential.

Finally, my delegation wishes to emphasize once
again its appreciation of the Court's independence and
of the Prosecutor's efforts to implement resolution
1593 (2005).

