Mr. Ubalijoro (Rwanda) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like, through you, to
pay a tribute to Ambassador Li Zhaoxing for the excellent

 

and pragmatic way in which he has presided over the
Council this month.

My delegation would also like to thank his
predecessor, the Ambassador of Botswana, for his
dynamic and competent manner of conducting the
Council's work last month.

The Security Council has just decided to renew the
mandate of the United Nations Protection Force. This
would suggest that the United Nations is firmly resolved
to establish a lasting peace in the countries concerned and
that it is determined to reinvigorate the Force and make
it even more effective. The delegation of Rwanda would
like this attitude to have a positive and tangible effect,
which would require a series of conditions and
prerequisites. First, the United Nations forces are united
for peace and to maintain peace. That is why the will for
peace of the countries parties to the conflict must
constantly be played upon. Secondly, the forces must act
in response to a commitment to peace between all the
parties involved and the United Nations Force.

In this connection, the continued practice of "ethnic
cleansing" in Bosnia and Croatia would seem
incompatible with the search for peace. This is also true
when a State's borders continue to be violated in contempt
of international law and the principle of territorial
integrity.

The Council's credibility would be put at stake were
it to give a peace-keeping force an empty mandate. The
time used to consider the mandate must not be wasted; it
must rather be an opportunity to reflect deeply on the real
need to resolve conflicts.

As to the situation in The Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, my delegation would wish any armed
conflict to be as narrowly confined as possible, in time
and especially in space. It proclaims its belief in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and in mutual respect
between States.

The painful memory of the recent bloody events in
Rwanda that arose from the rejection of the other allows
us to sympathize with the many victims of "ethnic
cleansing" among our brothers and sisters in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia. Rwanda will spare no effort in
considering, along with others, solutions aimed at ending
the great range of conflicts afflicting many countries
today. That is why my delegation decided to vote in
favour of the three resolutions just adopted.

 

