Mr. Fekl (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the initiative of the President to hold a
debate today on an issue of great importance for the
international community. France also welcomes the
effort of the Secretary-General to place the maintenance
of international peace and security, and conflict
prevention in particular, at the heart of his agenda.
Furthermore, France thanks him for the presentation
of his first report to the Council today (see S/2017/6, annex). In a chaotic and uncertain world, we now need
more than ever the benchmarks and the multilateral
framework that the United Nations alone can provide.
We look forward to working with the Secretary-
General, especially on this crucial issue, in the years
to come. Our debate today provides an opportunity to
frame the action for future years under his mandate.
On this occasion France wishes to convey three key
messages. The first message and priority is, of course,
to strengthen prevention and to continue to invest in
peacekeeping. Prevention is one of the foundational
objectives of the United Nations, as was recalled
by earlier speakers. In Article 1 of the Charter, the
founders of the Organization set the objective to take
effective collective measures to prevent and remove
threats to peace. France supports all initiatives aimed
at strengthening the prevention and mediation role of
the United Nations. We do that because the nature of
the crisis situations to which the Council must respond
has changed, becoming increasingly intercommunal,
transnational and asymmetrical.

How do we support such initiatives? We do it
first by better anticipating the risks of crises with
the help of an early warning system. That is the case
today in the Gambia, for example. The challenge is to
collectively improve the ability of the Council, which
is an irreplaceable body, to anticipate crises and take
action. The Secretary-General plays a key role in that
respect. It is essential that the Secretary-General, as
he is authorized to do under Article 99 of the Charter,
alert us to any situation that he feels could jeopardize
international peace and security. Similarly, the
regular reports of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and of the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide are extremely useful for our work. The
Security Council must make more systematic use of the
information provided via those channels.

We must also strengthen our collective response
through mediation and good offices. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the agreement that was signed
on 31 December as a result of the efforts of the
Congolese bishops provides a good example. France
provided its full support to that initiative and worked
toward the swift adoption of a presidential statement
by the Council that fully supported that agreement
(S/PRST/2017/l).

As we know, better prevention sometimes translates
to greater pressure. Sanctions, and sometimes even the
mere threat of resorting to sanctions, constitute one of
the tools of the Security Council. Sanctions have made
it possible to bring parties back to the table, to stop the
spiral of violence and to stabilize explosive situations
that would have completely degenerated otherwise.
In cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, for example, sanctions
have been useful in supporting the peace process and
they were lifted once a more lasting phase of stability
has been achieved. Sometimes our efforts find their
limit, as in Burundi where mediation work has been
hindered by the refusal of the Government to engage
in a constructive dialogue with international partners.

The difficulty encountered in prevention efforts is
to find the means to act, even when there are just hints
of probable deterioration, without being blocked by
arguments relating to the non-interference in internal
affairs and the respect for the sovereignty of States. The
Council must be able to act whenever it is necessary.
Overcoming that dilemma and those risks is, among
other reasons, why France has taken the initiative to
propose a limitation on the use ofthe right ofveto in cases
involving the risk of mass atrocities. When prevention
fails and violence worsens, it is our responsibility to
stop its escalation and to intervene. This is what France
has done, at the request of its partners, in both Mali and
the Central African Republic.

In that context, peacekeeping operations are an
essential Security Council tool to promote a return to
peace and to enable consolidation. When a crisis unfolds,
security must be restored quickly so as to allow for a
political settlement. We know that without security, no
real progress is possible. Such operations must be able
to benefit from resources that fit the requirements ofthe
environment in which they operate and must be able to
rely on political processes through robust and flexible
mandates. The United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic provide very clear
illustrations of the problem.

The second message and priority is that we must
help vulnerable countries develop their own capacities,
and we must address their vulnerabilities upstream. In
order to do that, we must make further progress in the
integration of the actions of the various components
of the United Nations system. We advocate a cross-
cutting and integrated approach that combines security,
humanitarian, political and development actions over
time with a continuity of the prevention, maintenance
and consolidation of peace.

The following is a simple and widely shared
observation: peace and development are linked. Many
conflicts and civil wars are rooted in development and
governance issues, the very issues that lie at the heart of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular
Goal 16. In order to prevent conflicts, we must enable
the most vulnerable countries to deal with the fragility
brought on by crises and terrorism. To that end, we
should work to combat unemployment, in particular
youth unemployment; address the lack of public
services and public infrastructure; put in place a system
of inclusive governance and robust administration;
promote a judicial system that enables everyone to
have access to quality justice; ensure respect for human
rights; and ease tensions over natural resources.

France is a resolute supporter of the 2030 Agenda,
which is why we were among the first to present our
national programme for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals at the High-Level
Political Forum in July.

Wherever France is engaged militarily, we
simultaneously undertake cooperation and development
assistance in all of the areas mentioned. And that has
produced results. Acting on the entire spectrum of
issues has enabled the establishment of a constitutional
process and the holding of elections in the Central
African Republic; the training of security and police
forces in Mali and in Niger; and crisis recovery and the
return of growth in Cote d'Ivoire.

Allow me also to stress the role of climate change.
While it is not a direct cause of conflict, it exacerbates
vulnerabilities, aggravates their most immediate
causes, and threatens progress. And, even if it is not
yet a cause today, in the future climate change may
itself become a direct cause of conflict. It strikes the
poorest populations and the most fragile States hardest.
Sub-Saharan Africa and small developing islands
are the primary victims. That is why the effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement is a necessity
and a matter of urgency for peace and security. Major
regional initiatives such as the Great Green Wall for the
Sahara and the Sahel deserve our full support.

The third priority concerns linkages among the
various tools, depending on their contexts and the level
urgency. Under the auspices of the Secretary-General,
the cooperation of the United Nations with external
actors must also be strengthened, and we know that
it will be. I am thinking of the national authorities,
whose ownership of prevention and development
activities is essential, but also of international,
regional and subregional organizations, including the
European Union and the African Union, which are
major partners of the United Nations. Finally, I am
thinking of international financial institutions, such as
development banks, civil society and private partners.

The framework sketched today must find concrete
and immediate application in our response to the
challenges posed to peace and security. To conclude,
I would like to emphasize a few crises that we ought
to prioritize.

The resolution of the Syrian crisis will require an
exemplary partnership and full mobilization of the
members of the Security Council in support of the
inter-Syrian negotiations. Such negotations will have
to be fully integrated in the framework of the United
Nations process, in line with the Geneva Communique
and resolution 2254 (2015).

Libya will require special vigilance, given the
increased risk of civil war. The mediation work of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya is essential in
that regard, to support the efforts of the Government of
National Unity to be inclusive.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
support of the United Nations and the Security Council
for a full and swift implementation of the 31 December
agreement is necessary for the success of the ongoing
process. The coming weeks will be crucial in that regard.

In Mali, the Security Council must do still more to
enable the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to accomplish its mission
and to provide it with the necessary personnel and
equipment. We must also maintain the pressure on the
parties in order to ensure a swift implementation of the
Algiers Agreement, which is urgent.

We are at a pivotal moment. While the demand for
conflict prevention and the links between peace and
development have become clear, it is now up to the
international community, above all the United Nations,
to translate that will into action. The Secretary-General
will always be able to count on the initiative and support
of France of his actions in this regard, whether in the
field or in the Security Council.

