The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

Before adjourning today's meeting, which is the
last scheduled meeting in the Chamber for the month of
July, I would like to express, on behalf of the Peruvian
delegation, our sincere thanks to all the members of the
Council for their continued support, cooperation and
counsel during a very busy month. We may not always
have agreed, but there was no need for any procedural
votes, and we unanimously adopted three resolutions,
which shows the success of our efforts to maintain
Council unity, which is a crucial value and one that we
hope will extend to other items on the agenda.

We would like to thank all members of the
delegations to the Council, including the Permanent
Representatives, as well as the experts on the various
issues we have discussed, for their hard work and
dedication. We thank Hasmik Egian and James
Sutterlin and the efficient Security Council Affairs
Division team for their assistance here and during the
trip to Colombia, the conference officers, interpreters,
verbatim reporters, security staff, press officers and
journalists, and the kind members of the Security
Council Secretariat Branch. I also thank the members
of my team for their work, organization and dedication
during our month in the presidency. I am grateful for
their unflagging efforts to fulfil - in the most efficient
way possible - the delicate task that has been entrusted
us for these two years.

I am pleased to turn over the gavel to the Mission
of Poland, our friends and neighbours for these two
years, and to wish them great success, which I am sure
they will achieve under the leadership of Ambassador
Wronecka and her efficient team. We offer them our
full cooperation in the month to come.
Once again, we wish to express our gratitude and to
reiterate distinguished Peruvian diplomat Javier Perez
de Cuellar's undying commitment to peace: it is not
just a simple dream but the most deeply held treasure
of humankind.

The meeting rose at12.05p.m.
