Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2350 (2017). It is a good demonstration of
how the United Nations should be sustaining peace by
selecting the right tools at the right time for the right
ends. As we argued on Tuesday, the Haiti of today is not
the Haiti of 2004. It is a country on a trajectory toward
greater stability. Peacekeeping troops performing a
stabilization role are no longer the right tool in Haiti.
The resolution bring the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to a close, and I welcome
that. We thank all of the troops and all of the troop-
contributing countries for their service to MINUSTAH.

The United Nations holds other tools that are
required for today's Haiti. United Nations police units
are still needed to uphold the security achieved to date,
but the primary focus of the United Nations must now
be ensuring that the Haitian National Police is able to
perform that role itself.

Support for Haiti's security capacities will not alone
sustain peace in the country. As history has told us time
and time again, it is the rule oflaw and the protection of
human rights, not the capacity to use force that delivers
long-term stability. It is welcome that the resolution
launches a new peace operation, the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
with the appropriate mandate and authorization to
advance toward those very ends. Ultimately, however,
the new Mission has one overarching objective, which
should be to work tirelessly to establish the conditions
for its own redundancy. MINUJUSTH should be
working toward a careful exit through the phased
handover of responsibilities to the Haitian Government
and greater reliance on the tools of the United Nations
country team. I am glad that an exit plan will be
developed from the very start of it deployment.

Haiti is still fragile. It needs the support of the
United Nations through a new peace operation in the
short term and the use of other United Nations soon
after that. We can never have an absolute guarantee of
continued stability in any context. The experience of
peacekeeping withdrawals in Haiti's recent past loom
large. But fear of the worst outcome should not restrain
us from pursuing the best, which is a peaceful, just and
stable Haiti standing proudly on her own two feet.

