Mrs. Kanchanalak (Thailand): I would like to commend Viet Nam for holding this open debate, which has come at a very timely moment when our world is facing immensely sobering security challenges everywhere, and most recently in the Middle East. At the outset, Thailand wishes to associate itself with the statements to be made by the representatives of the Philippines, on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, respectively. Today, the world's security landscape bears no resemblance to that of 1945, which was different from that of 1920, when the League of Nations was created after the First World War. What remains a constant is us, the peoples, whose nature barely changes. That is why, in order to move forward with our exercise, it is important that we step back and understand history. As George Santayana wisely said, "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it". There are at least seven factors we should keep in mind as we ponder the future relevance and effectiveness of the Charter of the United Nations for international peace and security. I shall be brief. First, great Powers always write the rules and then break them. They resort to multilateralism only when it serves their first interest, which may or may not be their best interest. And unilateralism seems to answer to the first interest and the schadenfreude mindset faster, unless there are consequences. Second, when one nation is pushed against the wall disproportionately, it will resort to any means, no matter how short-sighted and dangerous, to get out of the jam. Third, violence begets violence and good sense gives way to fanaticism. It constitutes the race to the bottom, where there is no winner. Fourth, despite all the technological advancements in communication tools brought to us by the fourth industrial revolution, nothing can replace diplomacy and dialogue, most importantly face-to-face. Fifth, as wars become less conventional and global conflicts have become multifaceted, preventive measures and crisis management tools will have to be recalibrated to be more adeptly effective and consequential. Sixth, the United Nations peace and security endeavour will be greatly aided if it is carried out in a concerted effort with regional cooperation. The growth and expansion of regional organizations and the proliferation of nuclear weapons have made such collaboration a necessity. Seventh, sanctions lead only to the suffering of the people and rarely to regime change. It is therefore an injustice to people who already suffer under a given regime. While the United Nations Charter remains essential, we need to revitalize its tools in order to effectively address the international peace and security questions of the day. The tools at the disposal of the Security Council are abundant, as outlined in Chapters VI and VII of the Charter. Furthermore, given the multidimensional nature of today's challenges, it is necessary for the Security Council to engage even more with other United Nations bodies such as the Economic and Social Council and its specialized agencies. This engagement will make the Security Council's efforts and undertakings more relatable to those specific issues. Thailand believes that a peaceful solution to any conflict is not just the best option; it is the only option. Let us join hands to uphold multilateral diplomacy and use it to its best capacity. Through our firm commitment to multilateral diplomacy and the agile application of the United Nations Charter, this principle will continue to guide us through this turbulent world and ensure that it is not only the dead who have seen the end of war.
