The President (interpretation from Chinese): At the
outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to extend deep sympathy to the
Governments and the people of Argentina, the Russian
Federation and the United States for the great loss of life
suffered in the crash of a helicopter flying for the United
Nations in Haiti on 14 March 1999. I would request the
representatives of Argentina, the Russian Federation and the
United States to convey to their respective Governments
and to the bereaved families our deep condolences.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo

Letter dated 4 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1999/278)

The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Burkina Faso, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Germany, Japan,
Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Rwanda, South Africa,
the Sudan, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She Okitundu
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso), Mr.
Ndaruzaniye (Burundi), Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt), Mr.
Kastrup (Germany), Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Mahugu
(Kenya), Mr. Dora'a (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Mazimhaka (Rwanda), Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa),
Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda),
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr.
Kasanda (Zambia) and Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations on the
letter dated 4 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, contained in document S/1999/278.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the Minister
for Human Rights of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, His Excellency Leonard She Okitundu, whom I
welcome and on whom I now call.


