Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. We
thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for their briefings.

In July 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015), on the Iranian nuclear issue,
in which it endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) concluded by the E3/EU+3 and Iran.
The conclusion of the JCPOA was a success story in
the settlement of an international and regional hotspot
issue by political and diplomatic means. It will succeed
so long as the parties maintain their confidence in the
political settlement process, demonstrate political will
and make tireless efforts to that end.

The implementation of the JCPOA is a protracted
process. Inevitably, there will be difficulties and
challenges. The parties must continue to strive, first,
to adhere to the principle of gradual and reciprocal
implementation and to fully implement their
commitments under the JCPOA; secondly, to keep the
larger picture in mind, assiduously strengthen mutual
confidence, and allow political trust to serve as the
ballast for the follow-up implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015); and thirdly, to promote
mutual understanding and accommodation, duly settle
their differences, actively seek consensus and jointly
seek progress. The JCPOA will stand only if they
act accordingly.

China notes the report (S/2016/589) submitted by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi. We believe that the
report must reflect the implementation of the JCPOA
by all parties in an objective and balanced manner. The
efforts of all parties should be reflected in the report.
China also notes the report recently submitted by the
Joint Commission on the work of its Procurement
Working Group. China will continue to participate
actively in the work of the Joint Commission and the
Procurement Working Group.

China has always advocated the settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue by political and diplomatic means
and is committed to strengthening the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime in order to maintain
international peace and stability. China actively
and constructively participated in the entire JCPOA
negotiating process, and proposed useful plans and
ideas for the deal. China is ready to work with all parties
to implement the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) in
earnest and to make new contributions to the facilitation
of a comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.

