Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I believe we owe the
Secretary-General a debt of gratitude, not only for
his efforts in the Middle East but especially for his
briefing this morning. We also want to thank Minister
Asselborn for his presence and for labouring with the
Security Council for a second consecutive day.

My comments will focus on the questions of
Palestine, Yemen, Lebanon and Syria.

The death toll in the war between Hamas and Israel
is mounting at an alarming rate. The humanitarian
dimension of the conflict on the Palestinian side has
reached crisis levels; thousands have been displaced.
Health facilities have been stretched beyond their
capacities and medicines are in short supply. Those
problems have been compounded by acute shortages of
water and electricity, as well as the massive destruction
of infrastructure and residential buildings. The net
result is that residents of Gaza face untold hardship.

As with every sovereign State, Israel has an
inherent right to defend itself and to keep its citizens
safe. However, we view its military response in Gaza
as needlessly excessive and in violation of international
humanitarian law. There can be no justification
whatever for the wanton and unrelenting killing
of civilians, including women, children and senior
citizens. We call for an immediate withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Gaza.

The immediate cause-and-effect relationship of
this conflict cannot be ignored. The indiscriminate
rocket attacks by Hamas amount to a violation of
international humanitarian law. Firing rockets against
non-military targets serves no purpose other than to
terrorize civilians. That is unacceptable, and we urge
Hamas to put an immediate halt to those attacks.

The cycle of violence will not solve any problem;
it can lead only to a hardening of positions, which
will not serve the long-term interests of either party.
We call for an urgent de-escalation of the conflict and
a cessation of hostilities. Leaders on both sides must
demonstrate maximum restraint, both in their actions
and utterances. There must be an intensification of
diplomatic efforts to end the conflict. We therefore
urge leaders around the world to bring their influence
to bear on the situation, in the hope that such efforts
will facilitate a return to the November 2012 ceasefire.

The Secretary-General's shuttle diplomacy and
engagement with leaders in the region provides for
us a ray of hope. We express our full support for his
relentless efforts. We also welcome the Egyptian
proposal for a ceasefire and note that Israel has
accepted it. We urge Hamas also to accept it. In the
current circumstances, a ceasefire represents the best
opportunity for a cessation of hostilities and a return
to dialogue. Indeed, the Secretary-General's summary
constitutes the guidelines for the contending parties.
He said, in summary, stop the fighting, start a dialogue
and address the root causes.

The situation in Yemen is part of the Middle East
calculus. Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups continue
to pose a challenge to the efforts of the Government to
restore stability. In addition to the attacks by terrorists
on civilians and security forces, the country is
embroiled in a conflict with separatists in the south and
Houthi militias in the north. We strongly condemn the
activities of the armed groups in Amran, which have
left scores dead and displaced families. According to
the Yemeni Red Crescent, 15,000 families have already
fled the fighting. That situation underscores the need
for the Yemeni authorities to expedite action in the
implementation of the recommendations of the National
Dialogue Conference, which have clearly addressed the
roots of the conflict.

We see a silver lining in the cloud, that is, the
political transition process, which has remained
on course in spite of the security challenges. The
confidence-building measures being undertaken by the
Government are commendable. We take particular note
of the steps to implement the 20 points recommended
by the National Dialogue Conference preparatory
technical committee, as well as the 11 points appoint
recommended by the Conference on the the southern
and Sa'ada issues. We welcome the Government's
designation of a competent authority to implement
the recommendations of the Conference. That is a
reassuring sign that the Government is committed to
building a united, peaceful and prosperous Yemen.

We take positive note of the two-day regional
conference on transitional justice held in June jointly by
Yemen's Ministry for Legal Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
conference was designed to discuss transitional justice
law and its implementation. According to various
reports, the topics addressed were the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and their relationship
with immunity laws, transitional justice, democratic
transition and the role of international actors and civil
society.

Transitional justice is a very important aspect
of Yemen's political process. We commend the
Government for its involvement in organizing the
Conference, and the United Nations agencies for
collaborating with the Government to hold the event.
We acknowledge the support provided by Japan, the
Netherlands, Sweden, the European Union and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund to the transitional
justice project in Yemen.

Turning to the situation in Lebanon, we note that the
political situation remains very delicate. We are deeply
concerned by the current presidential crisis, which
could, if not urgently resolved, threaten the stability of
the country. As the attention of the world is focused
on more dramatic developments in other parts of the
Middle East, including the war in Syria, the insurgency
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Iraq and
the escalation of tension between Israel and Palestine,
the potential dangers of the Lebanese situation could
be ignored.

The presidency of Lebanon has traditionally
been considered as one that should unify the country,
building bridges between the various communities.
That is why it is very important for political actors to
agree on who takes the mantle of the presidency. So
far, eight sessions of Parliament have been held without
a President being elected. That has created a political
vacuum since 25 May, when President Suleiman ended
his term as President. We understand that the Speaker of
Parliament has scheduled a ninth session of Parliament
for 23 July. It is our hope that consensus will have been
reached on who will become President before that date.
We urge the leaders of Lebanon to walk together in
the interests of their country and to elect a successor
without delay.

Nigeria remains deeply concerned about the
conflict in Syria, which has caused the deaths of
thousands and displaced many more. We welcome
the unanimous adoption by the Council of resolution
2165 (2014), on humanitarian access in Syria. That
indeed is a true reflection of the determination of the
Council to address the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
The resolution requires both sides to the conflict to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
United Nations humanitarian agencies. We expect
that, in the process of carrying out relief activities,
humanitarian agencies, including the United Nations,
will respect the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria. We hope that the
relevant parties in Syria will work closely with United
Nations humanitarian institutions and take effective
and concrete measures to implement resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014).

We have been very unequivocal in our position
that a military solution in Syria is unattainable.
Comprehensive negotiations remain the most viable
means to a sustainable resolution of the Syrian crisis.
The international community must continue to work
towards a political settlement through dialogue and avoid
a militarization of the conflict in Syria. In the current
circumstances, the 30 June 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) offers the best way forward. We
urge all parties to work towards its implementation.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. de Mistura as the
new Special Envoy for Syria, and call on the parties to
utilize his good offices and his wealth of experience to
achieve an amicable solution to the crisis.

The Middle East today must retreat from the very
dangerous precipice on which it has been standing for
too long. The time is now, and we are all summoned to
united collective action for durable peace.

