Mr. Sandoval Cojull'in (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Malaysian delegation for
organizing this open debate and for its concept note
(S/2016/662, annex), which contains useful guidelines
for focusing our discussion. We are also grateful to the
presenters this morning for their valuable briefings.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.
This debate is an ideal opportunity to, on the one
hand, commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
Graca Machel report (see A/51/306) and the consequent
development of monitoring and reporting mechanisms
and, on the other, to consider impartially how much
needs to be done to prevent egregious violations from
being committed against children, as they are an affront
to our humanity, deprive our children of a better world
and have devastating consequences for the victims,
their families and the communities where they reside.

We recognize the valuable contribution being
made by the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in condemning the six serious
violations committed against children in situations
of armed conflict. We stress that it is imperative
for the proper implementation of her mandate to
systematically gather accurate, impartial and timely
information on serious violations committed and to
provide the resources and leadership required so that
data can be collected in the field, in particular through
peacekeeping operations and the respective United
Nations agencies.

It is worth emphasizing that the monitoring
and reporting mechanisms should contribute to
accountability and to ensuring strict compliance with
international legal standards, in cooperation with
national Governments. They must be based on facts
and not be exposed to political pressures. As the
Secretary-General indicated today, the focus should be
on protecting children.

We condemn the arrests, mass abductions and

deaths of children in counter-terrorism operations. We
underscore that the detention of children without charges
must be ended. Security forces must hand over children
associated with armed groups to child protection
authorities and facilitate their proper rehabilitation
through education and vocational training programmes.
We must also address the trauma caused so as to break
the cycle of conflict, ensure the best interests of the
child and respect the child's fundamental condition as
a victim. In that regard, we urge Governments and the
international community to ensure that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes receive
the resources necessary to operate effectively.

We welcome the establishment of initiatives
that strengthen the international condemnation of
violations perpetrated against children. We believe the
achievements of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign
have been a success, and we encourage States to
redouble their efforts to fully implement their action
plans next year, as the Secretary-General indicated.
Furthermore, we recognize the growing support for the
Safe Schools Declaration and its Guidelines. Guatemala
is in the process of confirming its endorsement of
the Guidelines.

Accountability is key to preventing serious
violations and should be at the core of national and
international responses. Political and financial support
by regional organizations and the international
community will be necessary to ensure the institutional
framework and that the progress achieved is sustainable.
This accountability is extended to the Blue Helmets
deployed in the field. Guatemala reiterates its full
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy. The Council
must ensure that those responsible are prosecuted
and are included in sanctions regimes, and it must
redouble its efforts to strengthen national capacity in
the judiciary and strengthen the international legal
framework. Among other things, we must also ensure
that perpetrators are handed over to the International
Criminal Court. We are in favour of strengthening the
dialogue with the Court and its mandate on this issue.

Finally, we would like to welcome the recent
ratification by Uganda of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. We urge all Member States that have not
yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols.

