Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome to the Council today
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia. I thank
them for their comments. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Zannier for his comprehensive
briefing and for his excellent leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

The democratic and multi-ethnic institutions of
the Republic of Kosovo have continued to mature since
Kosovo's declaration of independence last year. We
welcome the increase in cooperation on practical
matters among Kosovo's communities, as cited by the
Special Representative. We note the recent
appointment of an ombudsman to ensure that
Government institutions are held accountable to the
public and to guard against any abuse of authority. The
appointment by the President of Kosovo of a
constitutional court that includes minority
representatives is another important development, as is
the selection of new members of Kosovo's Central
Elections Commission in preparation for Kosovo's
upcoming municipal elections. Those will be the first
elections run by Kosovo since its independence. The
United States offers our support to Kosovo's efforts to
ensure that they are democratic and transparent.

We also take note of the recent election of
Kosovo to the International Monetary Fund. We await
the results of the vote on Kosovo's bid to join the
World Bank. Membership in those international
financial institutions will help Kosovo to provide
economic stability and prosperity for all its citizens
and help to integrate Kosovo's economy into the global
financial system. All of these developments in Kosovo
are consistent with the vision of the Ahtisaari Plan. We
note that 60 States Members of the United Nations
have recognized Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State.

I would like to address the issue of the Kosovo
Serbs. We encourage the Government of Kosovo to
continue its efforts to reach out to the Serb and other
minority communities. It is positive news that the rate
of returns has at long last begun to increase, but returns
remain at an unacceptably low level. The Secretary-
General documents 660 minority families, comprised
of 3,100 individuals, who have expressed interest in
returning home to Kosovo in 2009. We look forward to
realizing that potential this year, and in this regard, we
welcome Prime Minister Thaci's restatement of
Kosovo's commitment to returns.

For Kosovo to become a truly multi-ethnic
society, Belgrade's cooperation is essential. We
welcome the commitment of Belgrade authorities to
cooperating with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which is now fully
deployed throughout Kosovo. We appreciate the firm
response of EULEX and the Kosovo Force to the
recent violence over the reconstruction of ethnic
Albanian homes in northern Kosovo, a response that
helps support freedom of movement, safety and
security for all, regardless of ethnicity.
We encourage Belgrade to support the integration
of Kosovo Serb communities into Kosovo's
institutions, in particular to create conditions for
Kosovo Serbs to return to their positions in the Kosovo
Police, and to support other pragmatic solutions that
will improve the communities" welfare.

Unfortunately, the Government of Serbia
continues to block goods from Kosovo, even though
UNMIK has certified twice now that Kosovo's new
customs stamp complies with resolution 1244 (1999).
We encourage Serbia to support intraregional trade, in
keeping with its Central European Free Trade
Agreement commitments.

The United States fully supports the
reconfiguration and downsizing of UNMIK, as outlined
in recent reports of the Secretary-General and as
reflected in the Secretary-General's current budget
proposal. In the light of the positive developments in
Kosovo, we believe that the Secretary-General should
continue to downsize the UNMIK presence to
functions that the Government of Kosovo or
international organizations cannot perform, such as
facilitating Kosovo's participation in regional
organizations such as the Regional Cooperation
Council and the Central European Free Trade
Agreement. Kosovo's participation in these forums
promotes regional cooperation and growth, and is in
the entire region's interest.

The stability of the western Balkans remains a
high priority for the United States. We strongly support
the region's integration into European institutions and
its full participation in the Euro-Atlantic community.
Kosovo and other Balkan countries still face many
challenges, and the United States will continue to
support their progress and development.

