As proud champions of the women and peace and security agenda, the United Kingdom will not accept any weakening of the hard-fought progress made over the past 20 years. We have repeatedly expressed our conviction that the women and peace and security normative framework is robust. As we heard from the compelling briefers in the open debate yesterday (S/2020/1084), what remains is for us to address the implementation gap and take action. There is no need for any additional resolution unless it serves to add distinct value to the acquis. Despite our reservations on the proposal for a resolution, we have remained constructive and engaged throughout the process. We collaborated readily, compromising on some of our own women and peace and security priorities in order to reach a draft text that, at a minimum, did not set back the agenda. We voiced our concerns about draft resolution S/2020/1054 throughout the negotiations, consistently requesting recently agreed language in efforts to maintain the integrity of the normative framework. Our repeated calls for the inclusion of relevant language on women's human rights and the protection of civil society were regrettably not met. We share the widely held view that this draft text lacks sufficient language on implementation and fails to reflect core components of the framework, such as the essential rights-based approach and the structural barriers to gender equality. For those reasons, the United Kingdom abstained in the voting on the draft resolution, which clearly lacked the support of a broad range of Council members and failed to represent a basis for achieving consensus. The adoption of this draft text would have undermined the significant achievements made on this critical agenda and the enduring efforts of so many women's rights activists. As members of the Security Council, it is our role not only to listen to the voices of a diverse range of women, but also to stand up for their rights and enshrine their inclusion and participation at all levels. The United Kingdom will remain resolutely committed to safeguarding the progress made on the women and peace and security agenda and advancing women and peace and security substantively alongside Member States, United Nations agencies and civil society. Women's human rights are the concern of all. The women and peace and security agenda is the result of women's actions, and it belongs to them. It is now for the Council to take women's lead and act. Women play a central role in delivering lasting peace and security.
