Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's briefing. We are pleased to
welcome Mr. Voronkov, who is now directing the work
of preparing the Secretary-General's strategic reports
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).

We studied the report presented today (S/2018/80)
with interest. Its conclusions about the military and
material suppression of the group's core in Syria and
Iraq inspire cautious optimism. With regard to the
regional aspects of this threat, we are still concerned
about the increasing strength of ISIL's outpost in
northern Afghanistan. We must not underestimate the
potential of the international terrorist adherents who
are gathering there. As the report says, Central Asia
is also under threat, and natives of that region have
already been observed in terrorist attacks in Turkey,
Russia, European countries and the United States.
We concur that the volume of money and other
material resources entering ISIL's coffers has
significantly decreased. That does not mean, however,
that reports should consider the issue of ISIL's
financial and material support a lower priority. As a
result of successful operations of the Syrian armed
forces, the support of Russia's Aerospace Forces, ISIL
fighters have lost access to critical oilfields as well as
transportation and sales routes. According to our data,
towards the end of 2017 ISIL's income from illicit oil
and gas trading was not more than $2 million a month,
while its total revenues in the Middle East had fallen to
$3 million.

Given the situation, ISIL has actively sought
new sources of support, honing its skills in the use of
modern technologies. For example, in one of Syria's
neighbours, terrorists' henchmen are swindling
ordinary civilians by setting up fake Internet shops,
while the caliphate's fighters are not above making
money from online casinos. As the Secretary-
General's report rightly notes, ISIL's adherents are
proactively using couriers and the hawala system to
transfer funds. Besides that, these criminal proceeds
are being deposited increasingly often in accounts
at reputable banks in countries in the Persian Gulf,
Europe, the Middle East and Central Asia, and Russia
recently provided detailed information on this issue to
the Financial Action Task Force. When we discussed
the Secretary-General's previous report (S/2017/467),
many delegations drew attention to ISIL's attempts to
invest in legitimate businesses abroad. But it also turns
out that some Western companies themselves are not
averse to doing business with terrorists. We believe that
such issues deserve the close scrutiny of the authorities
of the countries concerned.

Today more than ever before the issue of subjecting
terrorists to criminal prosecution is an urgent one.
In accordance with key Council resolutions, anyone
who provides direct or indirect assistance to ISIL,
not to mention the fighters themselves, should be held
accountable. We witnessed yet another failure to abide
by that obligation in early January, when the authorities
in Syrian Kurdistan made a unilateral decision to
pardon some 400 former members of ISIL, including
field commanders and caliphate officials, 120 of whom
ended up the ranks of the Syrian Democratic Forces.
The fact that events such as these can still go virtually
unnoticed testifies to the double standards that persist
with respect to terrorists.

Unfortunately, resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2368
(2017) are not being fully implemented, particularly
where observance of the arms embargo regime is
concerned, something that is well confirmed in open
information sources. We trust that those issues will
be taken into account when the Secretary-General's
seventh report on ISIL is being drafted. Furthermore,
with regard to consideration of the situation on the
ground and current trends in the fight against ISIL,
we would like to draw attention to the consolidated
assessment of future terrorist threats prepared for the
annual meeting, held in Russia, of heads of special
services, security agencies and law-enforcement
organizations. The next edition will be published
shortly as an official document of both the Council and
the General Assembly.

