The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark,
Japan, Slovenia, Ukraine and Yugoslavia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Hanea'a
(Japan), Mr. Kira (Slovenia), Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine) and Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Lord Paddy Ashdown, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Lord Ashdown to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Coordinator
of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 18 October 2002 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting a report from the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will
be issued as document 8/2002/1176.

At this meeting, members of the Council will hear
briefings by His Excellency Lord Paddy Ashdown,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There will be no list of speakers for this meeting.
To make this meeting an interactive one, I would
appeal to those who wish to take the floor not to make
prepared statements, but to address questions to the
speakers after hearing their briefings. I will give the
floor to Council members and non-Council members
who wish to ask questions. Council members may raise
their hands to indicate their wish to speak. Non-
Council members should come forward to register with
the Secretariat.

I now give the floor to Lord Paddy Ashdown.


