Mr. Bogaert (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his quarterly report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2017/508), as well as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and his commitment in support of Afghanistan
during this critical phase.

First of all, like those who have spoken before
me, I wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
Afghan people and the Government for the victims
of the recent terrorist attacks in Kabul. Belgium will
continue to stand firm with Afghanistan in the fight
against terrorism.

We welcome the Secretary-General's recent visit to
Afghanistan, which was an expression of international
solidarity for Afghanistan and reflects the continuing
international commitment to the lasting and peaceful
stabilization of the country. We fully support the
messages and appeals of the Secretary-General, as well
as those of his Special Representative, with respect to
preparations for the elections, the importance of an
Afghan-led peace process, the need for a concerted
international effort against terrorism and the need to
successfully integrate a significant number ofreturnees.
Those are key elements for the transition to succeed and
overcome the very real challenges and risks.

On its part, Belgium remains committed to
contributing to international community efforts in
support of Afghanistan. In particular, we wish to
salute the Afghan Government for launching the Kabul
process. We are also pleased at the announcement just
made as to the imminent announcement concerning the
date of parliamentary elections.

I would like to focus my remarks today on
three points.

First of all, we stress the importance of lasting
action against landmines in Afghanistan. Last week,
Mr. President, you organized an important briefing on
mine action in the Security Council (see S/PV.7966).
Despite the enormous efforts undertaken by the Afghan
Government, with the support of the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and other international
partners, Afghanistan remains one of the countries in
the world most affected by this scourge. Anti-personnel
mines, improvised explosive devices and explosive
remnants of war cause countless civilian casualties and
disproportionately affect children.

More than 80 per cent of victims of unexploded
ordnance are children. The challenge facing
Afghanistan in terms of achieving its mine-clearance
obligations under the Ottawa Convention by 2023 is a
substantial one. I am pleased to announce that Belgium
recently decided to support a new UNMAS project to
strengthen the capacity of the Afghan National Mine
Action Authority to coordinate and manage the quality
of all mine action activities in the country.

Secondly, I would like to express our deep
concern about the increased impact of conflict on
children. During the first quarter of 2017, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
unfortunately documented a sharp increase in the
number of child victims. While anti-Government forces
are responsible for the vast majority of recruitment
into armed groups, torture and other violations against
children, we also call on the Government to step up its
efforts to implement its commitments.

UNAMA reported progress with respect to detention
practices concerning children, but it is still important
to fully implement the directives issued by the National
Security Directorate. Too many schools continued to be
used for military purposes. We call on the Secretary-
General to maintain a special child-protection unit
within UNAMA. We also wish to reiterate our call on all
parties to the conflict to fully respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, and lastly, it is clear that the national
peace process and concerted action at the regional and
international levels, including the recently launched
Kabul process, are essential to make meaningful
progress in the fight against terrorism. I would also
like to reiterate the importance of a comprehensive
national plan of action against violent extremism in
order to effectively combat terrorism. Ground-level
understanding of the factors influencing radicalization
and recruitment, as well as an adequate understanding
of terrorist financing networks and religious dialogue,
are key elements for effective action. Belgium
commends the Government of Afghanistan for its
significant efforts to date, such as the action plan to
combat the financing of terrorism. Several speakers
mentioned drug trafficking, which plays a significant
role in that regard. Belgium encourages the Government
to continue to work on a national plan of action, while
taking advantage of the support and expertise of the
United Nations in that area.

