Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered by the delegation of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the current month and the five new non-permanent Council members for the 2020-2021 term. We wish them every success in discharging their responsibilities. We also acknowledge the work done by the delegations of Equatorial Guinea, Cete d'Ivoire, Kuwait, Peru and Poland as non-permanent members of the Council in 2018 and 2019. We welcome the holding of this open debate at the ministerial level, which is both timely and necessary. The United Nations and the Charter of the United Nations were born of the imperative need to save the world from another world war and with the perennial goal of ensuring peace, security, dignity and development for all the peoples of the world. As this year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of its adoption, we reiterate Cuba's firm commitment to defending the purposes and principles of the Charter, which are the cornerstone of multilateralism, one of the main sources of international law and a guide for the conduct of States in their international relations. However, continued violations of the Charter and breaches of international law, including the use or threat of use of force against sovereign States, acts of aggression against the sovereignty of other nations and interference in the internal affairs of States, continue to occur on a daily basis. We reject the prosecution of unconventional wars for purposes of hegemonic domination, attempts to reimpose a unipolar order, targeted assassinations of foreign leaders, the plundering and theft of natural resources, the imposition of unilateral coercive measures, policies of extraterritoriality, unilateral sanctions, all forms of pressure and all other such acts of aggression that undermine multilateralism, jeopardize peace and stability and disrespect the provisions of the Charter. The Security Council must carry out its functions in accordance with the powers conferred upon it by the Charter itself to safeguard international peace and security, but it must do so without double standards or discrimination, and always in accordance with justice and principles. It is therefore the duty of all to work towards reaching peaceful solutions and to firmly, effectively and resolutely avoid war. In particular, this main organ of the Organization must exhaust all avenues to safeguard peace and life, and prevent the promotion and actualization of the philosophy of dispossession, agendas involving regime change and attempts to violate the right of peoples to self-determination. It must promote a just, democratic and equitable international order that responds to the demand for peace, development and justice of peoples throughout the world and contributes to the full implementation of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It must defend multilateralism and reject any proposal that would constitute interference by the Council in matters falling within the purview of the other principal organs of the Organization, especially the General Assembly. A truly strong and participatory United Nations is required, with a transparent and duly democratized Security Council and a revitalized General Assembly that supports States in consolidating their sovereignty for the future which should be determined by every nation without any kind of interference. In Cuba, we have fought for peace; we have cooperated with many other peoples in the search for a better life; and we have stopped at nothing to defend our independence and sovereignty. We have never been intimidated or bowed down - nor will we be bowed down - by the illegal and criminal economic, commercial and financial blockade that the United States Government has imposed on our small island for almost six decades, which has now been intensified by a brutal economic war and the comprehensive application of the Helms-Burton Act, while disregarding the appeal of the international community, which has rejected that policy and demanded that it end 28 consecutive times in the General Assembly. As the President of Cuba, Miguel Diaz Canel Bermudez, has said, "Cuba will take all measures needed to stop the interventionist efforts of the United States, safeguard the tranquillity and welfare of the population, safeguard national unity and defend, at any cost, the sovereignty and independence of the country." Our country will continue to contribute, with its limited resources, all its energy and unwavering will, to the well-being of other peoples, especially those most in need, through inclusive international cooperation for sustainable development. Cuba will remain committed to defending the Charter for the promotion of international peace and security.
