Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): Mr. President, at the
outset, I thank you for convening this debate on the
working methods of the Security Council as set out in
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507.

Namibia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Sierra Leone on behalf of the African Group. We also
fully support the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

At the 2005 World Summit, world leaders agreed
that the Security Council needed to adapt its working
methods so as to increase the involvement of States
that are not members of the Council in its work,
enhance its accountability to the membership and
increase the transparency of its work.

It therefore cannot be business as usual. The
Security Council has to change the way in which it
conducts its business and interacts with the General
Assembly and the wider United Nations membership.
We note that some aspects of the Council's working
methods have evolved, but that evolution has tended to
be ad hoc and often is not reflected in any formal
decision of the Security Council. Some of the changes
in the working methods have been captured in the
notes of successive Presidents of the Security Council.
However, often, the language is drafted in aspirational
terms rather than as firm commitments.

To the best of our knowledge, there has never
been any change in the provisional status of the rules
of procedures of the Security Council. It is regrettable
that the rules of procedure have continued almost
unchanged since their adoption, in 1946. In the view of
my delegation, it is time for the rules of procedure of
the Council to be formalized. We believe it to be in the

interest of the Organization that this step be taken. We
therefore urge Member States, especially the
permanent members of the Security Council, to replace
the provisional rules of procedure of the Council with
standing rules of procedure. In our view, that would
greatly enhance the transparency of the work of the
Council.

Article 31 of the United Nations Charter provides
that any Member of the United Nations that is not a
member of the Security Council may participate in the
discussion of any question brought before the Council
whenever the interests of that Member State are
specially affected. Quite often, the Security Council
discusses issues without giving Member States with an
interest in those issues an opportunity to participate in
any meaningful way. Namibia shares the concern
expressed by many delegations that this practice is
contrary to the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter
of the United Nations.

Similarly, we have noted that, at times, elected
members of the Council experience difficulties in
participating effectively, particularly when draft
resolutions have been negotiated behind the scenes
among the five permanent members. While recognizing
the need for the Council to adopt its decisions
expeditiously, sufficient time should be allotted for all
members of the Council to be consulted as well as for
their consideration of drafts prior to any action by the
Security Council on specific items.

The majority of military personnel participating
in United Nations peacekeeping missions come from
countries not represented on the Council. At the same
time, the nature of peacekeeping operations has
become substantially more risky and complex than that
of the traditional peacekeeping operations of the past.
Namibia would like to see further improvement in the
interaction between the Council and troop-contributing
countries.

Finally, the report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, which, under paragraph 3 of
Article 24 of the Charter, must be submitted annually,
is the most visible source of information about the
work of the Council. It is therefore important that the
report be analytical, providing not only an account of
the matters considered by the Council in the year under
review, but also an assessment of the Council's ability
to deal with the problems at hand and signalling
difficulties and areas where improvements could be
made. In addition, the report should continue to include
an account of the work of the Military Staff Committee
and of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

