Mr. Mose: Let me also wholeheartedly thank all
the members of the Security Council for the words of
support and encouragement they addressed to the two
Tribunals, and in particular to the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), which I am
representing here. I noted in particular with great
appreciation the expression of the need for all States to
cooperate, including when it comes to the arrest of
suspects and indictees who are at large, and to the need
for all States to pay their financial contributions - a
problem which was raised by all four of us in our
introductory statements.
I turn now to some of the issues raised. I think I
will start with the intervention of the representative of
the United Kingdom, on a matter that was also
mentioned by the representative of Germany: the issue
of transfers. Of course, transfer under rule 11 bis is
primarily a judicial decision; it is for the Chamber to
decide based on a request by the Prosecutor in
conformity with rule 11 bis. We are not yet there, but
we will soon be there. The question at present therefore
relates not to the concrete evaluation of a case, but
rather to the general framework. When it comes to that
issue, there are two main problems. The first is the
question of the death penalty in Rwanda. Here, I noted
the statement of the representative of Rwanda
concerning the reiteration of assurances on waiving the
death penalty with respect to the cases transferred from
the ICTR. To what extent guarantees are needed here
and whether this is sufficient are currently under
consideration.

The other issue will be, once the legislative
framework has been clarified, to look into the issue of
the institution to deal with such cases and the
proceedings to be followed. Again, these are issues
currently under review and it is a bit premature to go
into them now, I think. Let me simply declare,
however, that I am in agreement with those members of
the Security Council that have stressed the need for
confidence-building and support in connection with the
transfer of cases. I note the request for such support by
the Rwandan representative.

The question of pardon or commutation, raised by
the Russian delegation, has already been fully and
satisfactorily responded to by my colleague, President
Meron. There is no need for me to go into that. I agree
with his assessment.

Turning now to the issue raised by the Pakistani
delegation, it is clear that we will never be able to deal
with all 29 persons at large. We now have the 48 under
control, so to speak. These cases are in progress, and
we have another 10 waiting in our detention centre.
That would bring us to 58. And then there is the issue
of the maximum number, which in our completion
strategy has been indicated at approximately 65 to 70,
at least at the present stage. We will see how this
develops as time passes, but, again, it is clear that we
cannot deal with them all and, in order to avoid
impunity - as vitally stressed by the Rwandan
representative - it is important to find the right
division of work between what we do at the
international level and at the national level. The ICTR
will concentrate on finding the accused who are most
responsible, as explained by the Prosecutor, and then
we will all have to assist the national jurisdiction in
order to assist such jurisdictions in dealing with the
other ones.

There was an issue raised by the Spanish
delegation concerning new agreements. Since we last
met on 9 October, France has ratified one enforcement
agreement and Sweden has signed one that entered into
force immediately.

Finally, I thank the Rwandan delegation for its
comments and I have taken note of what was said in
that statement. Again, I thank all the members of the
Security Council for their words of support. We will
bring them back with us to Arusha and they will be a
great encouragement in our work in the days and
months to come until the next time we meet here to
report on the progress made.

