Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): The
unanimous adoption of resolution 1871 (2009) sends an
important message of the Security Council's support
for the Secretary-General's Personal Envoy,
Christopher Ross, as he embarks on his new role. The
appointment of Ambassador Ross and the fresh
approach he brings represent a real opportunity for the
parties and the neighbouring States to re-engage, to
renew the talks process and to make meaningful
progress towards the settlement of a conflict that has
run for far too long. We strongly urge all those
involved to seize this opportunity, and we underline the
Council's call for the parties to approach the talks in
good faith and without preconditions.

In all cases of this sort, the principle of self-
determination of the people of the territory is
fundamental. The United Kingdom remains committed
to seeing a process of negotiation, under the auspices
of Ambassador Ross, which leads to a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution which provides
for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara.

I would also like to emphasize the importance of
what the Secretary-General has described as the human
dimension of the conflict, to which we refer to in the
seventh preambular paragraph of the resolution. My
Government firmly believes that addressing the
Secretary-General's recommendations in this respect,
including the expansion of humanitarian confidence-
building measures and transparency on human rights
by all parties, will do much to establish trust and
confidence between the parties and thereby enable
progress in the negotiations.

We have today renewed the mandate of
MINURSO for another year. In line with our ongoing
discussions on peacekeeping, I would stress the need
for the Council to take a strategic view of all its
peacekeeping operations. In this respect, I would echo
the comments of the Permanent Representative of
France and ask the Secretariat to develop suitable
benchmarks against which MINURSO'S progress in
achieving its mandate can be measured and to include
an assessment of such progress in the next report.
