Mr. Lamamra: I would like first to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the high office of President of the Security Council,
and I equally congratulate and thank your predecessor
for a job well done.

It is a great honour and privilege for me to
address the Council on the subject of Somalia, and I
3
wish to commend you, Sir, on your initiative to
organize this meeting, which we believe will boost the
renewed momentum we are witnessing in the
mobilization of world attention. Allow me also to
restate our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his commitment and support and to commend his
Special Representative, our colleague and friend
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his relentless efforts on
the ground.

The presence in the Council today of an
integrated Somali delegation led by the Foreign
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government, and
including some leaders of the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia, is a very positive and strong
indicator of their willingness to work towards the
restoration of lasting peace and reconciliation in their
country. It is also a clear message that should reassure
the Security Council and the international community
that Somalia is ready to receive and to lend its full
cooperation to a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
We urge the Council to fully take into account the
implications of this very important act of unity aimed
at achieving peace and security in Somalia and the
region as a whole.

We note with satisfaction the growing
mobilization with regard to the situation in Somalia as
recognition of the window of opportunity created
following the progress made by the Somalis
themselves, in particular the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government and other stakeholders, towards
the stabilization of the situation in their country and in
furtherance of dialogue and reconciliation among all
Somalis.

Those efforts culminated, first, in the convening
of the National Reconciliation Congress in July and
August 2007, which made a number of
recommendations aimed at promoting an all-inclusive
political process. That was further reinforced by the
efforts of Special Representative Ould Abdallah and
supported by the African Union through the convening
of the intra-Somalia talks, which resulted in the
Djibouti agreement of 9 June 2008 between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Alliance for
the Re-liberation of Somalia.

As the Council is aware, during its meeting held
at the level of heads of State and Government on the
margins of the most recent summit of the African
Union, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, the Peace and
Security Council welcomed the new prospects for
lasting peace and reconciliation in Somalia and called
for support and cooperation for the implementation of
the Djibouti agreement. We are pleased to note that
other leaders and elements of the opposition in Somalia
are recognizing and joining the agreement as a viable
means towards finding a lasting solution to their
differences. The agreement indeed provides for the
establishment of two key committees - a joint
security committee and a high-level committee - to
both prepare for the consolidation of the ongoing
political process and considerably to improve the
security situation in the country. The implementation of
that provision is currently under way, and the African
Union is actively collaborating with the United Nations
Special Representative in implementing it and other
important elements of the agreement.

I would like to underscore the fact that the
resolve of the Somali parties to commit themselves to
key proposals, including the restoration of mutual trust
and confidence, with the objective of ending the
conflict, provides the appropriate opportunity for the
international community, in particular the United
Nations and the African Union, to further assist in the
peace process. The African Union, which is currently
on the ground through the African Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and other good offices of the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission,
is prepared to use all necessary means within its
capacity to assist the parties, in collaboration with the
United Nations and other members of the international
community, towards an effective cessation of hostilities
on the ground.

Despite all the sacrifices of its leaders and
elements, AMISOM. is unable to fulfil its mandate
because its strength is obviously grossly
incommensurate with the scope of the real challenges
on the ground. The Mission faces a severe lack of
funding and logistical support. According to United
Nations one-year standard estimates, its budget
amounts to more than $800,000 for its logistics and
financial and technical components. It is therefore
crucial to beef up the Mission in order for it to reach its
authorized strength of 8,000 troops, from the current
level of 2,600, which constitutes only about 30 per cent
of its total authorized strength.

In that regard, the African Union is embarking on
a new troop-generation exercise amongst its members,
and I wish to take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda for their continued commitment to the
realization of lasting peace and reconciliation among
all Somalis. I would also like to reiterate the request of
the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union for assistance for the Mission. While
acknowledging the response of the Secretary-General
to that request, I should like to reiterate our call for
greater support for AMISOM. from all other partners.

I wish at this juncture to draw the attention of the
Council to developments on the ground, which offer a
window of opportunity that is without precedent in the
past 18 years. I therefore wish to renew the previous
calls of the African Union for a United Nations
takeover of AMISOM, a development that is also
clearly wished for by the Somalis themselves as
expressed in the Djibouti agreement, in order to
achieve an accelerated end to the ongoing hostilities. In
any case, AMISOM. stands ready to be ultimately
included in the international stabilization force
provided for in the Djibouti agreement.

In my interaction with the Security Council
delegation during its visit to Djibouti, I had the
opportunity to suggest for further consideration the
need for a strong naval component in the design of the
concept of operations for the United Nations
peacekeeping mission for Somalia, particularly at the
early stages of the mission. That suggestion is informed
by experience on the ground thus far. A mission with a
strong naval component would also be a significant
safeguard against ground attacks on the mission and
would thus enhance the security of both the personnel
of the mission and its equipment. Improved security at
the maritime borders of Somalia would in turn spread a
positive multiplier effect inwards to the rest of the
country. That would be one way by which the security
process would impact the political and humanitarian
efforts, as has been recommended by Special
Representative Ould Abdallah, whose focus on the need
for the international community to act decisively and to
act now I fully share.

Notwithstanding the difficult history of the past
involvement of the United Nations in Somalia, we call
on the Security Council to crown its consideration of
the situation at this crucial stage with a resolution
enabling the United Nations and the international
community to deploy a robust mission and thus fully
seize the current opportunity for the restoration of
lasting peace and security in the country. We are all
aware that any unnecessary delays may give room to
spoilers to undermine our efforts and turn this
auspicious occasion to build a better future for Somalia
and the region into a lost opportunity. We must not -
the Council must not - allow that to happen.

