Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting on such an important subject for the Security
Council. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of United
Nations Children's Fund, Ms. Bellamy, for their
continuing efforts to strengthen the role of the United
Nations in bringing these issues to the attention of the
international community and in dealing with the plight
of children in conflict. Of course, we greatly appreciate
the important work of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. His
remarks show that we are making some progress. He
has eloquently described the devastating impact of
conflict on millions of children and, unfortunately, his
remarks, and those of Director Bellamy, show that
much more needs to be done.

In recent months we have looked at the
humanitarian aspects of questions facing the Council,
at the protection of civilians in armed conflict and at
the issue of internally displaced persons. All of these
topics are interlinked, and we cannot look at them in
isolation from each other.

We echo the sentiments expressed by Special
Representative Otunnu in his most recent report: when
children are used as pawns in warfare, whether they are
targets or perpetrators, a shadow is cast on their future
and on the future of their society. As Mr. Otunnu has
pointed out again and again, many regions of the world
are experiencing the breakdown of traditional norms
and social codes of behaviour, the casting aside of local
injunctions and taboos and the undermining of the
authority of local elders and community structures.
This disintegration of local value systems yields an
ethical vacuum in which civilians and combatants are
viewed without distinction as enemy targets. Children,
women and the elderly - that is, the most
vulnerable - have, all too often, tragically become fair
game for the most horrendous of atrocities in the
valueless climate which prevails in too many war
zones.

As civilian populations are often deliberately
targeted, children suffer disproportionately as their
families are killed or displaced. One of the most
heinous developments has been the increasing use of
young children in armed conflict in blatant violation of
international law.

Two important international initiatives to protect
children from illegal use in armed conflict are the
Convention on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of
Child Labour, which President Clinton signed in 1999,
and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, which President Clinton signed, here at
the United Nations, on 5 July, and submitted to the
Senate for ratification just yesterday.

The Optional Protocol sets a clear standard: no
one under 18 may ever be drafted by any army in any
country. Signatories will do everything feasible to keep
even volunteers from taking a direct part in hostilities
before they are 18; they will make it a crime for any
non-governmental force to use children under 18 in
war; and they will work together to meet the needs of
children who have been forced into war to save a
generation that already has lost too much.

We believe that it is time to step up pressure to
implement the many existing norms to prevent further
abuse and brutalization of children. We should not let
our attention be distracted by debates on the margins of
the problem, but should focus on where the real abuses
are. Children even younger than 15 whose lives are
totally distorted by their recruitment or impressment
into armed conflict and brutality are becoming both
perpetrators and victims.

The United States places the highest priority on
assisting young children throughout the world who are
forced against their will - often kidnapped at
gunpoint - to take up arms in support of militias and
paramilitary groups. The United States works closely
with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) with respect to programmes to rehabilitate
children through counselling, reconciliation, education
and vocational training, in the hope that they will
readjust and be reintegrated into civilian society.

Since the 1980s the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) has provided over
$30 million in support of activities - including
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration - that
respond to the needs of children, including child
soldiers affected by armed conflict in such areas as
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra
Leone and Sri Lanka.

We are particularly concerned about the plight of
uprooted children. Over half of the internally displaced
persons today are children, and the proportion of
refugee children is equally high. In recent years the
United States has contributed substantially to activities
for refugee children, including support for the children-
at-risk programmes of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which
focus on children affected by armed conflict, including
child soldiers, and for the Liberian Children's
Initiative, a joint UNHCR/UNICEF programme to
address the needs of children and youth in Liberia
following seven years of war.

Thousands of children have received assistance,
either directly or indirectly, from programmes funded
by the United States in Angola, Liberia, northern
Uganda and Sierra Leone. Last year we contributed $5
million to UNHCR in support of its children-at-risk
programme and refugee-children-related activities. In
Sierra Leone USAID has made equally substantial
contributions to UNICEF for assistance to war-affected
children, including documentation and tracing of
unaccompanied children and reunification with their
families, demobilization and community reintegration
of former child soldiers.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report and
are reviewing its specific recommendations closely. We
look forward to working with the other Council
members on a closer review of the report. We also look
forward to hearing from other delegations and key
stakeholders so that we may be well guided throughout
the course of our decision-making process. Yesterday's
Arria-style meeting was a solid step in this direction.

The great German theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer
reminded us during one of the darkest moments of the
twentieth century that a test of morality of a society is
what it does for its children. We must not forget that
today's children are tomorrow's hope. We must all
work together to ensure that the future for all children
is better and brighter.

