Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I also
wish to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for his exhaustive
and detailed briefing.

As an associate member of the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement that will be
made later by the representative of Spain on behalf of
the European Union. I would like to make a few
comments in my national capacity.

The prospects before Afghanistan for a better
future are much better than they were six months ago.
The results of the first stage of preparing the loya jirga
are encouraging. The efforts of the Special Independent
Commission for the Convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga are a clear success. The role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in this success is to be commended.

It is true that the process of selecting the
members of a loya jirga is taking place in often
difficult conditions, especially outside of Kabul. There
are political murders and threats, but, nevertheless, the
Afghans have proven their willingness to regain control
of their country. Bulgaria will continue to accompany
them in this path. My country hopes that the emergency
loya jirga will play the essential role expected for the
development of a viable political process in
Afghanistan. We would like to see all of the ethnic and
religious communities of the country represented
within this traditional Afghan institution. We would
also like to see the largest number of women possible
as members of the loya jirga.

The crucial elements in the international
community's general strategy to normalize the situation
in Afghanistan are security and stability. From this
point of view, Bulgaria will work with the other
members of the Council and with countries that are
taking part in the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) to ensure that that process of
normalization and return to full security will be
accelerated. My country will support the adoption of
the Security Council resolution on the extension of
ISAF.

We would like once again to thank the United
Kingdom for having organized and led the
International Force, and we would also like to thank
Turkey for having decided to assume the command of
ISAF for the next six months.

My country is also pleased with the results of the
meeting on the reform of the security sector in
Afghanistan organized under the leadership of the
United States in Geneva on 17 May. We greatly
appreciate the willingness of the United Kingdom, of
Germany and of Italy to play a leading role in the areas
of the fight against drug production and trafficking,
police and the judicial system.

Bulgaria played an active role in the two
meetings in Geneva. My country will continue to
provide assistance to establish the security sector in
Afghanistan on a bilateral basis, as well as through
ISAF and the mechanisms established at the Geneva
meetings.

Respect for human rights is crucial for any
democracy. The emerging Afghan democracy can only
be stable if we respect this principle. The other aspect
that seems to be very important to us in the new reality
which is emerging in Afghanistan, and one with which
the new Afghan institutions should deal, is the status of
women, their access to health, education, employment
and participation in political and social life.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the appeal
launched by the European Union to all of the Afghan
leaders to grasp this unique opportunity and to fully
support the constitutional process that will begin with
the emergency loya jirga in order to reach an
agreement on common national institutions based on
Afghan traditions and on democratic values, on respect
for human rights and on the multiparty system.

