Mr. Prendergast: Mr. President, I thank you for
this opportunity to provide an update on recent events
in Afghanistan at an open meeting of the Council.

The emergency loya jirga process, which is to
take place in less than three weeks, is the most
important political event in Afghanistan since the
formation of the Interim Administration last December.

The loya jirga constitutes a pivotal test for the
Bonn process. The United Nations Assistance Mission
to Afghanistan (UNAMA), especially pillar I of the
Mission, has been focusing most of its resources on
ensuring that the loya jirga is held on time and under as
free and fair conditions as circumstances allow. Those
circumstances are difficult, both logistically and
politically. Phase I of the loya jirga process requires the
holding of about 380 district assemblies around the
country. Many of those districts are remote. Many are
under the control of commanders or are split between
armed factions that continue to fight each other. The
village assemblies will select electoral colleges of
between 20 and 60 members, depending on the size of
the district. In Phase II, these colleges will elect by
secret ballot representatives to the loya jirga. Phase III
will be the holding of the loya jirga itself. The loya
jirga members will be the approximately 1,000
representatives elected in Phase II, as well as about 500
representatives of special interest groups, such as
intellectuals, women, refugees, nomads and the
diaspora, who will be selected by their peers and
confirmed by the Loya Jirga Commission.

The members of the Special Independent
Commission for the Convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga are currently deployed in all eight regions of the
country to organize and supervise the Phase I district
assemblies. They are supported by five two-person
teams per region. Twenty-three international monitors
of five different nationalities are also deployed across
the country to follow the assemblies. A complex air
operation involving five helicopters and two fixed-
wing aircraft has been set up to assist the members of
the Commission and the monitors.

As we meet, Phase I has been completed in about
300 of 380 districts. Preparations continue for Phases II
and III. In Kabul intense preparation is ongoing for
Phase III. This includes the physical rehabilitation of
the site and the coordination of security arrangements.
We are pleased with the progress and are confident that
the loya jirga will proceed on schedule.
As expected, Phase I has been less than perfect.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and international monitoring teams have
heard of many cases of intimidation by local military
or political leaders. In some districts, the inability to
conduct a minimally fair selection exercise may lead
either to the Loya Jirga Commission selecting the
district representatives, as it is empowered to do under
article 7 of the rules and procedures that were adopted
by the Commission itself, or, in the worst case - that
is to say, if selection under article 7 might put in
personal danger the person who is selected - to
declare the district "unelectable", in which case it will
not be represented at all.

Although Phase I has so far not been perfect, it
has, nevertheless, in many ways, been better than
expected. For example, turnout at most assemblies was
in the thousands. Often, this compelling popular
support was sufficient to resist intimidation or to
successfully contest pre-rigged outcomes. While the
process in some districts heightened tension, as had
been predicted, in most cases this tension was
contained. In at least one case - Qarabagh district in
Ghazni province - rival factions that had been vying
for control of a district agreed to withdraw from their
positions in order to hold the assembly. They also
agreed to the establishment of a neutral security force
in the centre of the district. So, in this case, the loya
jirga process actually improved security.

It is our belief that the process so far has
demonstrated the capacity for reconciliation and
compromise among Afghans, as they realize the
importance of not losing this opportunity for peace and
reconstruction.

There is a general understanding that the loya
jirga is an important event for Afghanistan's future
and, above all, that it is too important to be discarded
for its imperfections.

Many of the obstacles in Phase I of the loya jirga
process were caused by the uncertain security situation.
It is clear that different parts of the country remain
under the sway of different commanders. Some are
loyal to members of the Interim Administration, which
does not necessarily make them loyal to the Interim
Administration itself, and this is an important
distinction. Some, like Bacha Khan Zadran in Gardez,
actively oppose the Interim Administration. The
Administration is therefore in a position of having to
assert its authority with little capacity to do so.

Helping the Afghans develop that capacity was
the subject of the recent security donors conference in
Geneva on 17 May. This meeting brought together
around 40 potential donors. Its purpose was to secure
real financial commitments for security-sector reform.

The delegation of the Interim Administration,
headed by Foreign Minister Abdullah, presented an
operational paper on the new Afghan Armed Forces.
This new army would be 80,000 strong and would cost
around $300 million in the first year. It would be
overseen by a civilian-controlled National Security
Council.

The German Government presented proposals for
rebuilding the police force. Germany stressed that it
was essential to create a functioning judicial system at
the same time as the police was rebuilt. Otherwise, the
police would operate in an institutional vacuum. Italy
and UNAMA presented papers on the judicial sector. It
is clear, however, that faster progress is required in this
area. We hope that the imminent establishment of the
Judicial Commission by the Interim Administration,
which is something that needs to happen before 10
June to comply with the Bonn Agreement, will help
speed up movement in this sector. UNAMA is working
closely on this with the Administration.

At the Geneva conference, the United Kingdom
presented a strategy paper for coordinating assistance
to combat illegal narcotics in Afghanistan. Both the
Interim Administration and the United Kingdom agreed
that this year's poppy eradication programme had
demonstrated the determination of the Interim
Administration to address this problem, which affects
the entire international community in a serious way.

Finally, UNAMA presented a paper on
demobilization and reintegration, estimating that a
programme addressing 200,000 combatants would cost
around $80 million. Japan agreed to join the United
Nations as the lead actor in this sector.

Overall, the Geneva conference was viewed
positively by its participants. A number of countries
other than those already mentioned pledged funds and
other support or said they were actively considering
doing so.

This moment in Afghanistan's history presents an
unusual challenge to the international community. As
was reiterated several times at the Geneva conference,
the reconstruction of Afghanistan and the creation of a
viable political system there requires the development
of an Afghan security sector that is controlled by and
responsible to the State. In the long run, this is the
cheapest option for the donors. In terms of ensuring
sustainability, it is the only option. We would therefore
want to urge donors to consider the initiatives
presented at the Geneva conference and to consider
how they might contribute to their financing and
implementation.

While the outcome of the Geneva conference is
very encouraging, the creation of new Afghan security
institutions is going to take time. I would therefore like
to take this opportunity to remind the Council that the
security situation in Afghanistan, in particular outside
Kabul, remains a major concern.

Last week during informal consultations, I
briefed the Council about the worrying situation in
Mazar-e-Sharif where UNAMA has successfully
brokered a separation of forces agreement between
rival warlords. The situation there remains fragile. So
does the overall security environment in other parts of
the country, in particular in the east and south of
Afghanistan.

In view of the absence of an expansion of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) beyond
Kabul, the United Nations and the Interim
Administration continue to believe that the
international community should address these
legitimate security issues as quickly as possible. I am
sure that the international community is fully aware
that all its political and financial efforts in support of a
new Afghanistan would be seriously compromised by a
lack of tangible progress in the security environment.
For example, we cannot expect a sustained
reconstruction process to be launched in Afghanistan
without real improvements in security outside Kabul
and its environs.

I turn now to the issue of relief and recovery.
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations continue to deliver on the relief
operation, but they are also giving increasing emphasis
to programming for recovery and reconstruction. Since
last September, the World Food Programme (WFP) has
provided more than 455,000 metric tons of food to
more than nine million Afghans, many of whom will be
dependent on food aid for some time. However, due to
insufficient funds, WFP deliveries in April and May
have fallen short of targets by about 80,000 metric
tons. All donors are urged to continue funding this and
other vital life-saving operations.

I can also report good progress on refugee
returns. On 16 May, the number of Afghans returning
in a single day from both Iran and Pakistan topped
20,000 for the first time. The total number of refugees
whom the United Nations has assisted in returning
since the start of this year now stands at 625,000, with
an undetermined number of others who have returned
on their own. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is working with
non-governmental organizations to rebuild 7,400
houses for the neediest returnees and is continuing to
provide repatriation packages to ease the difficulties of
the transition.

The United Nations continues to make progress in
reconstruction and development assistance. In this
endeavour, it is the philosophy of the Organization to
work closely with the Interim Authority, in particular
with the Afghan Assistance Coordination Authority.
The United Nations intends, in the coming weeks, to
articulate clearly to the Interim Authority and its
successor Transitional Administration its transition
strategy for national and sub-national capacity-
building. This strategy will be based on genuine
partnership between the Government and the United
Nations on a number of levels.

First, we will focus on Government and civil
society capacity-building at all levels of our regular
operations, but also with regard to a series of projects
to support the Interim Administration's capacity in
specific areas.

Secondly, we will work in partnership in
programming, particularly to ensure that equitable and
needs-based programming is applied across the entire
country. In cooperation with UNAMA, the Afghan
Assistance Coordination Authority has drafted a
national development framework that sets out a broad
strategy for economic reconstruction and development.
The next step, which we expect to be completed by the
end of this month, is the elaboration of a national
development budget that articulates priority needs and
ensures that different programme areas inform each
other. This budget will also help the United Nations to
identify and support optimal levels of funding for both
humanitarian and development work.

The third key area of partnership can be found in
our work in the provinces. It is incumbent on the
United Nations to support Government objectives in
improving the lives of millions of war-affected
Afghans by bringing real change in villages and towns
across the country. A strong element of
decentralization will be critical in ensuring that the
new area development programmes are successful.
These programmes have already been launched in both
Kandahar and Herat, tailored specifically to the needs
of those areas. This model is being rapidly replicated in
all priority areas around the country.

The partnership between the Government and the
United Nations must be based on a shared vision of
transition and recovery and Afghan self-reliance. The
United Nations and the Government must work
together to address common problems and to produce
durable common solutions. At present, millions of
people continue to depend on United Nations and non-
governmental organization programmes. For the
immediate future, therefore, a large-scale presence and
funding requirement will continue to be necessary. In
the medium-term, however, the United Nations will
progressively reduce its presence. We will assign more
funding to recovery and reconstruction projects, and,
above all, we will support the Government in meeting
its challenges and its responsibilities.

I am also pleased to report on the conference
recently held in Tehran on trade and private-sector
cooperation between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran.
The conference also addressed the rebuilding of
Afghanistan through the creation of a vibrant private
sector, and it emphasized the need to expand trading
opportunities as a key driver of this rebuilding.
Following the conference, Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan signed an agreement that established a
tripartite commission to develop private-sector
development and trade between the three countries. We
have often emphasized the importance of political
cooperation among Afghanistan's neighbours. It is
appropriate here to note the importance of economic
cooperation as well.

In conclusion, let me say that more progress has
occurred in Afghanistan in the past six months than
anyone would or could have predicted a year ago. It is
too early to take the Bonn process for granted. It is too
early to assume that it is cemented firmly into the
destiny of the country. At the same time, each day of
progress seems to make the process more and more
irreversible. We will be following events closely in the
lead-up to the loya jirga. We look forward to its
successful conclusion, and we look forward to a
smooth transition to the next phase of the Bonn
process, a phase in which, we hope, reconstruction
activities will pick up in earnest.

