Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC).

Allow me to welcome and thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for presiding over this
important debate. I also wish to express gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and other briefers for their
invaluable presentations this morning.

This debate comes at a critical time in the
maintenance of international peace and security, with
the current upsurge in violence attributed largely to
non-State actors. Tens of thousands of children have not
only been displaced and separated from their families
but also recruited, maimed, killed or forced to kill.
The horrific Videos released by the Islamic State in
Iraq and Sham (ISIS) showing a young boy executing
a captive and a teenage suicide bomber bear testimony
to the extent of the grave violations committed against
children who are forced to commit despicable acts of
violence.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, this debate is a
significant step in assessing the progress achieved so
far on combating grave violations against children
in situations of armed conflict. This year also marks
the first anniversary of the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, which was launched in March 2014 by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict along with UNICEF,
which is aimed at preventing the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. SADC believes
that the campaign's primary goal of achieving child-
free Government armed forces in conflict by 2016 is
attainable.

A significant number of children affected by
conflict live on the African continent. In an effort
to protect children affected by armed conflict, the
African Union has ensured that child-protection
concerns are central elements of the peace and security
of the continent. Strengthening cooperation among its
member States and subregional organizations with a
view to improving child protection remains a priority
of the African Union. The African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child, which came into force
in November 1999, addresses the issue of child soldiers.
In its article 22.2, it states that:

"States Parties to the present Charter shall
take all necessary measures to ensure that no child
shall take a direct part in hostilities and refrain in
particular from recruiting any child".
At the subregional level, most SADC member
States have signed and ratified international child-
rights-protection instruments and have enacted various
legislative measures to give effect to them. The
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and other instruments provide us with
guidelines on how to address the protection of children
in armed conflict. SADC believes that strengthening
the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations would enhance the protection of
children in armed conflict.

As the African continent and its subregions
continue to play important and significant roles in
the continent's mediation, conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding processes, it is imperative to make that
partnership stronger in order to confront the complex
emerging challenges emanating from the proliferation
of armed gangs and extremist groups. An example of
this cooperation is the joint action taken by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in freeing
child soldiers from the grip of armed groups. In South
Sudan, the Democratic Movement/Army-Cobra Faction
has released 1,757 children since January 2015 to
UNICEF and its partners.

While significant progress has been made in
achieving child-free Government armed forces, it must
be noted that Governments are not the only recruiters
of children. The current increase in the proliferation
of non-State armed groups poses a great threat to the
protection of children. The heinous acts committed
by Boko Haram and ISIS highlight the increasing
violence perpetrated through abductions, killings and
the instilling and perpetuating of extremist ideology in
societies through indoctrination.

Recruitment is not the only danger to which children
are exposed. Violations and abuses against children in
armed conflict take many other forms, including sexual
slavery, human trafficking and involvement in suicide
bombings.

SADC strongly condemns attacks on schools
and hospitals, which deprive children of the right to
education and health. Those who commit atrocities
against children must be held accountable for their
actions. Children's rights to education and health must
be guaranteed, and the Security Council must condemn
equally firmly such violations, wherever in the world
they occur. We must redouble our efforts to protect
children and to respect their rights in time of war as
in time of peace. The international community must
confront decisively the devastating impact of armed
conflicts on children in the many regions of the world
where they are occurring. In this context, the whole
range of tools available should be used to exert pressure
on both States and non-State armed groups in order to
end and prevent grave violations of children's rights in
situations of conflict.

SADC also believes that in order to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict, the United Nations and regional organizations
should secure a commitment from parties to conflicts
to promote child protection in the context of political
dialogue during peace talks. Mainstreaming the
protection of children's rights in final peace agreements
would go a long way towards promoting children's
rights.

We underscore the need to build local and regional
capacities, particularly in the judiciary, to deal with
perpetrators of violence against children. Holding
perpetrators accountable helps to prevent impunity for
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
Accountability requires instituting legal measures to
criminalize violence against children.

In conclusion, SADC wishes once again to
underscore the necessity of conflict prevention and
the need to tackle its root causes, including the ethnic,
religious, social and economic factors that facilitate the
recruitment of children by non-State armed groups. The
trauma experienced by children during armed conflict
affects them for the long term and can contribute to
recurring cycles of violence if left unattended. It
is therefore vital to reintegrate and rehabilitate the
children in those areas so as to ensure that they receive
the medical, psychological, educational and economic
support they need to rebuild their lives and realize their
full potential.

