Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): We welcome
the initiative of the Japanese delegation to hold this
important meeting, and we thank you, Sir, in particular
for having invited such important speakers who have
made such substantive briefings. We believe that the
positions of African representatives are very important
in discussions on peacebuilding within the United
Nations.

We have learned from experience that any
peacebuilding document drafted in New York will
remain a mere piece of paper if it is not based on the
specific situation in a country, an understanding of the
root causes of a conflict, experience from the region
itself and a realistic assessment of how goals can be
achieved. In considering topics of concern to Africa in
the Security Council and other United Nations agencies,
the Russian delegation firmly believes in the principle
that Africa requires African solutions. We therefore
pay special attention to the views of the African Union
and the subregional organizations of the continent,
favouring the establishment of effective cooperation
between them and the United Nations. However, much
remains to be done. We believe that the potential for
peacebuilding cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations has
not been fully tapped.

In April, the Security Council and General
Assembly adopted identical resolutions concluding
the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. These documents are comprehensive and
distil specific guidelines for international cooperation
in that area. Today, when conflicts are often domestic
in character, we welcome the understanding that the
concept of sustaining peace is based on addressing
the root causes of conflict, national reconciliation
and ultimately recovery and reconstruction. Another
critical element is ensuring that the country has a vision
for its future development. It is clear that sustainable
results in a peaceful settlement can be achieved only if
it enjoys the broad support of the people.

United Nations Member States unanimously agree
that peacebuilding processes must be based on national
ownership. That is our View. Taking into account the
needs of their society, Governments determine their
corresponding peacebuilding priorities, and all domestic
stakeholders recognize their shared responsibility for
peace. The United Nations and international partners
are called upon, when necessary and with the consent
of the host party, to provide assistance focused first
and foremost on the building the capacity of States
themselves to overcome conflict and its aftermath.

Unfortunately, achieving sustainable peace in a
post-conflict State is much more complex than writing
and adopting resolutions. Despite some success stories
in United Nations peacebuilding, there have also been
examples of significant failures. For instance, some of
the consistent shortcomings that led to the deterioration
of the situations in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan include the lack of due attention to
meeting peacebuilding challenges that had a direct link
to the root causes of the conflict, the maintenance of
stability and security and the promotion of national
reconciliation. It may be that priorities for these
countries were not sufficiently clear or justified, while
national resources were not properly used and other
United Nations players saw their remit encroached
upon.

Furthermore, with regard to South Sudan, we saw
what was essentially an accountancy-based approach
to peacebuilding. International partners did not scrimp
on providing multibillion dollar assistance to the
country, but they did not stop to think whether that
was being spent effectively, including in terms of the
peacebuilding and State-building challenges facing the
country. There was a lack of due attention paid to the
reasons for the political and war-related instability in
South Sudan, which is rooted in the decades-long bitter
civil war. The signs of an impending armed conflict
appeared several months before December 2013. We
are not going start judging the reasons for the absence
of a response to those signs on the part of international
partners - whether there were systematic blunders
in analysing and predicting the military-political
situation, or a distortion and suppression of facts based
on political and propagandistic considerations. The
appalling results are clear. Currently, South Sudan is
not ready for peacebuilding - the fire, which is having
a significant impact on countries and the region, needs
to be extinguished.

Another example is Burundi. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) country-specific configuration on
that country has been working for almost 10 years. It has
set up a number of significant peacebuilding projects.
The PBC has organized such important activities as
the December 2014 round table in Bujumbura with
the participation of Government representatives and
international partners. The Burundians themselves
gave the PBC's work its best rating while the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland was the Chair. They
invited him to Bujumbura on numerous occasions at
the highest level. At the same time, the behaviour of
a number of members of the configuration has been
worrisome. Instead of discussing the institutional
development issues facing the country, they were
calling for a reduction in programme assistance. We
were astonished during discussions in the Security
Council on possible assistance to Burundi, including
to the police sector, when some countries categorically
rejected the idea of providing assistance to local law-
enforcement agencies for improving police skills.

We think that such approaches are wrong. United
Nations mechanisms should not be used to exert
political pressure on the Government. The proposals
of the international community should be based
on a well-thought-out and realistic plan and should
enjoy the full support of the host country. Otherwise,
existing problems are just going to be exacerbated.
This point needs to be fully applied with regard to
the draft resolution on Burundi now being discussed
in the Security Council. The ideas in that document
on Burundi need to be clarified. We cannot just move
words around.

The Peacebuilding Commission has been playing
a most important coordinating and advisory role in
peacebuilding in the United Nations. We trust that,
based on the review of its activities, the Commission's
effectiveness will improve, and that the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council will seek its advice more often. We
think that improving the knowledge of the Commission
itself about the situation on the ground is important,
especially during periods when there is a change in the
form of United Nations assistance - for example, on
the eve of the withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation.
We would urge the Commission to cooperate with the
United Nations peacebuilding offices and other field
presences. We consider the recent PBC visit to West
Africa - Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra
Leone - to have been a useful step.

When we are talking about peacebuilding, it
is difficult not to mention the importance of the
predictability and sustainability of financing for such
projects. Ofcourse, the use of funds must be transparent
and accountable. We trust that the Secretary-General
will present well-planned and realistic options for
Member States to consider. One of them is improving
the Fund's peacebuilding toolkit and also improving its
attractiveness for potential donors.

