Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, for their comprehensive
briefings. My delegation commends the Chilean
presidency of the Security Council for this initiative
and welcomes the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/2 earlier today.

This exchange of views on post-conflict
peacebuilding is very timely as we embark on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We
have seen some successes in recent years, as in the cases
of Timor-Leste or the conclusion of peace operations in
Sierra Leone in March 2014. Such successes, however,
remain the exception rather than the rule. Repetitive
cycles of violence threaten a reversal of peace and
development efforts in various parts of the world. The
youngest State Member of the United Nations, South
Sudan, has seen its progress unravel due to the eruption
of violence over a year ago. In the Central African
Republic, the current fragile signals of improvement
should be carefully watched and actively supported to
prevent yet another repetition of the cycle of violence
and coups.

The dramatic fragility of the situations in Yemen,
Somalia and elsewhere demands the improved coherence
and synergy of efforts on the part of the various actors
on the ground. Even where success has been clear, as
in Sierra Leone, unexpected developments, such as the
unprecedented Ebola outbreak, threaten to undermine
peacebuilding gains. Ebola's overall impact on
peacebuilding and development in that country, Guinea
and Liberia, as well as its broader regional implications,
are yet to be seen.

The United Nations can and should do better in
many areas, including by ensuring across-the-board
delivery as one, developing effective transition and exit
strategies, continuous analysis, stronger synergies and
coherence, as well as constant adjustment of responses.
We welcome the upcoming review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, which we see as an
opportunity to come up with concrete recommendations
on its functioning, resources and modes of engagement.
We fully agree with the Deputy Secretary-General on
the importance of establishing positive synergies with
the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the Secretary-General, and the high-
level review to assess progress in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. We believe that, while distinct in nature and
scope, those reviews cannot be conducted in isolation
and that their outcomes should be mutually supportive
and reinforcing.

National institution-building is key for successful
transitions from conflict to a lasting peace.
Strengthening the resilience of States, building
legitimate, accountable and effective institutions, and
consolidating the rule of law is a long-term endeavour,
which requires national leadership and ownership and
sustained international attention and support alike.
Inter alia, it calls for holistic approaches and the
identification of specific destabilizing factors, such
as a lack of accountability, corruption or unaddressed
grievances and disputes, including those regarding
property, land ownership and access to vital resources.

Furthermore, the illicit flow and accumulation
of weapons can quickly wipe out years of
institution-building, as political actors would be tempted
to achieve their objectives through violence and force.
If a peaceful dialogue is to be sustained, the United
Nations must ensure the cohesiveness of its efforts,
including through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and assistance in security
sector reform that not only create a safer and more
conducive environment for institution-building, but
also offer incentives to former combatants to become a
part of the peaceful solution.

At the same time, as former combatants are
reintegrated, it is essential that they be properly vetted
and retrained and that their former victims do not feel
threatened by their new roles in the community. If that
is not ensured, their reintegration will undercut trust in
the institutions and in justice itself, with the inevitable
negative consequences for building a lasting peace.

Inclusivity is another crucial aspect of sustainable
peacebuilding. In particular, women can and must
play an active role both in conflict resolution and
in the peacebuilding efforts that follow. Peace and
development cannot be sustained if half of the
population is left out because of gender. When
peacebuilding efforts are based on inclusive societal
consultations, where credible, viable mechanisms
for effective and broad public participation exist, and
no group or segment of the society feels excluded or
marginalized, that generates legitimacy and trust in the
state and its institutions.
Conversely, the absence of such inclusivity
threatens peace and reconciliation processes and the
stability of the State itself. We may recall, for example,
that the Council urged the Governments of Mali and
Iraq repeatedly to ensure inclusivity and address the
lingering grievances among the various groups of
society. The consequences of such failure stand as a
stark warning to all States transitioning out of conflict.
Furthermore, the success of transition from conflict
to sustained development demands that the issues of
justice and accountability be most seriously addressed.
Failure to ensure justice and put an end to impunity
can sabotage post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and
eventually rekindle the conflict itself.

Lithuania highly values the contribution of the
PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in building durable peace in a number
of countries coming out of conflict. We encourage a
further strengthening of the links between the PBC
and the Security Council aimed at ensuring a seamless
transition from peacekeeping to sustainable and durable
development and peace. In that respect, periodic
stocktaking briefings and interactive exchanges can be
very useful in the work of both bodies. We believe that
the PBC can also have a useful role when the Council
is considering mandate renewals and in transitions of
United Nations missions.

Furthermore, the PBC should draw the Council's
attention to emerging threats in the countries on its
agenda. The PBC should also remain actively engaged in
support of the political dialogue and other preparatory
processes, in the light of the upcoming elections in
countries on its agenda. We would welcome a more
proactive dialogue of the PBC with relevant regional
and subregional organizations. Partnerships between
the PBC and the international financial institutions and
private sector entities are also important. We believe
that work in that direction should be further pursued
in order to mobilize resources, identify financing gaps,
ensure coherent responses and avoid duplications.

Peacebuilding is a long and painstaking
multi-stakeholder process. The upcoming review
of the peacebuilding architecture provides us with
an opportunity to revisit our approaches, identify
continuing and emerging challenges and broader
systemic gaps in order to adjust our collective responses
and realize the full peacebuilding potential of the
United Nations.

