Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, wish to
thank Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), for his informative briefing on his
organizational plan. It is absolutely crucial that CTED
assess the manner in which it has been executing its
mandate and address problem areas. We note that
CTED's organizational plan is ambitious in its
objectives, and rightly so.

But, before I comment on the CTED plan, I wish
to say that it is indeed noteworthy that the Security
Council is conducting an open debate on counter-
terrorism. That approach should be welcomed.
Counter-terrorism is not the sole preserve of the
Council. In fact, it is the belief of my delegation that
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
will be even more strengthened if it can also benefit
from the activities of CTED. Counter-terrorism is a
collective effort that should be supported through
CTED in order to put an end to terrorism.
Consequently, it is gratifying that all Member States
are being consulted when deciding on mandates such
as that of CTED.

CTED has to adopt a more tailored approach in
its assessment of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). It should be an approach that is aligned
with the unique situations and capacities of Member
States. That is a prominent feature of Mr. Smith's
organizational plan, and it should be supported, as it is
a departure from the one-size-fits-all approach that has
characterized the work of CTED in the past. Interaction
with Member States through less-formal visits will be
less of a drain on CTED's resources and will also
benefit CTED as a whole. However, we are still
concerned that there is an overemphasis on visits to
developing countries. That overemphasis reinforces the
perception that shortcomings in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) are prevalent only in certain
countries, which is not true. This has to be corrected,
and CTED's activities, including its travel plan, should
reflect its guiding principles of cooperation,
transparency and even-handedness.
Mr. Smith stated in his briefing that he has
identified consistency, technical assistance and
communication as three specific priorities. These relate
directly to the credibility of CTED. If the Directorate
fails - or is perceived to be failing - in one of those
areas, that will have a negative impact on its
credibility. We note that Mr. Smith has established a
quality control unit and cross-cutting functional
groups. We want to express our support, and we call on
Mr. Smith to keep the Counter-Terrorism Committee
up to date regarding the effectiveness of reorganization
and whether it is delivering on the projected
milestones.

The facilitation of technical assistance will
continue to be a key component of the CTED mandate.
We support the intention of the Executive Director to
closely match the needs of Member States with what
can be offered by donors. We would, however, caution
CTED not to fall into the trap of perpetuating a
practice whereby donors continue to dictate and
intended recipient Member States are passive
participants in identifying their own needs, including
the implementation of technical assistance. We support
CTED in its intention to strengthen its relations with
regional organizations, as that is an absolute necessity.

My delegation supports the fact that CTED will
be participating actively in the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
the Strategy represents the collective effort of the
United Nations to address terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as the conditions conducive to
its spread. It would benefit both CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force if they
embarked on coordinated actions.

There is still no effective coordination among the
expert bodies of the Council's counter-terrorism
subsidiary bodies, despite many calls for such
coordination. There have been attempts at joint visits
and information exchange, but they have not produced
the desired results. My delegation therefore calls on the
Executive Director to make this a priority by ensuring
that there is better coordination and that commonalities
are emphasized, as opposed to accentuating differences
of mandate. We have to rationalize resources and
prevent duplication. It is also opportune for the
Council to consider consolidating the mandates of its
counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies. Continuing with
separate mandates will only perpetuate duplication,
waste resources and result in confusion on the part of
Member States.

It is important that the Council continue to
provide direction regarding the activities of CTED, and

the comprehensive reviews are a crucial part of that.
My delegation therefore urges that future
comprehensive reviews be used to consult with the
wider United Nations membership. That would truly
demonstrate the global nature of the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations and the fact that Member
States are united.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes Mr. Smith
well, and we pledge our continued cooperation and
support to him in the pursuit of his mandate.

