Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in the Middle East, particularly with regard to the
question of Palestine.

The Security Council is meeting at a time when
peace negotiations have unfortunately reached a dead
end, following intensive efforts by the United States
Administration and the personal efforts of Secretary
of State Kerry. My country's position has always been
to support the United States initiative in favour of
negotiations and a time-bound settlement. That position
remains firm and is based on the principles of the Arab
Peace Initiative and the tenets of a two-State solution
respecting the 1967 borders.

The Kingdom of Morocco, a member of the
Organization oflslamic Cooperation and of the League
of Arab States, calls on the international community
to fully shoulder its responsibilities with respect to
the deterioration of the situation involving the Islamic
holy sites in occupied Palestine and the attempt to
change the demographic composition of the city of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. His Highness the King of Morocco
presided over the Al-Quds Committee this month in
the presence of President Abbas and made an appeal
to the international community to fully shoulder its
responsibilities. His Highness said, "the protection of
Al-Quds is the core of the question of Palestine. East
Jerusalem must be the capital of Palestine." He called
for a genuine Palestinian national reconciliation led by
the Palestinian Authority under Mahmoud Abbas. He
expressed the wish for that reconciliation to be positive
and that it protect the highest interests of the Palestinian
people, particularly through the establishment of the
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side in peace with Israel.

Following national reconciliation, the Palestinians
are now on the right road. We express our sincere
congratulations on that reconciliation because it
unifies Palestinian decision-making and strengthens
the Palestinian position in peacemaking, efforts
towards the two-State solution, and international
legitimacy towards a peaceful and lasting settlement
and the establishment of a State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital. There are many hopes
being pinned on the negotiations being undertaken by
Secretary of State Kerry in an effort to achieve peace.
We ask that all obstacles be overcome and that all
commitments be fulfilled without blackmail.

With regard to Syria, now that three years have
gone by, the situation continues to deteriorate. Lives
are being wasted and the country is being destroyed.
In accordance with the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/295), the number of victims has
escalated and more than 6.5 million are displaced
inside the country and 2.6 million are refugees outside
the country. They require much help and humanitarian
assistance. The parties must respect resolution 2139
(2014), on humanitarian assistance.

The Kingdom of Morocco has set up a field hospital
in the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan, pursuant to
our promise made at the pledging conference. We call
on both sides to put an end to the conflict by seeking
peaceful solutions to it. We stress the unity and
territorial integrity of Syria. We joined in the second
Geneva Conference, which we believe is the starting
point for a political settlement, as agreed by the entire
international community.

To conclude, let me also stress our commitment to
the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon,
which must be maintained.

