Let me, at the outset, thank Ambassador Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, for having convened this important open video-teleconference debate on ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council. I also extend our thanks to other briefers for their insightful contributions. Good working methods are not only essential to the work of the Council but also go to the heart of its performance. We therefore offer the following proposals. The Council should adapt its working methods to ensure its transparent, efficient and accountable functioning, in the light of the anticipated increase in its membership. It should also adapt them with respect to its subsidiary bodies and ensure the full participation of all members of the Security Council in its work, including the holding of the presidency of the enlarged Council by non-permanent members at least once during their tenure. It should also refrain from using Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations for issues that do not pose a threat to international peace and security and avoid any recourse to the imposition or prolongation of sanctions on any State, which serves the interest of only one or several States, as against the general interest of the international community. The working methods of the Council should also be tailored in such a way as to ensure that the conflicts on its agenda, as well as emerging threats, are addressed within their time frames and at meetings designed, in terms of format and focus, in order to bring about the best chance of a meaningful outcome from the Council's deliberations. Furthermore, the Council needs to improve its informal consultations. Meetings are not the primary aspect of the Council's modus operandi; rather, meeting behind closed doors provides the opportunity for Council members to engage informally with the aim of achieving concrete results. Other measures that my delegation believes can be taken to further enhance transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council in achieving its objectives include the following. First, there is a need for the submission of an analytical and comprehensive evaluation of the Council's substantive work in its annual report to the General Assembly. Secondly, there should be an increase in the number of interactive briefings, informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings as well as other public meetings. Thirdly, permanent and elected members could serve as Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and have an equal say in the selection of those Chairs in accordance with presidential note S/2017/507, which stresses that any member may be a penholder, in keeping with our collective accountability for the maintenance of international peace and security. In other words, there should be burden-sharing and a more equal distribution of work among all members of the Council to enhance its effectiveness. Fourthly, consultations and cooperation should be expanded to non-Council- member States, particularly troop-contributing countries and police-contributing countries, as well as regional organizations. Fifthly, the Council should hold more wrap-up sessions to improve the flow of substantive information and understanding of the Council's positions within the wider membership. Sixthly, Council members should also strive to promote more interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission and regional organizations that play important roles in conflict prevention and management. Before I conclude, I wish to note that the coronavirus disease pandemic has effectively exposed the underbelly of the Security Council and brought to the fore the need for the total reform of the Council, a Council whose membership, both permanent and non-permanent, is reflective of all geographical zones of the world - a truly democratized and inclusive Security Council that is functional, fit for purpose and ready to take on the global challenges of the twenty-first century. Nigeria, like most Member States, will continue to support, and spare no effort in advocating for, a meaningful reform that will not only make the Security Council more relevant, transparent, efficient and effective in addressing present and emerging global challenges, but also promote the core principles of the United Nations Charter.
