Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovie for his very thorough briefing on the human-
rights situation in Ukraine.

Luxembourg shares the deep concern of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights about
the collapse of the rule of law and the worsening
violence in the areas of eastern Ukraine controlled
by separatist armed groups. The report based on the
thorough work of the United Nations human-rights
observation mission reveals the seriousness and
extent of the human-rights violations committed by
these groups. Systematic recourse to intimidation,
abductions, forced disappearances, forced recruitment
and labour, arbitrary detention, torture, executions,
assassination and destruction of civilian infrastructure
sows terror among the people. The victims of these
heinous acts are not only those who openly oppose
the separatists but also ordinary citizens, teachers,
journalists, students, women and children. These grave
violations of human rights must stop. Those who have
committed them must be brought to justice in order to
account for their actions.

The situation is especially worrying in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. The people there are caught in
the crossfire of the intensifying clashes between the
Ukrainian security forces and the illegal armed groups,
which are increasingly heavily armed. The report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights gives the example of a case in which
illegal armed groups used the civilian population as
human shields. The report also mentions that these
groups are positioning themselves and carrying out
their attacks from densely populated areas, thereby
endangering the civilian population. Such behaviour
is irresponsible. It is unacceptable. All parties must
respect international humanitarian law.

We take this opportunity to once again call on
Russia to distance itself from the illegal armed groups in
the east of Ukraine and to publicly condemn violations
of human rights and international humanitarian
law committed by these groups. For its part, in its
operations, Ukraine must act in a proportionate manner,
in compliance with international standards, and ensure
the protection of civilians.

On a more positive note, there is clear improvement
in the human rights situation in Ukrainian cities that
have been liberated from the clutches of the separatists.
We encourage the Ukrainian authorities to commit to
improving the lives of local people, in particular by
rebuilding infrastructure and restoring basic services.

The deteriorating situation in eastern Ukraine
should not lead us to forget the human rights
situation in Crimea. The people of Crimea, especially
Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, who support unity in
Ukraine continue to be subjected to intimidation and
discrimination. Minorities who have not yet left the
peninsula live in an atmosphere of fear. The plight of
people affected by HIV and AIDS illustrates the tragic
negative impact of the illegal annexation of Crimea by
Russia. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, 20 patients
have died since 10 June due to a lack of proper medical
treatment.

At the political and diplomatic levels, all efforts
should be aimed at creating conditions conducive to the
implementation of President Poroshenko's peace plan.
The talks initiated between Ukraine and Russia under
the trilateral contact group, under the auspices of the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), are essential in that
regard. They must continue in order for an agreement to
be found as soon as possible on the release of hostages
and the establishment of a mechanism to monitor the
ceasefire. The OSCE observer mission that has just
been deployed to the two border posts at Gukovo and
Donetsk on the Russian side of the border is also an
element that could help reduce tensions. Russia, for its
part, must stop any destabilizing action.

Let me conclude by stating a simple imperative. To
honour the memory of the hundreds of victims of the
conflict in Ukraine, including the 298 people aboard
Flight MH-17, which was shot down three weeks
ago, we must redouble our diplomatic efforts to find
a political solution to this conflict as soon as possible
in accordance with President Poroshenko's peace plan.
We owe it to the millions of civilians who want respect
for their most basic rights and do not want to be the
victims of a conflict that dates back to another era.

