Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for your very kind words,
and I hope that the Council will indulge me for just a
few words of my own.

Let me say What an excellent experience I have
had here. It has lasted only a little over six months, but
I can remember when President Bush telephoned me
and asked me if I would serve as the United States
representative to the United Nations. I asked the
President whether he believed this was an important
job and Whether he thought that the United Nations
was important, and he assured me that, in his View, it
was. On that representation, I agreed to take this job,
and the experience that I have had serving here has
proved to me that the United Nations is indeed very,
very important. I think that it is important to the world,
and I think that it is important to the United States.

Clearly, as you pointed out, Sir, with respect to
the Sudan, the Security Council did play an
instrumental role. I do not think that there is any doubt
about that.

The parties recognize that. The various peacekeeping
efforts that we have put in place, the United Nations
response to the tsunami disaster - all of these are
instances where the United Nations has demonstrated
its essential quality.

I personally have been impressed by my
colleagues on the Security Council - impressed by
their seriousness, impressed by their competence, and
particularly impressed by the way in which very
diverse nations have joined together in serious efforts
to address important questions. It struck me as odd, in
the first month or so, how we would get all tied up in
wordsmithing - the difference between "demands"
and "urges", or the difference between "measures" and
"sanctions", and so on. But, thinking about it, it really
is evidence of the fact that people from all over the
world are trying to reach out together to bridge
differences and define formulations that bridge
differences and allow us to move forward in addressing
matters of very serious concern.

A lot of people have criticized the United
Nations, especially recently, and there is a lot to
criticize in the United Nations - the oil-for-food issue,
the problem of abuses by peacekeepers, especially in
the Congo. There will always be things to criticize, but
those points of criticism should not, and do not, detract
from the essential value of the United Nations.

Insofar as my own country is concerned, a lot of
people have voiced concern, even opposition, to the
United Nations. I think the reasons for that are
understandable. People have complained, "Well, the
United Nations does not always support the United
States", especially on the issue of the war in Iraq.
Various representatives of various countries and people
in the Secretariat from time to time make comments
that we would rather not have them make. I would
simply say in that connection that the United States is a
big country, a very strong country. It is a well-meaning
country; it really tries to do the right thing. Nobody
likes opposition, and nobody likes criticism. But
simply because the United States is big and strong, it is
important that we be particularly open to the views of
other people and to views that sometimes are different
from our own.

We have a concept in our own country called
"checks and balances", a governmental concept. It is
very important, I think, the stronger you are, to be a
country that listens and that takes on board the views
of others, even though we may not end up agreeing
with those views. The United Nations is a place where
we can speak, where the United States can speak; it is
also a place where can listen, whether we end up
agreeing or disagreeing with what we hear. So, when
President Bush said to me that the United Nations is
important, it seems to me, as I leave this post, that it is
even more important than I thought it was when I came
here. The United Nations is important for the welfare
and stability of the world, and it is important for the
welfare of the United States as well.

Mr. President, I thank you for your very kind
remarks, and I want to thank my colleagues on the
Council for their friendship and for their support these
last six months.

