Mr. Feltman: According to the official news
agency of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and various governmental sources, at approximately
2.48 a.m. local time on 29 November, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea launched a ballistic
missile, which it termed an "intercontinental ballistic
rocket Hwasong-lS". The missile was reportedly
launched from an area north of Pyongyang. It covered
approximately 950 kilometres (km) and reached an
apogee of approximately 4,500 km, before impacting
into the sea in Japan's exclusive economic zone.

Those parameters indicate that, if flown on a
standard trajectory, the missile as configured would
have a range in excess of 13,000 km. That is the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's third test of
a ballistic missile of apparent intercontinental range in
less than six months, and its twentieth ballistic missile
launch this year. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, again, did not issue any airspace or maritime
safety notifications.

The official media claimed that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea was now "capable of striking
the whole mainland of the United States". It also claimed
that the Democratic People's Republic ofKorea "finally

realized the great historic cause of completing the State
nuclear force, the cause of building a rocket power".

This is the thirteenth time that the Security Council
meets to discuss the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in 2017. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's repeated nuclear and missile tests over the past
two years have created great tension on the Korean
peninsula and beyond. This dynamic must be reversed.
The solution can only be political.

Given the grave risks associated with any military
confrontation, in exercise of its primary responsibility,
the Security Council needs to do all it can to prevent
escalation. Unity in the Security Council is critical.
Security Council unity also creates an opportunity for
sustained diplomatic engagement - an opportunity
that must be seized in these dangerous times to seek off-
ramps and work to create conditions for negotiations.

The Secretary-General strongly condemns this
latest launch. This is a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions and shows complete disregard
for the united View of the international community.
The Secretary-General urges the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to desist from taking any further
destabilizing steps. The Secretary-General reaffirms
his commitment to working with all parties to
reduce tensions.

I called a meeting this morning with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea Permanent Representative
to deliver the Secretary-General's message in person.
During the meeting, I stressed that there is nothing
more dangerous to peace and security in the world than
what is happening now on the Korean peninsula.

The Secretary-General discussed the situation
on the Korean peninsula with all concerned parties
in the margins of the high-level week of the General
Assembly. During the Secretary-General's meeting
with Mr. Ri Yong Ho, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, on
23 September, the Secretary-General expressed concern
about the tensions on the Korean peninsula and appealed
for de-escalation and the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Secretary-
General emphasized the need for a political solution.

Amid the heightened tensions, the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors play a critical
role in saving the lives of the most vulnerable in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The needs are
increasing, and food security remains a critical concern
for 70 per cent of the population. Member States are
again reminded of the need to support the life-saving
activities carried out by humanitarian organizations in
the country.

We will continue to closely follow the developments
and remain in close coordination with the international
organizations concerned, and with Members of the
Council, as well as other Governments concerned.

