Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, Mr. Prime
Minister, I should like to extend a warm welcome to
you and to thank the Lebanese presidency for having
organized this meeting to discuss the importance of
intercultural dialogue as a means of safeguarding
international peace and security.

Lebanon is a living example of successful
intercultural dialogue in itself. That, coupled with your
personal commitment to promoting better
understanding among different cultures, makes this
meeting all the more meaningful and relevant as it is
taking place under the Lebanese presidency, and in
particular with you yourself in the Chair. We fully
support your efforts to consolidate the foundations of
peace and stability in Lebanon. Lebanon's success in
openness and cultural diversity represents a beacon of
hope for the entire region.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for having made
room in his busy schedule to brief us today. I also
thank him for his kind words in response to my
country's co-sponsorship of the Alliance of
Civilizations.

Likewise, I wish to welcome the participation in
our meeting today of Mr. Alistair Burt of the United
Kingdom.

The reason behind the creation of this universal
body 65 years ago was "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war". Today we are equally
committed to the same ideals and endeavour to achieve
this goal in a security environment that is even more
challenging. Indeed, since the establishment of the

United Nations, the international security environment
has been transformed dramatically. Today we live in a
globalized world where more and more people from
different cultures interact constantly, shrinking the
world in unprecedented ways. As such, and as never
before, we witness global challenges having local
impacts, while local events have the power to impact
the whole world.

We also live in an increasingly complex world
where, in addition to conventional risks, new and
evolving threats emerge, posing enormous challenges
to international peace and security. Indeed,
asymmetrical risks such as terrorism, extremism,
xenophobia and religious and cultural stereotyping
present growing sources of concern for our collective
security. Given that many of these risks recognize no
national boundaries, securing and maintaining peace
today remains an even more difficult task for the
international community.

Another obvious reality we can speak about in
today's world, so full of uncertainties, is that it is
beyond the capacity of any single country to tackle
these new challenges alone. That is why the
international community is compelled to adopt
cooperative approaches and strengthen effective
multilateralism. All of this in turn necessitates better
understanding among nations, enabling them to rise
above classic stereotypes, reject us-and-them
mentalities and engage in genuine dialogue aimed at
attaining our common objectives.

We believe that the United Nations, as the sole
international forum with universal membership, must
take the lead towards that end and exert every effort to
promote intercultural dialogue. And, given the negative
security implications of any failure to do that, the
Security Council should also assume its fair share of
responsibility while dealing with conflict situations.

That is true also because we know today that our
security cannot be ensured by military means alone.
Intercultural misconceptions are sometimes at the core
of the conflicts with which we have to grapple in the
Council. Hence, we need comprehensive strategies that
address the root causes of these misconceptions, be
they historical, cultural, social or economic. Issues
related to intercultural dialogue should therefore have
their rightful place in our policy formulations. As you
mentioned in your introductory remarks, Mr. President,
peace in the Middle East is certainly one of those areas

that would benefit from such a dialogue. Overall,
respect for different cultures and dialogue help
moderation and reconciliation in conflict situations.

To this end, we should first and foremost
acknowledge cultural diversity as an integral part of
the common heritage of humanity and as an asset for
the advancement of humankind. To achieve respect and
understanding among cultures, we should accept
differences, fight ignorance and prejudice, identify
commonalities, amplify voices of moderation in our
societies, and encourage dialogue at every level. Only
then will our quest for social peace and harmony be
attained.

Due to its history and geography, Turkey has a
special understanding of the need to promote
intercultural dialogue. Indeed, over centuries Turkey
has historically, geographically and socially straddled
and bridged many different cultures and tried to create
an environment of mutual understanding among them
conducive to peace, stability and prosperity. Our
thinking has been firmly based on dialogue and
cooperation, and we have always been a strong
advocate of cultural tolerance, diversity and
moderation. That is also why Turkey feels a special
responsibility to actively contribute to the promotion of
dialogue and mutual understanding in its region and
beyond. For we know by experience that intercultural
dialogue plays a constructive role in the fields of
conflict prevention, crisis management and
peacebuilding.

This is also precisely the reason why, together
with Spain, we have co-sponsored the Alliance of
Civilizations initiative. Indeed, the Alliance of
Civilizations, which was launched by the Prime
Ministers of Turkey and Spain in 2005 under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, is founded on the
very principle that different cultures and civilizations
can live together in peace provided that they have a
better understanding of the values and principles that
unite them.

Since its inception, the Alliance of Civilizations
has provided a sound platform to this end, and today it
has become a truly global peace initiative aimed at
breaking down walls of misperception, connecting
people and building bridges towards peaceful
cohabitation. Today, the Alliance serves as a global
facilitator to promote sustainable dialogue among
various stakeholders, including young people, women,
parliamentarians, the media, civil society and the
private sector.

We are pleased to see a growing number of
Member States embrace and act upon the ideals of the
Alliance. In this framework, we welcome the United
States as the latest member of our Group of Friends,
bringing the total number to 120. Such wide
recognition and support makes us all the more hopeful
for the future, as only the commitment of Member
States to the ideals of cultural diversity can carry the
Alliance of Civilizations agenda forward.

As noted by the Secretary-General, our meeting
today has proved to be very timely for the Alliance of
Civilizations initiative as well, since the third Forum of
the Alliance will take place in a few days, on 28 and
29 May in Rio de Janeiro. We are confident that
today's meeting and the Rio Forum will provide further
impetus for an inclusive and open platform for
intercultural dialogue.

Our history reminds us that cultural ignorance has
been one of the obstacles to peace and development.
Today, the risks are even greater in that regard.
Therefore, so long as we empower prejudice and
ignorance rather than peaceful coexistence and respect,
conflict and poverty will continue to prevail to the
detriment of all humankind.

Let us not forget that human development,
security and peace are ultimately indivisible and that
they are vital for our progress. Intercultural dialogue in
this regard will make our efforts easier and stronger
while we tackle these challenges in a collective
manner. In other words, effective multilateralism will
only benefit from a better understanding among
different cultures, as it will break down the barriers to
multilateral cooperation in many areas of common
interest. In this context, it is my very sincere belief that
our continued efforts in this direction will produce a
more tolerant and peaceful world for future
generations.

