Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to express
our sincere gratitude to Ambassador Amr Abdellatif
Aboulatta for his excellent and skilful facilitation
of the negotiations on resolution 2354 (2017) on the
comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives.

Such narratives are used by terrorists, in particular
populations that are marginalized and disenfranchised
and in nations that dream of a good life, as an escape
from their pitiable plight and as a promise for better
prospects. We can address this threat efficiently by
combining our best practices and creating synergies
between all the main stakeholders and actors. Those
include States; international organizations; religious,
cultural, education and community leaders; young
people; families; and women.

My delegation just voted in favour and
co-sponsored the resolution. That well-balanced
document describes a comprehensive approach to
countering terrorist narratives that, based on false
interpretations, misrepresent the religion in order to
justify their violence.

Kazakhstan, having a Muslim-majority population,
has been convening the Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions since 2003. The population
of our country is witnessing how the Astana platform
has become significant to the leaders ofworld religions,
as well as political leaders, for open and constructive
dialogue on a wide range of issues. As a country with
multi-cultural and -ethnic traditions, we strongly
believe in the importance of the voice of each and every
member of its society, especially minority groups. An
important element of the Kazakhstan political system
is that it ensures the interests, rights and freedoms of
citizens and minority groups, irrespective of ethnic
affiliation, are respected.

Through our creative counter-narratives, we can
create a different vision of the world. At the same time,
we believe that effective methods to combat narratives
should include vulnerable groups and their participation
in the social and political life of their countries. Such
approaches will gradually lead to the deradicalization
of individuals, who then decide to come back into the
fold of society. Such a strategy would, in accordance
with the basic principles of peace and sustainable
development, help to ensure that no one is left behind.

