I would like to thank you, Madam, for convening this important meeting, which is very dear and close to our heart. Peacekeeping is the most visible action of the United Nation on the ground. It is what shows that the United Nations has done its job. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for the introduction, as well as Lieutenant General Gyllensporre, Lieutenant General Tinaikar and Brigadier General O'Brien for their briefings. As we just recently celebrated the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers with a focus on women in peacekeeping, I am proud that Indonesia has women peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I would also like to once again pay tribute to the many fallen Blue Helmets who served with honour and made the ultimate sacrifice for global peace and security. As we commemorate the International Day of Peacekeepers on 29 May, we vow to never forget their service. I would also like to pay tribute to all Force Commanders for their exemplary leadership. Allow me now to make some general observations on the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peacekeeping missions, and then ask some questions to the briefers. First, I would like to turn to the safety, health and security of peacekeepers. We are deeply concerned about the increasing number of COVID-19 cases and the loss of lives among peacekeepers. As we have just heard from Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, we recently lost two peacekeepers to COVID-19. Let me take this opportunity to express my deepest condolences to the families of the two fallen peacekeepers in MINUSMA. I ask the Force Commander to convey that message to their family. The magnitude of the pandemic must not be underestimated. We therefore urge the Secretariat to further strengthen the medical support capacity of missions. For Indonesia, the safety, health and security of peacekeepers is a top priority. Secondly, I would like to touch upon the implementation of mandates during the pandemic. We commend the continued efforts by the missions, including MINUSMA, UNMISS and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), to carry out their mandates despite some restrictions related to COVID-19. Indeed, missions need to prioritize their activities and resources, focusing on the most important aspects of their mandates. Missions should also do more to support the local Government and population's efforts to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic. Thirdly, I turn to training and capacity-building for peacekeepers. One of the lessons that we should learn from the current pandemic is the importance of training and capacity-building for peacekeepers, including with regard to basic medical care and community health. That training will equip all peacekeepers with the necessary skills, not only to take care of themselves but also to more effectively help the community during the pandemic. We in Indonesia have always advocated the importance of community engagement and winning the hearts and minds of the community, as has always been the credo of our armed forces and police and as is evident in the training of our peacekeepers. In that regard, the Secretariat needs to incorporate those skill sets into the curriculum and materials, both for predeployment and in-mission training. As a strong supporter of training and capacity-building, Indonesia remains committed to working with the Secretariat and member countries to further improve that important endeavour. Allow me to ask some questions to the Force Commanders. The first question is to all three Force Commanders. What is their assessment on the Council's mandate vis-a-vis its implementation on the ground? Is it clear enough and are they able to translate the mandate into clear practical actions on the ground? That will also help us in the Council in the future when we come up with a resolution and seek to ensure that it is line with the needs of the Force Commanders and the troops on the ground. Their honest assessments will certainly help us in our decision-making processes. My next question is to Lieutenant General Gyllensporre. But let me first express our condolences to the families of the six peacekeepers who lost their lives last month. It is a pity that, as we marked the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, we lost another six brave Blue Helmets. We extend our condolences to the troops on the ground, on behalf of Indonesia and the Council. My question is, to what extent does the increase in COVID-19 cases affect MINUSMA's ability to deliver on its mandate? With the mandate renewal scheduled for later this month, what areas can be improved to ensure that the Mission can continue to support the implementation of the peace agreement, stabilization efforts and the protection of civilians? I also concur with General Gyllensporre's sentiments about the need to change mindsets, particularly in this time of new challenge. On UNMMISS, I would like to ask Lieutenant General Tinaikar about the rising intercommunal violence, especially the recent clash in Jonglei. Have there been any specific measures taken by UNMISS to respond to that violence, and what needs to be done to prevent such violence in future? My last question is to Brigadier General O'Brien. As we just heard from her, there have been ongoing violations of the 1974 Agreement as Israel Defense Forces and other parties attacked targets within Syria and at positions within UNDOF's area of separation and area of limitation. What more should the Council do to assist UNDOF in implementing its mandate? Are there any actions that Brigadier General O'Brien can suggest, especially given its occurrence within UNDOF's area of operations and its adverse effect on its peacekeepers? In conclusion, rest assured that Indonesia, now the largest troop- and police-contributing country in the Security Council, will continue to support all these missions. We have sent our peacekeepers - including women personnel in MINUSMA, UNMISS, UNDOF and other missions - to make the world a safer place. Please also keep them safe from harm's way. Godspeed, Force Commanders.
