Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire would
like to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on the progress in the peace process in Mali and the
support efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We would also like to thank Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, for
his briefing. We would also like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Mali, Mr. Tie'man Hubert Coulibaly, to New York to
take part in these meetings.

Mr. Annadif's briefing adequately informed us on
the encouraging indicators in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
but also alerted us to the persistent threats, specifically
the resurfacing of security, humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenges in northern and central Mali.
Those challenges remain a concern for the Council
and remind us of the need to pursue multidimensional
support for MINUSMA, the Malian Government and
all stakeholders in the crisis, with a view to sustainably
restoring peace and stability to Mali.

Cote d'Ivoire, neighbour to Mali, is closely
following the developments in the political and
security situation in this brotherly country. We
reiterate our support to the Government of Mali in the
comprehensive and inclusive implementation of the
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in the context
of a peaceful and sustainable resolution of the current
crisis. While the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the demonstrated progress in Mali, it also shares the
Secretary-General's concerns about the delays in the
implementation of the Agreement and calls on all actors
to truly commit to its implementation, particularly with
regard to keeping to the timeline for the upcoming local
and presidential elections. Time is running out, and the
progress towards the implementation of the Agreement
would undoubtedly be a symbolic and irreversible gain
for a peaceful electoral process and a source of stability.

To that end, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption,
on 16 January, by the Agreement Monitoring
Committee at its twenty-third session, with support
from MINUSMA, of a timeline for priority actions set
forth under the Agreement, particularly in the areas of
political and institutional reform, defence and security,
economic and social development, elections, justice and
reconciliation. Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Agreement
Monitoring Committee to seek national consensus on
the need for all Malian stakeholders to take ownership
of the Agreement and to work together to implement the
Algiers road map with the valuable support of Algeria,
which is leading international mediation efforts, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

With regard to national reconciliation, the Ivorian
delegation would like to express its support for the
recent visit undertaken by the Malian Prime Minister
Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga to Kidal, Gao, Tessalit
and Timbuktu. That visit, the first by a Malian Prime
Minister since 2014, enabled an easing of tensions
and restored trust by conveying a message of peace
and reconciliation to the people and political actors
of the region, who have suffered greatly as a result of
the crisis.

In view of the persistent security threats in
certain regions and the emergence of new hotbeds of
intercommunal tensions, MINUSMA should continue
to support the redeployment efforts of the national
Administration and strengthen the capacities of
institutions responsible for security in order to enable
the State to ensure the protection of civilians. If they are
to be effective, those efforts must be accompanied by
support for the National Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission of former combatants
and the National Council for Security Sector Reform.
Indeed, that support is essential to countering the illicit
traffic in weapons and building a republican national
army for peace and development in Mali.

Cote d'Ivoire condemns the attack on a MINUSMA
camp in Aguelhok on 5 April, which claimed the
lives of two soldiers and wounded a dozen troops in
the Chadian contingent. We salute the memory of the
deceased soldiers and wish the wounded a speedy
recover. That attack prompts the Council to consider
the importance of bridging MINUSMA's capacity
gaps in terms of protecting its camps and securing
roads and supply convoys against attacks by terrorist
groups. The improvement of MINUSMA's logistical
capabilities through the provision of armoured vehicles
and air assets for force projection and the evacuation of
victims remains crucial. However, it must be preceded
by calibrated training for troops on the asymmetric
peacekeeping environment specific to northern and
central Mali.

Our delegation welcomes the convergence of views
and the unity of action prevailing among Council
members with respect to MINUSMA's support for the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
We welcome the signing of the technical agreement
among the United Nations, the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel States, pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017) of
8 December 2017, with a view to providing, through
MINUSMA, specific operational and logistical support
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

In that vein, my delegation also welcomes the
adoption by the G-5 Sahel States of a compliance
framework on respect for human rights in order to
ensure the necessary coherence between the military
operations of the Joint Force and their obligation to
protect human rights. Respect for the compliance
framework, which incorporates the principle of
accountability, reflects not only donor demands, but
also the need for the engagement ofthe local population,
which is a prerequisite for the success of the Joint
Force operations.

In order to be effective, the security approach to

restoring peace and stability in Mali must be supported
by strong initiatives to provide lasting solutions to
structural development challenges, such as employment
for women and young people and their engagement in
the political process, as well as the fight against poverty
and regional disparities. By addressing the root causes
of conflict and its effects, we will be able to rebuild the
foundations of lasting peace and security in Mali.

In conclusion, I would like once again to make an
urgent appeal to all Malian stakeholders and convey to
them our country's faith in their ability to overcome
their differences in the best interests of the people in
order to resolutely implement the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali.

