Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union and would like to make some additional
comments in our national capacity. I sincerely thank
Guatemala for the work that it has undertaken to
advance this initiative, on which we should all cooperate
to further development it and provide timely follow-up.

Following on the High-level Meeting on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels, held
on 24 September, Spain believes that the holding of this
debate is very pertinent. We hope it will allow us to
delve deeper into this topic with the goal of improving
coordination between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, as well as strengthening
the concept of the rule of law in this context.

The rule of law is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security, respect for human
rights and sustainable human development. Legal
certainty and compliance with obligations derived
from international commitments are preconditions for
stable and peaceful relations based on trust and mutual
respect. Effective multilateralism is not possible
without respect for the rule of law and international
legal certainty.

Spain is a country firmly committed to respect
for the rule of law, which is a basic principle of our
political model and our coexistence and it guides our
Government on domestic and international matters.

I believe that holding a debate such as this is ofgreat
interest, as it allows us to strengthen relations between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court. As we all know, relations between the Court and
the Council are governed by the provisions of the Rome
Statute and the Charter of the United Nations, signed
in San Francisco. While the Security Council is the
organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, as set forth in paragraph 1 of Article 24
of the Charter, the International Criminal Court is the
organ responsible for prosecuting, with the support of
States, those crimes of international scope that, due to
their seriousness, endanger peace and security around
the world. The prosecution of those crimes that most
concern and affect the international community is
therefore a complimentary and constitutive element
in maintaining international peace and security. The
existence of the International Criminal Court and its
action and prestige have in many cases put an end to
the impunity that was enjoyed by known international
criminals. That is having a deterrent effect, which
is playing an enormous role in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The cases of Darfur and Libya, referred by the
Security Council to the International Criminal Court,
are good examples of the complimentary nature of the
relationship between the Council and the Court. The
4 October 2004 Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court,
signed by the President of the Court and the Secretary-
General on behalf of their respective institutions,
provides a framework for cooperation that still offers
a wide range of room to manoeuvre for improving and
strengthening relations between both bodies. To that
end, it is essential that the necessary political will be
put forth.

Beyond the technical and legal aspects of the debate
on the relationship between the International Criminal
Court and the Security Council, I should now like to
underscore a number of proposals that could improve
the relationship between the two institutions, and thus
contribute to bolstering the rule of law and, with it, the
maintenance of international peace and security.

There are different opinions or perspectives within
the Organization that must be heard with the objective
of fully understanding the attitude of some ofthe States
with regard to the International Criminal Court. For
that reason, there must be dialogue between all United
Nations Members, especially between and among the
members ofthe Security Council. That is the only way to
avoid polarization among States members ofthe Council
and to help them to come together on compatible and
constructive points of view. What I have just said could
also help to reduce the gaps that separate members of
the Council on important issues of internationaljustice.
It could also lend greater consistency and coherency to
their relations with the Court.

Some members of the Council continue to be great
champions of the International Criminal Court since
its inception. I call upon those countries to continue
to promote cooperation between the Court and the
Security Council.

The holding of periodic meetings on this topic more
frequently than those that have been held so far, similar
to those that are held on other issues, would allow for an
improvement of the relations between the two bodies. It
would also allow for all parties to know the stance of all
Council members with regard to cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.

It would also be desirable for those countries that
are part of the Rome Statute to play an informative role
vis-a-vis the countries of their region that have yet to
ratify the Statute, passing along their experience in the
International Criminal Court. In short, an open dialogue
at the United Nations on the relationship between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court would contribute to a greater understanding
of international justice in general and of the Court
in particular. That would help to generate greater
confidence in the institutions of the international
system ofjustice, and in particular in the Court.

In conclusion, I also wish to stress that the relations
of the Court have broadened beyond the Security
Council to other bodies, as set forth in article 87 of
the Rome Statute. Improved cooperation among the
Court, the Peacebuilding Commission, the African
Union and the Organization of American States is also
of great importance in supporting the fight against
impunity with respect to serious international crimes,
strengthening the rule of law among the international
community.
