We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and take this opportunity to reiterate our deep appreciation and respect for the many humanitarian organizations and workers on the ground in the Syrian Arab Republic who, for nine long years, have saved lives and brought hope to millions of people. The devotion and resilience of these heroes and of the people they serve are a constant reminder that humanity and solidarity always prevail, no matter the circumstances. We remain concerned over the deterioration of the situation in the north-west of the country. We are aware of the return of more than 100,000 previously displaced people but worry about their fate and means of survival in a context of increasing challenges resulting from hostilities and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We applaud the efforts to scale up the cross-border assistance, which has once again proven to be life-saving for millions of people. The economic situation and the rise in food prices in Syria is a source of great concern for the Dominican Republic. Those are issues that, without proper mitigation and attention, could have devastating consequences for the most vulnerable population, who continues to pay the highest price in this horrible and long conflict. In that regard, we reiterate our call on the Syrian Government to increase its capacity and strengthen its coordination with the United Nations and humanitarian organizations on the ground in order to ensure timely and principled assistance to the entire population - in other words, to everyone everywhere. As in many other places around the world, the COVID-19 pandemic has brought to the fore many of the underlying root causes of conflicts and violence. In already vulnerable contexts like Syria, which has seen almost a decade of conflict, the dire conditions in which the affected people are living are bound to deteriorate further. Therefore, we must all help to alleviate the suffering and take all feasible measures to protect the people. Prevention is the only and best way forward. A sustainable, long-lasting nationwide ceasefire is the first step in that regard. Then we must support the continuation of the broader political process. All parties to the conflict and relevant stakeholders must unite their efforts to achieve those two goals. Together, they must also support all the prevention and response efforts under way, under the leadership of the World Health Organization and in coordination with the Government of Syria, to provide assistance to the whole country, particularly areas where assistance has been disrupted in recent months, such as in the north-east of the country. In that regard, we emphasize the need for the Council to call for an increase in the flow of humanitarian assistance to the north-east through all modalities. We stand ready to work with all Council members on this our common responsibility. To conclude, we reiterate that the COVID-19 pandemic is not a situation in which we sit and wait; rather, we have a responsibility to provide Syrians with the support and attention they need and deserve.
