With the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) was confronted with an unprecedented threat to the health of the communities we serve as well as that of our own personnel. The Mission acted swiftly and decisively to continue implementing its protection and peacebuilding mandate and protect our staff, while proactively managing reputational risks by countering misconceptions among the local population about UNMISS personnel being contagion vectors. To that end, robust action was taken to mitigate the spread of the virus, including freezing non-essential travel, prohibiting large gatherings and limiting interaction outside of bases, as well as requiring physical distancing, mask-wearing and hand-washing. Balancing the delivery of our mandated responsibilities with the health and safety of our peacekeepers and vulnerable communities, including the thousands of displaced families living in protection-of-civilians sites adjacent to UNMISS bases, was of paramount importance. Despite the risks and enormous challenges, peacekeepers remained motivated to continue delivering on their mandated responsibilities. Given the difficulties in implementing prevention measures for internally displaced persons (IDPs) inside protection-of-civilians camps and the congested living conditions, conducting "hands-on" policing at the site posed a considerable risk to not only the United Nations police (UNPOL) component but the Mission as a whole. UNPOL therefore reduced its footprint inside the protection-of-civilians sites but maintained the capacity to respond to emergency security situations if necessary. UNPOL also maintained patrols around the protection-of-civilians sites, high-visibility patrols and confidence- and trust-building patrols in towns in the 10 field offices. All responses to the exceptional security situation, including reports of sexual and gender-based violence inside the protection-of-civilians sites, were recorded by UNPOL for the purpose of contact tracing if needed. Notably, at the height of the COVID outbreak in June, fighting erupted at the Juba protection-of-civilians site 3, with about 500 involved over a three-day period. Formed police units responded, equipped with COVID-19 personal protective equipment, and successfully stopped the fighting with no casualties. As anticipated, formed police unit officers later tested positive for COVID. However, the swift quarantine of the affected contingent curtailed the risks of the virus spreading to the entire UNMISS base. On technical assistance and advice activities, workshops continue to be conducted, but with strict adherence to social distancing and other COVID-19 prevention protocols, including remote technical assistance and advice sessions and imposing limits on the number of participants for physical-presence activities. In addition, the South Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS) was regularly engaged in the decongestion of holding facilities to avoid any spread of the virus. Support was provided to IDP communities and our counterpart, the SSNPS, as well as other law-enforcement agencies through sensitization on COVID-19 awareness, donations of hand sanitizer and personal protective equipment, including disposable face masks, and the development and dissemination of COVID prevention guidelines for police and prisons. Moreover, quick-impact projects to renovate and build selected police stations were followed through despite the COVID-19 situation, and seven were completed for handing over to SSNPS in the past fiscal year. That is crucial to enhancing the protection of civilians in anticipation of the colocation of United Nations police with the SSNPS. We will continue to strengthen the capacity of the SSNPS to ensure a protective environment for the civilian population. With the ceasefire and peace deal in South Sudan, political violence has been markedly reduced over the past two years. The Mission - in close consultation with the Government, non-governmental organizations, donors and internally displaced persons themselves - is working to gradually withdraw our peacekeepers and redesignate the protection-of-civilians sites to conventional IDP camps. The protection-of-civilians sites in Wau and Bor have already successfully transitioned to IDP camps. The redesignation enables both the military component and UNPOL to increase their protection activities outside of the camps, where protection needs are greater. With the redesignation of protection-of-civilians sites, the Government of South Sudan assumes responsibility for protecting the safety and security of IDPs. UNPOL therefore plays a key role in preparing for the transitions through engagement with the SSNPS to build their community-oriented policing capabilities. UNPOL is providing technical and logistical support, as well as co-locating with the SSNPS for on-site training, mentoring, coaching and monitoring of policing activities. UNPOL will also continue to support the delivery of humanitarian assistance and to deploy in emergency situations to protect humanitarian workers who are at risk. Furthermore, UNPOL is working with the Rule of Law Section to strengthen the rule of law and access to justice in all locations where transitions of protection- of-civilians sites have taken or will take place. These activities will include support to the SSNPS, prisons, prosecutions and the courts. Notwithstanding the challenges from COVID, our commitment to protecting civilians remains steadfast. We will continue to find innovative ways to implement our mandate and, together with the SSNPS and other partners, work towards a creating a protective and peaceful environment for all South Sudanese.
