Ms. Scott (Namibia): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the assumption of your country,
China, of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July 2017, and thank you for organizing
the debate on the important topic of the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestine question. We also
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

These five decades of occupation in Palestine
have seen ongoing violence in seemingly unending
cycles. Our debate here in the Security Council keeps
us focused on seeking a peaceful resolution to this
complex situation. During the United Nations Forum to
Mark Fifty Years of Occupation, held on 29 and 30 June
under the auspices of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the
Secretary-General was on point when he stated that, by
bringing an end to this conflict situation, a major driver
of violent extremism and terrorism in the Middle East
region would be removed. There are few who would
disagree. Indeed, the Secretary-General's call must
be taken as a call for a return to direct negotiation to
resolve the status issues contained in United Nations
resolutions, agreements and international law, and also
by resolutely establishing the two-State solution as a
basis for peace.

Namibia calls on Israel to comply with Security
Council resolutions and to implement agreements it has
reached on the two-State solution, based on the 1967
borders. Namibia has stood alongside the rest of the
United Nations membership in calling for peace and
dialogue in order to seek a just solution to the question
of statehood in Palestine. Namibia therefore welcomes
the decision of Israel to withdraw the metal detectors,
and calls for respect for the holy sites in Jerusalem.
Namibia also calls on Israel to desist from building
settlements in violation of previous agreements and
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which is a continued affront to the dignity and
property ownership of the Palestinian people.

Namibia is also apprehensive about the continued
tensions which seem to be causing dangerous and global
polarization and violent extremism. The conflicts
in Syria and Yemen, coupled with terrorism across
the Middle East, are causing untold suffering and a
humanitarian crisis equivalent to some of the worst this
world has seen. We urge all parties in the Middle East
to work with seriousness to silence the war drums.

Once again, we call on the Israeli Government
to end its ongoing punitive destruction of Palestinian
homes and infrastructure, and to cease its illegal
construction of settlements on occupied territory. We
call on all parties to move towards rather than away
from the tables of dialogue and compromise in order to
seek a just peace and solution to the conflict. Namibia
once again calls for Israel's complete an unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. We urge the international
community to facilitate the creation of a Palestinian
State based on the 1967 borders.

Namibia stands with the people of Palestine
in their determined efforts for the pursuit of their
inalienable right to self-determination, justice, freedom
and independence through political, diplomatic,
peaceful and non-violent means. We call on all other
States Members of the United Nations to support
any deliberation that would result in an end to half a
century of occupation, to see the Palestinian people
exercising their inalienable rights in an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and as a rightful member of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

