Mr. Amrani (Morocco) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Madam President.
We also wish to express our gratitude to the delegation
of Argentina for convening this debate on a topic of
utmost importance, not only for all Latin American
countries - we note and welcome the presence of
many Foreign Ministers of Latin America - but also
for all the African countries represented in the Council
today. In that connection, I would like to express
our appreciation for the briefings given by so many
distinguished persons from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Union of South
American Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union, who have given us insights into this
important topic. We welcome also the presence and
contribution of the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

Before I go on with my statement, may I offer
Ambassador Samatha Power of the United States our
congratulations. We assure Ms. Power our fullest
cooperation in working in the Security Council and
within the United Nations.

Today's topic coincides with other recent efforts
by the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations aimed at strengthening alliances between
such organizations in order to confront the challenges
to peace and international security and deal with crisis
situations of many types that destabilize entire regions
and impact millions of people.

Morocco attaches particular importance to the
role of regional and subregional organizations and
their cooperation with the United Nations, consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and in keeping
with the parameters established under the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In the light of their firm
commitment to peace, development and the respect
for human rights, some organizations have become
major actors in working with the United Nations.
Since Morocco became a Member State, our country
has consistently contributed to the achievement of
the aims and principles of the Organization, whether
in peacekeeping or in international security, and in
promoting cooperation for development, which are two
sides of the same coin.

Morocco is also a founding member of the African
Union and considers the stability and development
of the African continent to lie at the forefront of its
foreign policy priorities. On the basis of that long-
standing international commitment, Morocco is now
participating in and seeking to step up cooperation
between the United Nations and the African continent
with full respect for the specifications defined
by individual Member States. In that context, my
country has participated in international and regional
endeavours to settle numerous disputes in Africa and in
various countries around the world.

It is in that same conviction that Morocco has also
supported the democratic processes that are taking
place in various countries. Morocco, an African
country with a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with and commitment to our African neighbours, has
undertaken to support all United Nations efforts aimed
at enhancing the security and stability of countries
throughout Africa. We also stand ready to actively
participate in any endeavour aimed at meeting those
challenges.

It cannot be denied that regional organizations and
arrangements play a major role in achieving regional
and continental aspirations. We have closely followed
everything that has been done in Latin America, in the
Union of South American Nations and in the Andean
Community, and we commend the approaches taken
there. We are now doing similar things in our continent,
Africa. In particular, we would emphasize the efforts
being deployed by the Gulf Cooperation Council, with
which Morocco has a strategic partnership for the
resolution of crises, like the one in Yemen, for example.
We have also worked hand in hand with other members
of this Council to seek the resolution of the conflict
in Mali through a regional approach spearheaded by
such African regional organizations as the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States.

With that same goal in mind, we are now also
working to build the Arab Maghreb Union, which is a
priority for my country and which will contribute to the
stability and prosperity of the five member countries
of that organization. Developing our ambitions for the
Maghreb remains a priority for Morocco, since that will
lead to sustainable development and solidarity, both for
the countries of the Maghreb and for countries of the
broader region.

Recent events in Mali require that the countries
of the Maghreb and the Sahel and their partners step
up cooperation in order to deal not only with security
challenges, which are extensive, but also with the
democratic challenges and the challenges of economic
development. The phenomenon of insecurity calls
for major efforts at coordination and cooperation to
be undertaken today, with a view to promoting an
inclusive security approach of a preventive, concerted,
multidimensional nature that incorporates all aspects of
economic and social development. We thus commend
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel recently adopted by the Security
Council.

I will not dwell further on the aforementioned
matters except to say that in Africa today we have
the required major instruments and tools, such as the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States, which is working
to promote prosperity in the region.

I would also wish to praise the cooperation that
exists between the League of Arab States and the
United Nations. In order to strengthen that cooperation,
we worked with the German presidency of the Council
in September 2012 to bring about the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/20), which led
subsequently to the holding of a seminar. We hope that
closer relations and enhanced cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations will
contribute to the success of the ongoing efforts on the
part of the United States Administration to promote the
conclusion of final agreements on a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security, consistent with the strategic objective of
the Arab Peace Initiative.

In conclusion, at a time when the United Nations is
seeking to enhance its partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, I would like to say that, in
order to promote international peace and security, we
must take into account the following six elements. First,
we must clearly understand and have a clear vision of
and respect for the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and of the charters of the various regional and
subregional organizations. Secondly, we must duly take
into account the principal responsibility conferred on
the Security Council to ensure international peace and
security. Thirdly, we must undertake assessments that
could help to avoid duplications that might hamper or
delay the solution of any conflict or dispute. Fourthly,
the United Nations and the regional and subregional
organizations must adopt a conflict and dispute
prevention strategy. Fifthly, we must resolve the root
causes of conflict and combat any trends that could
lead to the instability resulting from terrorism. In
that regard, the United Nations and all Member States
are called upon and invited to step up their support
for efforts to achieve sustainable development and
contribute to the success of reform, democratic change
and good governance. Lastly, where the intervention
of more than one regional organization is required,
experience has shown that it is of prime importance
to ensure that those organizations coordinate their
activities so as to avoid duplication. It is important
not only for development but also in the interest of
fostering and promoting interregional cooperation and
cooperation between subregional organizations in order
to enhance the complementarity of efforts and to place
all capacities in the service of peace.

