Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and the
Chinese delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. I also thank you for convening us
this evening.
The situation in Burundi is beyond fragile. The
ongoing repression, harassment and violence against
the legitimate political opposition, the closure of free
and impartial media, and widespread impunity for
human rights violations and abuses - including those
involving killings and alleged sexual violence by
security services against political opponents, members
of civil society and others - continue. Almost a quarter
of a million Burundians have fled the country since
April 2015 out of fear for their lives, and countless
more have been internally displaced. People do not
flee in the hundreds of thousands unless there is a very
serious problem.

Against that backdrop, let us be clear: progress
will be measured by peace, and peace will come from
genuine political dialogue that is inclusive. To date,
while there have been opening ceremonies, the real
discussions have not commenced. We strongly support
former President Mkapa in his efforts to move the
process forward and we urge that a date be scheduled for
discussions to begin. Each day that this crisis continues
makes it that much harder for Burundi to regain the
progress it has achieved over the past decade, risking a
much longer-term and much deadlier crisis.

While in our discussions some pointed to the release
of a "significant number of prisoners", resolution
2279 (2016) does not do that. The resolution instead
welcomes "the steps made by the Government of
Burundi" towards that end and urges them to fulfil their
commitments. The progress made by the Government
of Burundi to date is woefully insufficient. There have
been plenty of press releases, but not enough political
prisoner releases. We acknowledge the Government's
acts of clemency for prisoners who are old, under-aged
or infirm, but that is not the same as releasing political
prisoners, and they must begin to deliver on those
important promises.

We have been promised that free media would be
allowedto operate, but only two out of five banned outlets
are today operating. It was agreed that 200 African
Union (AU) human rights and military observers would
be deployed, but today there are currently 32 human
rights observers and 15 military observers on the ground
in Burundi, and they do not have a memorandum of
understanding with the Government.

Recognizing the enormity of those problems,
today's action by the Security Council is indeed
important. With this resolution, the Security Council
expresses its support for the African Union's efforts
in Burundi, including the deployment of the 200 AU
human rights observers and military observers. We
call on the Government of Burundi to cooperate fully
to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the
human rights observers and military experts.

With this resolution, the Security Council endorses
the East African Community-led, regionally mediated
dialogue. Only such an inclusive and regionally
mediated dialogue can resolve this crisis and restore
stability to Burundi. We urge all stakeholders to
expedite the resumption of the dialogue in pursuit of a
peaceful and consensual path forward for Burundi.

With this resolution, the Security Council urges the
Government of Burundi to deliver in reality what it has
committed to in the press.

With this resolution, the Security Council has
sent a strong message to the Government of Burundi
and the opposition to cease all violence, refrain from
provocation and commit to peacefully resolving this
crisis through dialogue - a dialogue based on respect
for the Arusha Agreement.

And with this resolution, we are today sending a
more robust, larger international civilian presence into
Burundi to advance political dialogue, security and
the rule of law. We are also asking for options for the
deployment of a police mission, which should include
options on the deployment of formed police units, to
Burundi to advance rule of law.

The United States appreciates the efforts the
Security Council members and our colleagues made to
find consensus on this important resolution.

