Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: I would like to begin
by recalling the historic importance of the Security
Council's visit to Iraq on 29 June. On that day in
2014, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/ Da'esh) declared its so-called caliphate. While that is
a grim memory, during the Council's visit we instead
celebrated Iraqi freedom and sovereignty and saluted
the enormous sacrifices made in the fight against
ISIL. The Council delivered important, well-received
assurances of its continued support to Iraq and its
people. That was highly appreciated by many in Iraq.

It may be unusual to immediately switch to
funding concerns but, with the Council's well-received
assurances in mind, I feel the need once again to share
our concerns regarding the continued underfunding
of both the Funding Facility for Stabilization as well
as the humanitarian response plan, with gaps of over
$300 million and $500 million, respectively.

Ifthe Council will allow me, therefore, I would like
to use this opportunity to express my sincere hope for
the ongoing and generous support of the international
community. Progress has been made, but the road
ahead is long and complex. Right now, due to the
continued underfunding Ijust mentioned, Iraq's post-
conflict humanitarian programming is being hindered.
For example, vital health-care services are being
suspended, schools for the internally displaced are
being shuttered and food distribution cycles are being
interrupted. Moreover, around 1.6 million internally
displaced persons are still desperately awaiting better
times, are still waiting to return to their homes in safety
and dignity.

Do not get me wrong: without a doubt, lots of
good work has been done. Thanks to the many donor
contributions, houses, roads, bridges and power lines
have been rebuilt, to name but a few examples. And yes,
4.3 million people have returned home, but the pace
has slowed, and outstanding needs are most acute in the
health, electricity and water sectors.

Understandably, donors have been asking the
Government of Iraq to demonstrate shared ownership
by taking part in the financing ofthis work. I am pleased
to report that, moments ago, the Government signed
a cost-sharing agreement to begin making its own
contributions to the Funding Facility for Stabilization.

Let me also briefly refer to the Kuwait International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, which took
place almost a year and a half ago. The Iraq Recovery
and Resilience Programme is being implemented
throughout the country, and resource mobilization
efforts have yielded almost half of the required funding
so far. We will continue to encourage development
partners to fund the programme, particularly through
the United Nations trust fund.

Returning to politics, Iraq's leadership is hard
at work building on the progress made to date. As
discussed during the Council's visit to Iraq, painting a
grim picture is never a goal in itself. More importantly,
it is not justified. Also, we cannot simply judge the
current situation without putting it in the context of
Iraq's past. Decades of trouble continue to impact the
present, and we have not seen the end of it yet. It is
equally important, however, not to sugar-coat the
current circumstances. We can all agree on Iraq's great
potential, but perseverance is key to making the most
of that potential.

Clearly, one cannot expect the Iraqi Government
to create miracles overnight in dealing with the legacy
of the past and the many challenges of the present. The
harsh reality is that the Government needs time to fight
the many narrow partisan interests and to deliver.

Just as essentially, political parties and other actors
need to arrive at a common understanding that the
country's interests should be prioritized above all else.
Ultimately, it must be clear that a Government cannot
act alone. It is ajoint responsibility.

As the Council knows, the federal Cabinet is now
fully formed aside from the Ministry of Education.
Significant progress has been made on senior
appointments to parliamentary committees. The
Kurdistan Regional Government is also up and running,
with the critical resources portfolio still to be filled. I
note that three ministers of that Regional Government
are women, as is the Speaker of the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament. At the federal level, unfortunately, not a
single woman has not yet been appointed.

The good news is that the progress in the both
Government formation processes in both Baghdad
and Erbil has created a positive momentum to
advance negotiations between the two capitals, as
also demonstrated by the establishment of a high-level
joint committee.

I cannot deny that the expectations are high, in
particular on key files, including Kirkuk, Sinjar and
revenue-sharing. On the latter, it is important that all
parties acknowledge that, instead of counterproductive
annual budget battles, a comprehensive, lasting
agreement is far more productive. It goes without saying
that I am always ready to offer the good offices of
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in order to advance discussions towards consensus,
followed by action.

Regarding Kirkuk, I am very encouraged by the
goodwill demonstrated by all parties involved to finally
address the normalization of the situation in Kirkuk.

As for Sinjar, again earlier this month I travelled to
the region, where, unfortunately, I continued to witness
great devastation and slow progress on the ground. Rival
security actors and the lack of a unified administration
remain the main obstacles for progress. That situation
also greatly restricts humanitarian action. I therefore
continue to appeal to all those feeling challenged, the
federal and Kurdish authorities in particular. Indeed,
it is high time to put aside partisan interests to bridge
differences and to place without further delay the needs
of the people first.

Turning to the economy, the Government is
increasingly recognizing the urgency ofreform, notably
in broadening the revenue base beyond hydrocarbons
and in increasing the role of the private sector in
areas ranging from infrastructure development to
job creation.

Discussions at the senior-most levels focus on
enhancing governance, better managing oil revenue,
protecting the investment environment from corruption
and reforming the banking sector to pave the way for
more foreign direct investment and public-private
partnerships. That is becoming more urgent, especially
as a higher budget deficit looms with rising expenditures
and oil price volatility. Within that context, we
encourage the Iraqi Government to accelerate its
structural reform, fostering macroeconomic and
financial stability, as well as promoting sustainable,
inclusive growth.

In terms of regional politics, we continue to operate
in a perilous context. Yet the Iraqi leadership must
again be commended for its unwavering commitment
to multilateral diplomacy. With great dedication, Iraqi
leaders are tirelessly engaging regional and international
actors to ensure that their country is a meeting ground
for stability, not a venue for proxy conflicts. How right
they are. With that in mind, we should be lucid and
recognize that current tensions could well deal a huge
blow to all national and international endeavours to
rebuild a stable and prosperous Iraq. We must therefore
spare no effort in avoiding that prospect.

I am also very encouraged by the Government's
determination to bring all armed actors under State
control. Recent orders have been met with broad support
across the political spectrum. That is good news, but we
are in the early days of implementation and the next
phase will prove crucial. Clearly, zero tolerance for any
armed actor outside State control is the way forward.
Further work on security sector reform will be
necessary, as an effective, efficient and financially
sustainable security sector is critical to protecting
Iraq against existing and emerging threats. With the
Ministers of the Interior, Defence and Justice in place, I
sincerely hope that the Government will now speed up
the reconfiguration of its national security architecture
in terms of structure, capabilities and resources.

Also important is the rapid enactment of the joint
security mechanism. It will pave the way for joint
operations along disputed boundaries. Inadequate
coordination will continue to give Da'esh a margin
of manoeuvre. In other words, enhanced operational
performance on the ground between the federal
and Kurdish regional forces is not a nice to have but
anecessity.

Within the context of domestic security, I would
also like to commend the bravery of Iraqi security
forces. In the aftermath ofISIL's territorial defeat, they
continue to hunt down the remaining ISIL fighters,
for example within the framework of Operation Will
of Victory, carried out throughout the country in the
past weeks.

The issue of returning ISIL fighters, including
their family members, from Syria to Iraq continues
to pose major challenges. Unfortunately, we still have
no clarity on numbers, a start date, screening/security
arrangements and/or hosting facilities upon return. As
I have stressed before, if not suitably addressed, this
issue has the potential to impact not only Iraq but also
the wider region and far beyond.

Also important to note is the fact that issues of
due process and accountability cannot be limited only
to the courtroom. A structured dialogue is required
to precisely define how the Government of Iraq will
handle this process, which will in turn inform the
modalities of United Nations assistance.

I would also like to emphasize the paramount
importance of robust safeguards for detention, due
process and fair trials. Complying with human rights
obligations would not only demonstrate commitment
to justice and accountability, but it is also a necessary
building block for reconciliation and social cohesion.
What is more, it would reduce the risk of history
repeating itself. We are well aware that a variety of
grievances, including unfair trials and detainee abuse,
have been exploited by ISIL to fuel its violent agenda.
Whether we like it or not, at this moment in time, too
many communities continue to feel marginalized. As
a consequence, many people remain vulnerable to
extremist messaging. For me that was one of the most
important reasons to establish a permanent presence in
Mosul. I am pleased to report that our Mosul office will
open its doors in early September.

Unfortunately, as discussed before, rampant
corruption is not being wiped out at once. As I said
last time (see S/PV.8531), achieving tangible results is
crucial. A recent call to lift the immunity of members
of Parliament accused of corruption could be a move in
the right direction. But again, the final result is what
ultimately matters.

With regard to the elections, the Iraqi Council of
Representatives recently amended the Governorate
Council Electoral Law. I must say that certain
provisions are of great concern, as they could lead to the
disenfranchisement of many otherwise eligible voters.
In addition, the transparency and accountability of
electoral institutions and processes are not sufficiently
guaranteed at present. While the elections expected in
April 2020 are critical and overdue, I have made it clear
that free, fair and credible elections are key to the revival
of public trust. In other words, UNAMI will continue
to highlight the importance of guaranteeing the right
of universal suffrage and the need for the transparency
and accountability of institutions and processes - all
key to the inclusiveness and credibility of the elections.

With your permission, Madam President, I would
now like to turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti,
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. I am pleased to report
a significant breakthrough. Samples of human remains
exhumed in March from a burial site in Iraq's Muthanna
governorate have now been confirmed as belonging
to some of the Kuwaitis we have been seeking. DNA
analysis is continuing on additional human remains. I
can also confirm that, earlier today, more than 40,000
Kuwaiti books belonging to the Amiri and national
archives were handed over by the Government of Iraq
to the Kuwaiti authorities.

In that context, as always, I would like to commend
the ongoing constructive cooperation between Iraq
and Kuwait under the auspices of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, with the invaluable
assistance of the Tripartite Commission. I truly hope
that the recent discoveries will finally bring some relief
to the families of the missing, to whom we extend our
deepest sympathies.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that Iraq's
daunting challenges neither arose overnight nor are
solely the product of Iraqi actions. As such, they will
not be resolved tomorrow. In other words, Iraqis must
press ahead in unity and, just as important, with an
engaged international community by their side.

