Mr. Baja (Philippines): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and the United States delegation,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2003/944) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET), as well as Ambassador
Sharma for his comprehensive briefing today on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

About five months ago, we celebrated the first
year of independence of Timor-Leste. It has been four
years since the Timorese voted in a referendum to
pursue independence. Today, we can all feel
satisfaction that, with the assistance of the United
Nations, war and starvation are slowly becoming
distant memories and nation-building has begun in
earnest in Timor-Leste. The security situation has
greatly improved; the foundations of a functioning civil
service have been laid; and there has been a marked
improvement in the strengthening of rule-of-law
mechanisms, political dialogue among stakeholders,
interaction with civil society and the critical
relationship between Timor-Leste and its closest
neighbour, Indonesia. Indeed, remarkable progress has
been achieved in Timor-Leste's nation-building.

Despite the success story of Timor-Leste, the
persisting economic difficulties in the country serve as
a reality check on the difficult road ahead as the
termination of UNMISET in May next year
approaches. The challenges that Timor-Leste faces are
daunting. It has been reported that the country has not
recovered much since the time when 75 per cent of its
infrastructure was destroyed. Seventy per cent of
villages lack running water, and large parts of the
countryside do not have electricity. Forty per cent of
the population live on less than 55 cents a day, while
half lack formal education. The unemployment rate is
20 per cent in urban areas, with the civil service and
UNMISET providing the bulk of all the paid jobs in the
country. The country has been going through a
devastating drought for the past two years.

There remain, however, some bright spots, even
on the economic front. The Timor Sea Treaty, signed in
March between Timor-Leste and Australia, provides
hope. The oil and gas industries are projected to add
about $5 billion over 17 years to the country's coffers,
although, according to experts, the bulk of this money
will start trickling into Dili only after five years. Until
then, Timor-Leste will receive about $100 million a
year, which should provide substantial help for the
financial needs of the nation. But such resources from
oil will not be sufficient to solve the problem of
poverty in the country. Timor-Leste desperately needs
capacity-building so as to improve the standard of
living of its people.

Timor-Leste continues to require the assistance of
the international community. In order to generate the
kind of economic growth that will filter down to
households, the country will need to seek development
and job-creation in labour-intensive areas, such as
farming, which employs most of the country's poor.
This is where international donors could provide
substantial assistance. There has been speculation that
some international donors are preparing to cut back on
aid because of the projected income from the oil and
gas industries, even if such income has not yet
materialized. We appeal to international donors not to
do so. There must be a reasonable time overlap
between aid and the oil income, as a premature aid
cutback would be devastating to the country's
economy. Furthermore, since Timor-Leste would
depend greatly on its oil and gas industries in the
future, we hope that it could maximize all possible
revenues from those industries in accordance with
established principles of international law, particularly
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

The international community has invested a lot of
political capital - not to mention billions of dollars -
in the future of Timor-Leste. For our part, we have just
successfully implemented the Philippine human
resource development assistance package for Timor-
Leste, under the auspices of the Philippines-Japan
partnership programme.

Thanks to the resolve of Member States and the
United Nations, we are now in the final stages of the
exit strategy for the country. We recognize the
significant role of the Council in assisting the
Government of Timor-Leste to develop its institutions
and infrastructure as an independent State through
UNMISET. We support the adjustments to the schedule
for downsizing the military and police elements of
UNMISET in the light of developments in the security
situation. However, my delegation would caution
against the precipitate withdrawal of the United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste following the
completion of the UNMISET mandate in May 2004
without a full assessment of the requirements of Timor-
Leste and sufficient guarantees that peace is adequately
secured.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his
report (S/2003/944), many of the fundamentals for the
country's good governance would remain unfulfilled
beyond the termination of UNMISET in May 2004.
The unfinished business would pertain to the critical
areas of civil administration, justice and policing, as
well as human rights training. The Secretary-General
has promised to provide further suggestions on what
would be the best means of meeting the country's
needs beyond UNMISET after undertaking a thorough
evaluation of the situation. We look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General in the near future.

