Mr. Dumitru (Romania) (spoke in French): I,
too, should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
publicly our congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We wish also to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Wang Guangya and his team for the
exemplary way in which they conducted the business
of the Council during the month of April.

Romania fully associates itself with the statement
that the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg will
be making on behalf of the Presidency of the European
Union.

I should therefore like to make only a few brief
comments.

First, I should like to thank Ambassador
Sardenberg for the outstanding way in which he led
this first Security Council mission to Haiti following
the adoption of resolution 1542 (2004). His in-depth
knowledge of the subject enabled the Council's
message to be conveyed forcefully and clearly to the
various stakeholders.

For Romania, the mission had special importance.
The situation that prevailed in Haiti at the beginning of
2004 was one of the first crises that Romania, as a
newly elected member of the Council, addressed and
acted on jointly with the other members of the Council.
Almost a year later, we have seen that our decisions
and the steps taken on that basis have started to bear
fruit, leading to positive changes in the field, beginning
with the security situation.

In that context, Council members were able to
assess first-hand the excellent work being done by the
leadership and the personnel of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The outcome of the mission, contained in the
recommendations of the report, once again makes clear
the value of field missions conducted by the Council.
The broad and coherent vision that the Council
mission's approach inspired with regard to Haiti's
present and future has been supplemented by the
priority given to the recommendations.

The overall experience gained by a number of
countries in transition, including Romania, has shown
that elections are the indispensable primary stage for
ushering in political stability, closely followed by other
components of the transitional process. In the
particular case of Haiti, in the light of the challenges
that need to be met in order to meet the deadline of the
2005 elections, we support the emphasis placed by the
Council mission on the responsibilities that are
incumbent not only on the Transitional Government
but also on the political forces and on civil society.

The experience of countries that have been
through transitions - sometimes complex and painful
ones - towards democracy, the rule of law and
democratization also makes clear that long-term efforts
are required at several levels - political, economic
and in terms of the prevailing mindset. Therefore,
while we fully support the view that success in Haiti
depends on a long-term, multidimensional involvement
by the international community and above all by the
United Nations, there is, however, another condition
that needs to be met in order to prevent history from
repeating itself in that country, which has experienced
so many false starts.

At this time, it is important in particular that the
internal Haitian stakeholders who are the international
community's partners act in good faith and commit
themselves unreservedly in both political and practical
terms.

Accordingly, we believe that the continuing
fragility in the situation is due largely to the marked
absence of trust which continues to prevail among the
political leaders of the various groups and communities
in Haiti. Absolute poverty, impunity, the absence of
hope and a lack of education - affecting primarily
young people - makes the atmosphere in Haiti a very
toxic one, full of hatred, which in turn leads to self-
destruction.

Unfortunately, it seems that, even at the
subregional level, confidence has not been completely
restored. The Security Council must furthermore
encourage the full normalization of the relations
between Haiti and the Caribbean countries. The Haitian
Minister for Foreign Affairs has informed us about
positive steps in that respect. In addition, the
representative of the Caribbean Community in Port-au-
Prince told us about a number of projects that the
subregional organization is implementing in Haiti. All
of this can only increase the synergy of regional
cooperation, with a view to a speedier improvement in
the situation in Haiti. Latin American countries are
providing most of MINUSTAH's military personnel,
and the Organization of American States is equally
involved in preparing for the elections, in close
cooperation with MINUSTAH.

Finally, we hope that, during the thematic debate
that the Romanian presidency of the Security Council
intends to hold in October, the case of Haiti will be
presented as a success story - the result of
cooperation among the United Nations and regional
organizations.

