Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Brazil voted in favour
of resolution 1564 (2004) on the understanding that its
main thrust is that of saving lives in Darfur. When
resolution 1556 (2004) was adopted on 30 July 2004
our delegation expressed the understanding that such
resolution was the first of a series of decisions to be
taken in due time by the Security Council with a View
to promoting peace and security in Darfur, alleviating
the suffering of more than a million people and putting
an end to the humanitarian disaster in that region.

Resolution 1564 (2004) focuses on some of those
goals by insisting on the need for further and
unequivocal actions by the Government of Sudan in
carrying out its primary responsibility to extend
protection and security to the civilian population and to
rein in the militias, as well as by pressing, in a
appropriate manner, the issue of the voluntary return of
refugees and displaced persons and by renewing the
appeal for urgent international support for
humanitarian efforts undertaken both in Sudan and in
Chad. We note with interest that the resolution also
addresses the issue of the Sudanese rebel groups. In
addition it welcomes the steps taken by the
Government of Sudan with regard to increased access
for humanitarian relief.

Notwithstanding this, we are of the view that
resolution 1564 (2004) could have acknowledged other
positive steps taken by the Government of Sudan, as
outlined by the Secretary-General and by his Special
Representative, Jan Pronk - in particular, those
concerning the beginning of disarmament and
improvement of security in certain areas of internally
displaced persons, together with the deployment of
additional police. If it had done that, the Council would
have firmer grounds for demanding more effective
steps, particularly in the security area.

Resolution 1564 (2004) commits the international
community to political and military efforts undertaken
by the African Union in connection with the crisis in
Darfur. Our delegation welcomes this clear
engagement, although we believe that the Council
should have gone further by basing the appropriate
paragraphs of the resolution on Chapter VIII of the
Charter. We are convinced that such provision, besides
being easily acceptable, would be both timely and
appropriate. It would have provided a steadier political
and legal basis for the budding cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in this
particular instance.

Actually, the excessive use of Chapter VII as an
umbrella for the whole operative part of this

resolution - as I had already mentioned at the
adoption of resolution 1556 (2004) - runs the risk of
misleading all parties concerned, including

international public opinion, which may understand
that the pacific settlement of disputes, or even
diplomatic negotiations, were not among the options
considered by the Council. Indeed, the negotiations
under the African Union in Abuja allow the Council to
continue to nurture positive expectations.

As to the request for immediate action on the
establishment of an international commission of
inquiry, our major goal continues to be that of avoiding
the recurrence of gross violations of human rights. We
certainly hope that the precise investigation of recent
highly deplorable facts will be possible at the time
when the African Union is seeking to have all parties
on board as the best way to find a durable political
solution to the conflict in Darfur.

Finally, my delegation shares the interpretation
that there should not be an automatic application of the
measures mentioned in paragraph 14 in that, by
mentioning now the possibilities set out in the last part
of that paragraph, the Council is not prejudging the
nature of its substantive decision, to be taken at an
appropriate time.

