We thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing this afternoon. First, we consider that the cooperation of the Syrian Arab authorities with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is paramount in order to achieve progress on this issue; this includes finding a resolution to the outstanding issues in order to fulfil the mandate of bringing about the total elimination of chemical weapons in Syria, in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013). In that vein, we commend the video-teleconference between the Syrian authorities and the OPCW secretariat held on 20 July. We are hopeful that this engagement will lead to the restoration of the technical rounds of consultations under the action plan outlined by the secretariat. We also look forward to the resumption of missions and deployments to the Syrian Arab Republic when the restrictions due to the coronavirus disease outbreak are lifted. It is commendable that despite the disruptions to its work resulting from the pandemic, the secretariat has continued to fulfil its mandate and its engagement with Syria. The Dominican Republic encourages the Syrian Arab Republic, as a State party to the Convention, to actively collaborate in good faith with the OPCW with a view to resolving pending matters, in particular to clarify the gaps and inconsistencies in its initial declaration. We call on it to fulfil its obligations emanating from the decision of the OPCW Executive Council of 9 July, based on the conclusions of the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team, which confirmed that toxic chemical agents were indeed used as weapons on three occasions by the Syrian Arab Air Force in the city of Ltamenah in March 2017. As we have stated previously, the normalizing of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which has been confirmed in numerous occasions by the fact-finding mission, the Joint Investigative Mechanism and, more recently, the Investigation and Identification Team, must come to an end, as must the culture of impunity, which is unacceptable. When we address the use of chemical weapons, it is usually through technical discussions of protocols and regulations that countries in general are required to abide by, but we must always keep in mind that we are actually talking about the lives of children, women and men that have been greatly impacted by those heinous actions. Thousands of people have died and many others have been affected physically and psychologically; nevertheless, there has been no resolution to those crimes and, subsequently, no vindication for the survivors or closure for the families of the dead. The identification of perpetrators is the first step towards accountability, and the responsibility lies with us to ensure a responsible pursuit of justice for the grave violations committed. We also have to strengthen our efforts to prevent the development and use of such weapons by non-State or State actors alike; thus the support and cooperation of the international community for the OPCW is essential in that endeavour. In addition, we urge unity in the Council and the fostering of dialogue among all parties so as to find a viable political solution to this long-lasting issue. On another aspect, the Dominican Republic expresses its unwavering support for and full confidence in the professional, objective and impartial work of the OPCW in its task of definitively relegating to the past the utilization of chemical weapons. Likewise, we extend our support to the Investigation and Identification Team in its efforts to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. To conclude, the Dominican Republic reiterates its firm condemnation of the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances. Their use is unjustifiable and constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and of the Chemical Weapons Convention and a threat to international peace and security.
