Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the delegation of the Republic of the Congo
for having taken the initiative in organizing this debate
on the role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa. The
situations in Darfur and Somalia remain critical, and in
many instances consolidating peace after a conflict has
ended is a challenge. The debate today is therefore
most timely.

Today, I would like to touch upon three issues,
namely the role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention and resolution, relations with the African
Union, and the efforts of Japanese Government in this
area.

We need a comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention - one that not only addresses the problem
from the political, economic, and social perspectives,
but also takes into account elements such as the rule of
law and humanitarian activities. And, given the wide
range of actors involved, it is essential to coordinate
what they do in order to ensure that the overall effort
has coherence.

The Security Council has been holding thematic
debates focusing on the different elements that can
trigger conflicts: small arms, food security, climate
change, energy and natural resources, for example. We
welcome such discussions and think it is important to
try to translate their outcomes into concrete action.

In order to arrive at more effective means of
conflict prevention, the Security Council should further
develop cooperative relations with relevant
organizations within as well as outside the United
Nations. To that end, the Council should enhance its
relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission, one
of its subsidiary bodies, which plays an important role
in the consolidation of peace and nation-building. And
in no area is that more important than in preventing a
conflict from recurring in a country where it has finally
been brought to an end. In particular, the Council
should refer to the Commission the task of following
up on problems relating to the consolidation of peace
that were discussed in the thematic debate on that
subject. More specifically, it might request the
Commission to provide an action-oriented advisory
opinion with regard to ways to promote coordination
among organizations and activities in the area of
conflict prevention.

In the area of the prevention of armed conflict
and mediation in Africa, the role of the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations has been growing,
and we commend them for their efforts. It is necessary
for the international community to support such
undertakings, which are demonstrations of regional
ownership. As for the United Nations and the role it
should play, it is important for the Mediation Support
Unit established within the Department of Political
Affairs to further enhance its partnership with relevant
regional organizations, including the AU, and for the
United Nations mediator to play a role in tying together
the efforts of the various actors in the area of
mediation.

With regard to peacekeeping, the United Nations
Secretariat is already at work developing concrete
cooperative projects with the AU Commission pursuant
to the framework for the latter's 10-year capacity-
building programme. In the area of conflict prevention
and mediation, it is also important to promote

cooperation between the two organizations by looking
carefully at what kind of added value the United
Nations can provide.

As for the peacekeeping operations carried out by
regional organizations, I believe that true ownership is
possible only when an organization is able to sustain its
activities on its own. To that end, the international
community should work to enhance the capacity of
regional organizations. The Group of Eight (G-8) and
other bodies have already made such efforts, but it is to
be hoped that in the future, we will see more sharing of
information by regional organizations and more
communication regarding experiences and lessons
learned by countries contributing troops to United
Nations operations.

When it comes to financial support for the
peacekeeping operations conducted by regional
organizations, in principle, every such organization
should be responsible for its own costs. In those
instances in which the United Nations examines the
possibility of offering financial support, the Council
should consider the advisability and modality of
support on a case-by-case basis, taking into account
whether such support would be consistent with the
principles that govern United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and also taking steps to obtain the views of
major States that are not members of the Council - in
particular, major financial contributors, when the
subject is financial support - so as to ensure
transparency.

Japan has always sought to understand the root
causes of conflicts. In order to emancipate people from
fear and poverty, and to assist in creating a society
where people can live their lives with dignity, we have
been making financial contributions through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, the United
Nations Democracy Fund and the Peacebuilding Fund.
Japan has also been working to enhance awareness of
the importance of peace consolidation through the
Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process and, to that end,
offering bilateral and multilateral assistance in such
areas as the collection of small arms, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the response to
landmines, as well as reintegration through community
development based on the principle of human security.
In addition, we provide significant support to the
African Union and subregional organizations in Africa
in the area of capacity-building and South-South

07-4920]
cooperation. We intend to continue to extend such
assistance.

Japan has been Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission since June of this year and will become a
State party to the International Criminal Court in
October. In those capacities, and for all the reasons I
have outlined, we are determined to address the issue
of conflict prevention and resolution in a more active
way. To that end, Japan will host, in April of next year,
the G-8 development ministers' meeting; in May, the
fourth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD IV); and in July, the G-8
Hokkaido Toyako summit. In those forums and
elsewhere, we intend to continue to take up the
challenges that Africa is facing as a matter of central
importance to the entire international community.

