We thank the Permanent Mission of Estonia for holding this very important high-level open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict via video- teleconference. The theme underscores the pivotal importance of the issue, especially as civilians around the globe have become a disproportionate target of violence in the ongoing situations of armed conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the International Committee of Red Cross and the other briefers for their insightful statements. The modern edifice of international humanitarian law is built on the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Today the four Geneva Conventions are among the very few international treaties to have been universally ratified, reflecting not just the universal legal consensus but also our shared values of ethical behaviour during armed conflict and the conduct of hostilities. Despite the comprehensive legal framework, it is quite evident that the implementation of international humanitarian law, particularly the protection of civilians during armed conflict, has not matched our expectations. That is also reflected in the Secretary General's latest report (S/2020/366), which notes that tens of thousands of civilians were killed, maimed or injured in 2019 in various armed conflicts around the globe. Unfortunately, the cardinal principles of distinguishing between civilians and combatants, military necessity and proportionality continue to be violated, with warring parties operating with impunity. It is the persistent failure to comply with those obligations and respect the rules of international humanitarian law during armed conflict that remain the abiding challenges for the international community. The empirical evidence of recent and older history shows that systematic and consistent violations of the rights of civilians are most frequent and pervasive in situations of foreign occupation and suppression of the right of peoples to self- determination. An important question that should be posed is how to protect civilian populations when their very suppression is the object of the conflict. The rationale of suppressing terrorism should not open the door to the repression of civilians seeking respect for their fundamental rights, including the right to self-determination. The challenge of addressing gross violations of international human rights law and humanitarian law are exacerbated by the problem of inequity in the international response. In some situations, there is a quick and even robust response. In others, the perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity, both at the national and international levels. Most often, there is sufficient public concern but insufficient political will to act. The record of the Security Council itself in that context is not without blemish. In the circumstances, it is vital to reinforce the concept of the protection of civilians in all such situations of complex crisis. We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment that the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated difficulties in the protection of civilians. Since the attention of Governments and the international community is absorbed by the unprecedented health crisis, the pandemic has allowed some States to take advantage of the situation by intensifying targeted violence against civilians, particularly those living under foreign occupation. In that regard, we wish to draw the Security Council's attention to the deteriorating human rights and humanitarian situation in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir, where India has callously exploited the COVID-19 crisis to enhance its control of the occupied territory. Already reeling from a nine-month-long draconian digital and physical lockdown, the occupied valley has now been placed under a double lockdown in the guise of COVID-19 restrictions, severely impeding the access of Kashmiris to medicine, medical help and information on ways to deal with the pandemic. While the world's attention has been riveted to combating the COVID-19 virus, India has taken further steps, almost by stealth, to change the demography of occupied Jammu and Kashmir by promulgating new domicile regulations that would enable settlers from all over India to colonize the occupied state in violation of Security Council resolutions and the Fourth Geneva Convention. In order to suppress the legitimate resistance of the people of Jammu and Kashmir advocating for self-determination, the Indian security forces have once again resorted to the indiscriminate use of pellet guns and live ammunition, arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial killings against civilians in the occupied valley. In April 2020 alone, 33 Kashmiris were killed, 152 injured and 945 arbitrarily arrested. In another inhumane practice, the Indian security forces have refused to return the bodies of killed Kashmiris to their families for proper burial. Defying the Secretary-General's call fora global ceasefire, India has intensified its violations of the ceasefire along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir and the working boundary. Since | January, it has committed 989 unprovoked ceasefire violations and deliberately targeted innocent civilians on the Pakistan side of the Line of Control, killing six civilians and injuring 82. In flagrant violation of article 28 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, India has frequently placed its artillery guns within crowded Kashmiri villages, using them as human shields, to avoid Pakistani retaliation for its ceasefire violations. The worsening situation and increased attacks against civilians call for the Security Council's intervention by holding India accountable for its clear, grave breaches of international humanitarian law and war crimes in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir. The protection of civilians in the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations has been complex because of the vastly different nature of armed conflicts, possible contradiction of the long-standing agreed principles of United Nations peacekeeping, the limitations of the mandates and the serious inadequacy of the resources made available for peacekeeping missions. Pakistan, as one of the world's top troop-contributing countries, has proudly and conscientiously undertaken the task of proactively protecting civilians, in collaboration with the host Governments, as and when mandated by the Security Council. While the fundamental principles of peacekeeping are not an impediment to the protection-of-civilian mandates, the primary responsibility for the protection of all civilians nevertheless rests with the host countries. The clear distinction between the established norm of the protection of civilians and the evolving concept of the responsibility to protect must therefore be maintained. The goal of protecting civilians is best served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts in the first place. The Security Council, as the primary organ of the United Nations tasked with maintaining international peace and security, should focus on the root causes of emerging and long-standing conflicts, including Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir, and find inclusive political solutions. Inaction by the Council in cases of foreign aggression and occupation comes at a high human cost. However, unfortunately, we continue to see legal and moral values sacrificed at the altar of political expediency. In conclusion, collective action and multilateral solutions to today's conflicts offer the best hope for millions of civilians who are trapped between death and despair. We must not fail in responding to this challenge. We must act boldly in all situations where the survival of millions of civilians caught in the vice of violence and war is threatened.
