Mr. Okuda (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
today's debate. I also wish to join previous speakers in
thanking the respective Chairs of the Council's three
counter-terrorism Committees for their briefings on
developments during the past six months.

Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to the
international community. Countering terrorism requires
a comprehensive and multifaceted approach, as well as
enduring engagement. The three Committees play a
significant role in this context and should continue
their efforts to develop further effective measures.

As we are all aware, the threat of terrorism posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban continues unabated. The
sanctions imposed against individuals and entities
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban under
resolution 1267 (1999) - travel bans, the freezing of
assets and arms embargoes - continue to play a
crucial role in countering terrorism.

In order for the regime under resolution 1267
(1999) to be fully effective, continued efforts to ensure
the credibility of the consolidated list are
indispensable. Japan commends the work accomplished
so far by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) with respect to the
comprehensive review of the list and narrative
summaries of reasons for listing pursuant to resolution
1822 (2008), as well as the improvement in recent
years of its listing and de-listing process. We are also
grateful to the Monitoring Team and the 1267
Committee's secretariat for their devoted work in these
endeavours.

Japan regards the improvement of the 1267
sanctions regime as instrumental in making its due-
process improvements and raising its transparency and
efficiency. We continue to support the efforts to
improve the regime in a way that does not compromise
its effectiveness as a counterterrorism measure.

I welcome the good work done by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
(CTED) in encouraging Member States to fully
implement resolution 1373 (2001). I also pay tribute to
Mr. Smith, Executive Director, and the CTED experts
for their excellent work in counter-terrorism efforts.

We attach great importance to the role of
Committee CTED in identifying specific needs in the
area of counterterrorism technical assistance. In this
regard, we support the stocktaking exercise consisting
in the review of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by all Member States. This exercise contributes,
through dialogue, to identifying the challenges that
Member States face and the technical assistance that
they require. We expect the Committee and CTED to
make further efforts in this area to enhance counter-
terrorism capacity in all Member States.

It is important to note at the same time that some
countries are not submitting their Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs) to CTED in a
timely manner. We would like to stress that all Member
States need to cooperate fully with CTED and make a
determined effort to submit their PIAs by the deadline.

In addition, we would like to highlight the
importance of the country visits that have been
conducted by the Committee and CTED. Country visits
are among the valuable tools allowing the Committee
and CTED to ascertain the current situation of counter-
terrorism in a given country and to assess actual needs
in the area of technical assistance for capacity-building
through direct contact with the relevant authorities. It
is our hope that the Committee and CTED will adopt a
more effective approach by engaging in shorter and
more focused country visits and regional visits in a
flexible manner.

With regard to technical assistance for capacity-
building, Japan would like to express deep appreciation
to CTED for sharing information regarding technical
assistance needs with members of the Counter-
terrorism Action Group (CTAG). Japan continues to
support the coordination mechanism between CTED
and CTAG.

Lastly, we welcome the revised version of the
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), which is now under consideration by the
Committee. We hope that the global survey will
contribute to deepening our understanding of the
counter-terrorism measures in both the regional and
thematic aspects.

Japan expresses its appreciation for the strenuous
efforts undertaken by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to promote full
implementation of the resolution, and also appreciates
Costa Rica's presidential efforts in the Committee. We
highly value the adoption of resolution 1887 (2009) on
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, in which
the Security Council reaffirms the need for full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Japan also
welcomes the fruitful discussion in the open meeting
convened from 30 September through 2 October as part
of the comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Ensuring sincere compliance by Member States
with the provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673
(2006) and 1810 (2008) requires a tailored approach
that takes the specific needs of each respective country
into consideration. Japan will continue to extend its
assistance in promoting the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in close cooperation with the
1540 Committee and other international forums,
including the Group of Eight.

Lastly, we appreciate the close cooperation
among the three subsidiary Committees to maximize
the functions mandated by the respective Security
Council resolutions. We also commend the contribution
of their work within the framework of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The cooperation
and coordination in this regard should make the most
of the limited capacities and resources available by
avoiding overlaps and duplications.

