Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing today's debate.

(Spoke in Spanish)

I also thank you for the enthusiasm with which you
presented your views.

(spoke in English)

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President ofthe International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy
of Human Rights Watch, for their important and
inspiring contributions.

Sweden fully endorses the statements that will
be made later today on behalf of the European Union
and on behalf of the Group of Nordic Countries by the
representative of Norway.

The Fourth Geneva Convention puts the protection
of civilians at the heart of international humanitarian
law. The Charter of the United Nations puts it at the
heart of the mandate and responsibility of the Security
Council. Sadly, despite those protections, one might say
that it has never been as perilous as it is today to be a
civilian in the middle ofarmed conflict. It has been forty
years since the adoption of the Additional Protocols of
1977 to the Geneva Conventions, which specifically
strengthen the protection of civilians Yet, almost every
day, the Council is faced with testimonies to the most
brutal, barbarous and premeditated instances of the
targeting of civilians as a tactic of war.

From the atrocities in Syria and in the inaccessible
villages of Borno State in northern Nigeria and the
man-made famine ravaging South Sudan to the crisis
in Yemen and the attacks on medical facilities in
Kunduz in Afghanistan, the Secretary-General and the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross rightly speak of a global protection crisis.
The current level ofpreventable suffering is horrifying,
and, as we have stated repeatedly, utterly unacceptable.

It is incontrovertible that States have the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians. At the
same time, the international community, including the
Council, must do more. We welcome the Secretary-
General's proposed path to protection and his
recommendations for a more ambitious approach for the
United Nations across the board. The path to protection
is strongly linked to the Secretary-General's prevention
agenda. Such an approach saves lives and prevents
suffering. It also has the potential to save billions of
dollars in humanitarian aid, which can, in turn, be
invested in building stable and prosperous societies.

Once a year, we meet here to speak about the
protection of civilians in an open debate. Every day,
however, we address those issues in our work. It is our
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians in
each and every conflict, but often we fail. How can we
do better? The protection of civilians' agenda is broad.
Today, I will limit myself to focusing on three issues.

First, we can ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, as well as international human
rights law. Where once civilian deaths were seen as
the unavoidable accidental casualties of war, we now
see civilians being actively targeted. Deliberate attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure are seen as
just another tool in the toolbox of warfare. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General that the narrative that
civilian deaths in war are inevitable must be reversed.
In fact, such deaths can be prevented.

International humanitarian law provides a
foundation for prevention, as well as for reconciliation,
peacebuilding and accountability. The protection
and promotion of human rights contributes to
addressing the root causes of instability. We can
include a gender perspective in the implementation
of international humanitarian law. It would ensure
that all civilians - both men and women - get the
effective protection to which they are entitled, as well
as impartial humanitarian assistance. Women and girls
face heightened and specific risks in situations of armed
conflict. It is, therefore, important that the situation
and needs of women and girls in armed conflict be
addressed. Furthermore, the particular vulnerabilities
and protection needs of migrants, refugees and internally
displaced persons - especially Children - need to be
recognized, considered and addressed

Secondly, we can take concrete steps forward by
building upon landmark resolution 2286 (2016) and
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General of August 2016 (S/2016/360). The
legal and policy framework for protecting the sick and
wounded and those endeavouring to assist them is in
place. Sweden is ready to engage. My Government's
ministerial delegation on international law and
disarmament is in the process of developing new and
concrete proposals to strengthen the protection of
medical care in armed conflict

Thirdly, with regard to peacekeeping, we can
ensure that cross-pillar political strategies guide all
peace operations. The protection of civilians cannot
be seen as optional. It must be politically prioritized
within those strategies, properly resourced and
integrated across the work of missions. That requires
the availability to the Council of relevant and accurate
information with respect to the protection of civilians,
which, we believe, should be included in reporting by
the Secretary-General and other mechanisms, while
drawing on the whole of the United Nations system.

Missions have a critical role in ensuring that
protection needs are identified, reported and addressed.
Women's participation must be ensured at all stages
of protection strategies in order to ensure that those
strategies address the needs of the entire population.
Building the capacity of United Nations troops and
police, including in the protection of citizens, is part
of a larger peacekeeping reform that must be sustained.

Finally, as the Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
would also like to highlight the fact that the Security
Council's children and armed conflict agenda has an
important accountability mechanism for dealing with
the perpetrators of attacks on schools and hospitals.
That includes its monitoring and reporting mechanism,
namely, the Secretary-General's annual report on
children and armed conflict with its annexes, which
list the perpetrators of such attacks and United Nations
action plans concluded to end such violations. In order
to address the widespread impunity for attacks on
health care, we can fully utilize that mechanism.

We have made much progress on the protection of
civilians within the Council and within the work of the
United Nations more broadly. The legal framework is
there; the resolutions have been adopted and agreed.
We must now start down the path of protection that
reinforces respect for international humanitarian law,
while working to prevent and end conflict. Doing so
will require the full commitment and strong leadership
of both the Secretary-General and the Security Council.

