Mr. Pascoe: The crisis in the Gaza Strip and
southern Israel has escalated dramatically since last
08-21369
Tuesday, 15 January 2008. The precursor to this
escalation has been daily rocket and mortar attacks on
Israeli civilian residential areas by several militant
groups from Gaza and regular Israel Defence Force
(IDF) military attacks on and into Gaza. There are also
the tight Israeli restrictions on crossings into Gaza for
the stated purpose of bringing about a cessation of
rocket fire.

The IDF entered the Gaza Strip on Tuesday,
15 January, and were engaged by Hamas militants in a
heavy battle, which included IDF air and tank
operations. Hamas claimed responsibility for sniper
and rocket attacks against Israel.

Since then, over 150 rockets and mortar attacks
have been launched at Israel by militants, injuring 11
Israelis, and a sniper attack killed an Ecuadorian
national on a kibbutz in Israel.

Forty-two Palestinians have been killed and 117
injured by IDF, which has launched 8 ground
incursions, 15 air strikes and 10 surface-to-surface
missiles in the past week. Among the dead are a
number of Palestinian civilians, who have been killed
in ground battles between IDF and militants and in
Israeli air strikes and targeted killing operations.

There has been a significant de-escalation in
violence in the past few days, with a much lower level
of rocket fire and IDF incursions. Since first light this
morning until 2.00 pm. local time, one rocket landed
on an open field and three mortar shells have been
fired; there have been no IDF incursions or operations.
The situation, however, remains extremely fragile.

The Secretary-General has expressed his deep
concern over the bloodshed and has appealed for an
immediate end to the violence. He has stressed the
responsibilities of all parties to adhere to their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to
not endanger civilians.

Indiscriminate rocket and mortar firing towards
civilian population centres and crossing points is
totally unacceptable. We have and continue to condemn
it unreservedly. Such attacks terrorize Israeli
communities near Gaza, particularly in the town of
Sderot. They also endanger humanitarian workers at
crossing points. They have been a regular occurrence
since well before Israel's disengagement, causing
civilian casualties, damage, school closures and high
levels of post-traumatic stress disorder. Over 100,000
08-21369
Israelis live within range of standard Qassam rocket
fire.

We are further concerned that IDF Corporal Gilad
Shalit is still being held captive in Gaza and that
Hamas continues to deny the International Committee
of the Red Cross access, in contravention of
international humanitarian law. We continue to be
concerned by allegations of smuggling of weapons and
materiel into Gaza.

We equally call for strict observance of
international humanitarian law by Israel and its armed
forces. I must state firmly that the Israeli occupation -
including with respect to Gaza - carries clear
obligations under international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

We are cognizant of Israel's security concerns.
We also take note that Israel stresses that in using
military force it does not target civilians and claims
that it takes care to avoid civilian casualties. However,
Israel is obliged not to take disproportionate measures
or endanger civilians, and must thoroughly investigate
incidents leading to civilian casualties and ensure
adequate accountability. I would also like to reiterate
that the basic principled position of the United Nations
in opposition to extra-judicial killings is compounded
by the frequency with which such operations are
carried out in densely populated civilian areas. This is
why the Secretary-General has repeatedly called on
Israel to exercise maximum restraint.

The Gaza crossings have remained largely closed
since the Hamas takeover in June 2007, except for
imports to meet minimal humanitarian needs.
Compared with the already precarious first half of
2007, imports into Gaza have dropped 77 per cent, and
exports from Gaza by 98 per cent. Most Palestinians
cannot exit Gaza; exceptions are made for some
students and humanitarian workers, and some - but
not all - needy medical cases.

Large United Nations construction projects,
which could bring employment and housing to Gazans,
including some left homeless by earlier IDF
operations, are frozen because building materials are
not available. At a time when United Nations security
procedures are evermore critical, the requests of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to import even
bulletproof windows to protect its Gaza offices have
been denied.
3
On 17 January, Israel augmented quantities of
fuel allowed into Gaza pursuant to a petition before the
Israeli High Court. However, on 18 January, as rocket
fire intensified, Israel imposed a comprehensive
closure of the Gaza Strip, halting the import of fuel,
food and medical and relief items. The Gaza power
plant, which supplies electricity to Gaza City and the
middle camps, shut down on Sunday evening, leaving
every area in Gaza except Rafah with daily power cuts
of 8 to 12 hours a day. Approximately 40 per cent of
the population did not have regular access to running
water. Fifty per cent of bakeries were reported closed
owing to a lack of electricity and shortages of flour and
grain. Hospitals were running on generators, and two
reduced their activities to intensive care units only.
Thirty million litres of raw sewage was pumped into
the Mediterranean Sea owing to the breakdown of
sewage pumping equipment.

Earlier today, Palestinian demonstrators who had
tried to force open the Rafah border crossing were
dispersed by Egyptian security forces, with injuries
reported.

The United Nations has been actively involved,
through interventions of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations Special Coordinator, Robert Serry, and
the UNRWA Commissioner-General, Karen Koning
AbuZayd, in seeking an urgent easing of the blanket
closure of Gaza.

Today, Israel reopened two crossings for fuel and
the delivery of humanitarian supplies by international
organizations. As of yet, it is not clear whether the
crossings will stay open. We strongly urge Israel at a
minimum to allow for the regular and unimpeded
delivery of fuel and basic necessities. Approximately
600,000 litres of industrial fuel will be delivered today,
with a target of 2.2 million litres throughout the week
for use by hospitals, industrial vehicles, UNRWA
operations and the power plant. The plant resumed
operations at 11.30 am. local time this morning.

However, allow me to underline that the
humanitarian situation is still extremely fragile. The
2.2 million litres of fuel will only restore the electricity
flow to what it was at the beginning of January. That
could mean cuts of 8 to 10 hours every day in the mid-
region of Gaza and every second day everywhere in
other parts of the Strip. In addition, benzine is still not
being allowed into Gaza causing widespread closure of
petrol stations. Unless supplies are allowed in, the
stocks of the World Food Programme (WFP), which
relies on benzine, will be depleted by Thursday
morning.

The entry of commercial humanitarian supplies
required to meet the total humanitarian needs of Gaza
is still not permitted. In December, only 43.5 per cent
of basic commercial food import needs were met. It is
imperative that both commercial and international
humanitarian assistance be allowed into Gaza.

As the Secretary-General stated last September
when the Israeli cabinet decided to intensify its closure
measures, Israel must reconsider and cease its policy of
pressuring the civilian population of Gaza for the
unacceptable actions of militants. Collective penalties,
let me recall, are prohibited under international law. In
that context, I take this opportunity to reiterate the
Secretary-General's strong support for the plan of
Palestinian Authority President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad for the Authority to man crossings
into Gaza, particularly Karni. Early implementation of
that initiative should be a priority for the benefit of the
civilian population of Gaza.

The events of the past week have also underlined
the ever-present potential for the Annapolis process to
be undermined by the deterioration of the situation on
the ground and, in particular, the continuing crisis in
Gaza. Less than two weeks ago, the parties launched
negotiations on core issues, and President Bush visited
the region to underline his commitment to assisting
them to reach a peace treaty in 2008 and to implement
the first phase of the road map. The Quartet
representatives and the entire international community
are fully engaged in that effort in what should be a year
of hope and opportunity for Israelis and Palestinians.
Crisis management and containment in Gaza would
seem to be a minimal requirement if that process is to
be given a chance to succeed.

Finally, I wish to reiterate the deep commitment
of the United Nations to the welfare of the civilian
population affected by the conflict. The work being
performed by United Nations agencies, as well as non-
governmental organizations, in Gaza is one of the few
things that stand between the current crisis conditions
and an even more dramatic deterioration of the
situation. Special Coordinator Serry and
Commissioner-General AbuZayd of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East were in Gaza last week at the height of the
08-21369
violence, and the Special Coordinator also visited the
Israeli town of Sederot as it came under increasing
rocket attack. The United Nations will continue to do
everything we can to ensure that civilians are protected
and assisted, whatever the political environment.

