Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Farid Zarif for presenting the report on
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2014/558), and we welcome Foreign Ministers Ivica
Dacie and Enver Hoxhaj.

I would like to begin by highlighting the formation
of the new Serbian Government, led by Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vucie, and by commending the
Government's prompt confirmation of its willingness to
continue its high-level dialogue with Pristina, facilitated
by the European Union, and the full implementation of
the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of Principles on the
Normalization of Relations.

We commend the peaceful and orderly conduct of
the parliamentary elections held in Kosovo on 8 June.
We also appreciate the negotiation and adoption of new
statutes for the Serbian majority municipalities and the
establishment of an association of those municipalities,
as outlined in the Agreement. We urge that the high-
level meetings between Belgrade and Pristina that were
suspended during the elections be re-started as soon
as possible. It is essential that the parties participate
actively in the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union in order to reach their shared goal of better
cooperation in building peace and the rule oflaw. In that
context, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) deserve special mention for their
contribution to the process of establishing the rule
of law and maintaining security in Kosovo. We also
welcome the decision to extend EULEX's activities in
Kosovo for another year.

We are concerned about the acts of violence
committed during the demonstration in South Mitrovica
on 22 June, when the Kosovo police, EULEX and the
Kosovo Force helped to reduce tensions. Such acts pose
a threat to the Agreement between the parties and are
a reminder that the road to reconciliation between the
communities is long and hard.

We emphasize the important work of the Serbian-
Kosovo Working Group on Missing Persons, advised by
UNMIK, on the Rudnica exhumation site and consider
it vital that the tasks of exhumation, identification and
return will continue for missing-persons cases. Chile's
own experience has shown how important such tasks
are to achieving national reconciliation, since they
encourage the search for truth. Equally important to
the reconciliation process is the safe return of refugees
and internally displaced persons, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), including their reintegration
into social and economic activities. We also call for
the continued implementation at all levels of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, in order
to enable women to participate fully and effectively
in decision-making and to ensure that due account is
taken of their needs.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of
resolution 1244 (1999) as a fundamental tool to be
used in the region of Kosovo in order to promote its
communities' reconciliation, stability and prosperity.
We also take this opportunity to express our gratitude
for the work of the Chief Prosecutor of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force, Mr. Clint
Williamson, who is leaving the post he has held for
three years.

