Ms. Honore: Once again, I take the opportunity to
thank you, Madam President, for having placed today's
debate on the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2014/162) on the
Security Council's agenda.

I wish to thank you, Madam President, and
the members of the Council for the comments and
recommendations that have been made in the course of
this morning's debate on our work and on the work of
the Mission for stabilization in Haiti.

My gratitude is also extended to all the other
Member States, including the Republic of Haiti, and
the multilateral organizations that have proferred
comments and suggestions, either on their own behalf
or on behalf of regional groupings.

On behalfofthe personnel ofMINUSTAH - military,
police and civilians, international and Haitian - as
well as United Nations Volunteers, I thank participants
today for their expressions of support for the work of
the Mission as we strive to fully acquit ourselves of the
Council mandate to ensure an environment of security
and stabilization in Haiti. We are encouraged by the
Council's continuing support of our efforts and its
desire to ensure they redound to the full benefit of the
children, women and men of Haiti.

In keeping with the Mission's consolidation
plan, we continue to concentrate on the core areas
of development of the Haitian National Police, the
strengthening of the national capacity for electoral
management, the rule of law and human rights, and key
governance issues, including elections, the legislative
agenda and institutional-strengthening.

MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
in Haiti draw inspiration from the remarks made today
and look forward to continuing our work and service
in support of the Secretary-General's obligations to the
Council as it continues deliberations on the contents of
the report contained in document S/2014/162.

The Mission renews its deep appreciation for
participting countries' and organizations' long-standing
and continuing cooperation with the Government and
people of Haiti. We have taken note of the specific
comments on specific areas in which participants
feel that we need to place renewed emphasis and look
forward to continuing to serve them.

