Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to have His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan preside
over this meeting. Bolivia commends the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Kazakhstan not only
for having organized this debate, but also for its
leadership in drafting today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/2) and for the trip to Kabul during its
presidency. We take this opportunity to acknowledge
and express our thanks for the hospitality of the people
of Afghanistan during the Security Council's visit.
We also acknowledge the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The importance of this meeting is also illustrated by
the presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, to whom I
convey my deepest respect.

Bolivia is pleased by the significant progress made
in preventive diplomacy as a result of strengthening
relations between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and the countries of Central Asia. We believe that
such expressions of mutual trust are a clear sign of
the determination of their authorities to continue the
process that seeks to ensure peace and development for
the Afghan people and other peoples of the region. We
encourage the efforts that the Afghan Government has
carried out to promote mechanisms and platforms for
regional, interregional and international cooperation to
bring about peace, stability and long-term sustainable
development in that country and its neighbours in
Central Asia, as set out in the presidential statement we
adopted today.

We hope that the current fragile stability in
Afghanistan will improve so that a stable environment
can be established in order that future elections can
be transparent and inclusive. We also believe that all
work facilitating dialogue and cooperation between
Afghanistan and Central Asia must continue, above all
because such work fosters the achievement of the shared
goals of economic and social development conducive
to prosperity in the region. In that context, national,
subregional and regional initiatives are very positive,
as are actions to promote connectivity in trade policies,
finance and infrastructure improvement, as will as
trade among Afghanistan, Central Asian countries and
other regions.

In that connection, it is important to acknowledge
that the lack ofterritorial access to the sea, exacerbated
by the distance to global markets and the high costs
and risks associated with transit, imposes serious
restrictions on export revenues, the inflow of private
capital and the mobilization of domestic resources of
landlocked developing countries, specifically those of
Central Asia.

Bolivia expresses its satisfaction with the outcome
of the seventh Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held in Ashgaba on
14 and 15 November 2017. Both the host country and
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, together with
67 other countries, had an opportunity to present
important initiatives concerning energy and natural
resources, connectivity, regional trade, private-sector
development, cooperation among businesses and
labour's support for the inclusion of women in economic
activities in general.

In that connection, Bolivia believes that subregional,
regional, interregional and international projects,
platforms and programmes must be based on
unequivocal respect for the sovereignty of the Afghan
people over their natural resources. In a context in
which the international community seeks to restore the
rightful place of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
in international politics, the United Nations and the
Security Council must stand as the guarantors of the
sovereignty of that country.

Bolivia takes note ofthe meeting held in the Beijing
on 27 December 2017, in which, under the auspices of
the host country, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan reached important
bilateral agreements through which both States
demonstrated their willingness to improve their
bilateral relations with a view to achieving harmonious
coexistence and systematically resolving their concerns
through dialogue and comprehensive consultations.
We commend the important role of the Government
of China, which is constructively promoting the
rapprochement between the two countries through a
trilateral dialogue and strengthening cooperation in the
political, economic and security areas.

On the other hand, Bolivia is deeply concerned
about the persistent presence of terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida and Da'esh, in the subregion. We
emphasize the importance of the participation of
Afghanistan in regional Central Asia mechanisms
in order to cooperate in combating terrorism. In that
regard, we fully support the efforts under the joint plan
of action for the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. We
believe that every effort to end the threat of terrorism
in Afghanistan will be essential to ensuring definitive
peace and security.

We also believe that it is necessary to combat illegal
armed groups and those involved in the production,
trafficking and illicit trade of drugs. The threat to
stability and security in Afghanistan will continue as
long as the illegal activities of those groups continue.

Finally, Bolivia is convinced that the only way to
achieve sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan
is through a negotiated solution through constructive
collaboration and diplomatic efforts in the interests of
all Afghans and for their well-being. We therefore call
upon all countries of the region to continue to strengthen
their commitment with strong cooperation. We believe
that there is no military solution to the situation in
Afghanistan. We welcome any initiative at inclusive
dialogue that respects the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan. It is for that
reason that we fully support the Kabul Process under
the leadership of the Government of Afghanistan, which
seeks to achieve peace, security and sustainability for
the country in order to benefit all Afghans.

