Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Like
my colleagues, I too would like to thank Baroness
Ashton for her presence and her very important
statement today.

The review that we are undertaking reflects one
of the main mandates of the United Nations Charter,
which calls on us to prevent conflict and achieve
international peace and security while serving as a
forum for coordinating efforts to attain those common
goals through political dialogue and cooperation. That
not only strengthens the effectiveness of
multilateralism; it also provides an opportunity for
creating models applicable to other areas of the world.

The United Nations and the European Union have
the task of raising awareness about the consequences of
transnational organized crime, both in the various
relevant forums of the United Nations and in Member
States. That is why there is a need for the
Organization's contribution in the areas of civilian,
customs and port and airport security.

With regard to development cooperation as an
effective means of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, we underscore the importance of the
assistance provided by the European Union as an
appropriate part of the social development process of
recipient countries in the context of their national
priorities. In cases of natural disasters, for example, in
order to prevent the displacement of populations, an
increase in refugees or migration without sufficient
guidance and information, we believe that cooperation
must focus on reconstruction, the financing of projects,
the rehabilitation of affected farmland and the
restoration of infrastructure in the worst affected areas.
The Baroness also mentioned in her statement the
current impact of climate change and its consequences
on such important issues as natural disasters, which
compromises the safety of the civilian population and
makes the emergence of conflicts much more likely.

We value the contribution of the European Union
and the members of the Quartet in seeking lasting
peace in the Middle East. For Colombia, all approaches
towards achieving and strengthening peace in the
region must be governed by the fundamental principles
of the peaceful settlement of disputes, the obligation on
the non-use of force and the free self-determination of
peoples. Furthermore, they must be in accordance with
due observance of human rights and international
humanitarian law and, of course, respect for the dignity
of all. Historically, Colombia has maintained that the
solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict must lie in the
existence of two States living together in peace, which
are essential conditions to achieving the stability and
security of the region.

The political conditions and the aspirations to
strengthen democratic progress in the Arab world
dominate the world stage today. Those processes will
be strengthened only to the extent that they develop
and conclude peacefully. The current outlook requires
even further efforts to achieve peace.

Today, we are very pleased to note the
developments in the Sudan. With the conclusion of the
referendum, the Southern Sudan has taken an important
step towards achieving a peace that we hope will be
stable and lasting. That requires the full
implementation of the provisions of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The birth of a new
State now presents a very delicate process. The
establishment of a road map for good relations and
mutual respect between the North and the South is
essential in all areas - political, economic and social.
We should consider the support to be provided by the
Security Council in the implementation of the
agreements between the parties and the prospects
opening up in the immediate future. The potential for
conflict remains as long as there are no specific
agreements on the status and administration of this
area.

My country and all Latin American nations attach
the highest priority to the situation and future of Haiti.
It is essential to maintain close coordination to promote
cooperation policies aimed at the country's
comprehensive development as an imperative, given
the sad and desolate reality of that nation.
Strengthening its State structures, social cohesion and
physical reconstruction go hand in hand with its
internal security, well-being and development.
Investing in development is an investment in peace and
security.

We have said, and we reiterate, that the case of
Cote d'Ivoire requires finding a prompt and
appropriate course for the country, along with the
appropriate regional bodies and efforts and in line with
the legitimacy and expressed will of its people to
exercise democracy. The work that can be done among
the United Nations, regional organizations and the
European Union will ensure peace in that country.

We highlight the central role that institution-
building plays in efforts to promote peace in countries
emerging from conflict situations. In that context, we
reaffirm the primary responsibility and leadership of
affected States. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, can play a supporting role
in the priorities and agendas set by States concerned.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we believe
it necessary to promote institutional development on
the basis of the existing capacities of a State and its
social, economic and cultural specificities, as well as to
better coordinate the activities of all stakeholders
involved.

