Mr. Dumitru (Romania): Allow me first of all to
convey my Government's condolences to the
Government and the people of Bangladesh on the
tragic deaths of nine peacekeepers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I would like now to welcome Foreign Minister
Jose Ramos-Horta, and, through him, to congratulate
the Timor-Leste authorities on the steady progress they
have achieved in putting the country firmly on the path
to becoming a stable and democratic nation.

I also join other members of the Council in
thanking the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2005/99) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) and the Special
Representative, Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his briefing.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union, I would
like to confine myself here to only a few specific
comments.

First, I want to say how encouraged we are by the
remarkable progress achieved in Timor-Leste in a wide
range of sectors, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report.
I would like also to reiterate Romania's
commendation of the continued improvement of
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We
hope that that strong political commitment will make
possible further progress on the delineation of the land
border between the two countries.

It is also in this context that Romania welcomes
the agreement between Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
establish the Truth and Friendship Commission as an
important concrete step forward in the consolidation of
bilateral relations, including in the field of fighting
impunity. Meanwhile, we consider the Secretary-
General's recent decision to establish an independent
commission of experts to conduct an assessment of the
prosecution of serious crimes in Timor Leste a very
welcome initiative, with the potential to make a
difference to the overall efforts to put an end to
impunity. Our assessment is that these two new
structures - the commission of experts and the Truth
and Friendship Commission - could and should
coordinate their activities in the common effort to
address the issue of serious crimes committed in 1999.

Turning to the role of UNMISET, we consider
that its contribution to upholding governmental
capacity-building efforts is outstanding. We
congratulate the Mission, under the inspiring
leadership of Special Representative Hasegawa, on the
effective discharge of its mandate, including matters
relating to the gradual transfer of ownership of the
process to the Timorese, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1573 (2004).

We have taken due note of the Secretary-
General's assessment regarding the challenges that
remain and that require additional international
assistance beyond the expiration of UNMISET's
mandate on 20 May 2005. Undoubtedly, building
adequate capacity to manage border affairs, increasing
the professionalism and accountability of the police
service, consolidating key State institutions and further
enhancing respect for the rule of law and human rights
are all among the vital areas in which self-sufficiency
cannot be reached without continued international
assistance.

The Security Council, bilateral donors and the
wider international community have so far made an
enormous investment in Timor-Leste. The
achievements made by that country are remarkable. Yet
these gains must be consolidated and their
irreversibility must be safeguarded. The Government
and people of Timor-Leste have proved their strong
commitment to peace and the development of their
country. Their strong pledge must be matched by the
firm and long-term commitment of the international
community in order to secure the confirmation of
Timor-Leste as a notable success of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Accordingly, Romania favours the ongoing
support of the international community in Timor-Leste
beyond the expiration of UNMISET's mandate. We
consider that the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report will be a
solid basis for further discussions in the Security
Council on the identification of the best formula for
continued United Nations assistance to Timor-Leste.

