Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me start by welcoming
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, Judges Meron and Joensen,
as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow. We
commend their important work and appreciate their
comprehensive reports on the work of the Tribunals
(S/2014/546 and S/2014/556) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in the
reporting period.

There is appropriate symbolism in the date of
today's Security Council meeting. Today we celebrate
Human Rights Day; yesterday we commemorated the
adoption of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. The issues we
are discussing now properly fit into both categories.

As the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) prepares to bring its work to a final
conclusion after more than two decades of existence,
there has been an increased focus on the question of
the legacy that the Tribunal leaves behind. The ad
hoc Tribunals have been widely praised for playing a
pioneering role in the development and implementation
of international criminal law. The ICTY has produced
an impressive body of jurisprudence in the field of
international humanitarian law and international
criminal procedure. The Tribunal has contributed to
putting an end to the culture of impunity, providing
an incentive for domestic judiciaries to conduct
proceedings impartially and to incorporate international
legal standards. Due to the existence of the Tribunal, the
voices of victims are being heard and written historical
records established. That is a worthy legacy.

There is no doubt that the Tribunal's principal
contribution to peace and security, regional stability
and reconciliation is its establishment of undisputed
facts and individual criminal responsibility and its
bringing to justice the persons who are responsible
for widespread and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law. The road to justice is not an easy
one, but at its very end lie true peace and appeasement.

As many would say - and as in fact has been said
here today - justice delayed is justice denied. In our
view, a speedy trial resulting in a court decision - a
conviction or acquittal - represents not only one of the
most essential rights of the accused, but also an equally
essential right of the victims. Protracted proceedings
may weaken public trust in international justice and its
proper administration. In that context, we should not
forget the case of the mastermind of the terrible events
in the former Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milosevic, in which
the proceedings lasted so long that his death thwarted
the conviction he deserved. Very long trials, measured
not in mere months but in too many years, are not an
exception in the ICTY practice; unfortunately, they are
the rule.

Vojislav Seselj, notorious for his warmongering,
was indicted in 2003 for war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as well as for making inflammatory
speeches and spreading hatred in the media and during
public events. And the latter are precisely the activities
that Seselj is carrying out as we speak. The Tribunal's
indictment of Seselj, it is worth noting, is 33 pages long.
He advocated an ideology that left thousands of deaths,
horrible crimes, destruction and suffering in its wake.
If the Tribunal's procedures and decisions are perceived
by the general public, especially the victims, as unjust
or grossly unbalanced, they could produce an effect
opposite to that desired. Such negative perceptions
can result from a number of factors, particularly
including lengthy trials, such as in the Vojislav Seselj
case, notwithstanding the fact that to a great extent he
contributed to it himself.

Seselj was released for humanitarian reasons, but
the current consequences of that decision are anything
but humanitarian. It is difficult to understand, to
say the least, why Seselj was released with no clear
conditions attached to his activities and conduct. The
fact that he is abusing his temporary freedom as much
as possible comes as no surprise to anyone familiar
with his indictment and behaviour during the trial. The
basic conditions for provisional release, as provided
for in the Tribunal's rules of procedure and evidence,
stipulate that an accused provisionally released must not
in any way obstruct proceedings or harm by his deeds
the fundamentals of international justice, for which
the ICTY was established. The potential escalation of
Seselj's political activities and the danger that his hate
speech might gain new advocates, as well as followers,
is increasingly damaging the very foundations of peace
and stability in South-East Europe. To wait more than
11 years for justice to be served is painful and difficult
enough; to see the accused set free and able to continue
with the inflammatory speeches and scandalous
provocations for which he was on trial is beyond
difficult: it is utterly unacceptable and insulting.

Owing to all of this, the President of the Republic
of Croatia, lvo Josipovie, has decided to draw the
attention of the Tribunal and the Security Council to the
impact of the Trial Chamber's decision to allow Seselj's
temporary release. His letter has been distributed as
a document of the Council and the General Assembly
(S/2014/839, annex), and we hope that members have
taken note of it. On 26 November 2014 the Croatian
Parliament adopted a declaration on the ICTY decision
on Seselj's provisional release, expressing its deep
concern. We commend Prosecutor Brammertz's recent
motion that the Tribunal demand that Seselj's temporary
release be revoked, based on his well-founded opinion
that the Tribunal's trust in Seselj's conduct was without
foundation. We expect the motion to be processed
rapidly.

On its official Web page, the ICTY describes its
role as follows:

"The Tribunal has contributed to an
indisputable historical record, combating denial
and helping communities come to terms with their
recent history. Crimes across the region can no
longer be denied."

With Seselj's provisional release, those noble goals have
been not only ignored but also seriously compromised.
Seselj is now mocking both the victims and international
criminal justice. Through his speeches he spreads the
hatred that led to the war in the former Yugoslavia.
While we are not questioning the legal foundation of
the Tribunal's decision, we have to say it, loud and clear,
that releasing Seselj is nothing short of cynical laughter
in the faces of his countless victims. Considering
Seselj's provocative, abusive and highly dangerous
behaviour, Croatia sincerely hopes that many will join
us in voicing their discontent and calling for putting a
definitive end to it.

In that regard, it is worth noting that in Brussels
on 27 November the European Parliament adopted a
resolution on the Seselj case that strongly condemns
his warmongering and deplores his provocative public
activities. The resolution notes with concern that the
lack of an adequate political reaction and legal response
from the Serbian authorities to Seselj's behavior
undermines the victims' trust in the judicial process. At
the same time, in the resolution the European Parliament
encourages the ICTY to take determined action to
reaffirm confidence in the Tribunal, weakened as it
has been by Seselj's appalling and inadmissible public
statements. We hope the messages in this important
resolution will be taken seriously by all concerned.

Some ofus were present in this very Chamber more
than 21 years ago when the Security Council adopted
resolution 827 (1993), establishing the ICTY. Croatia
has come a long way since then, becoming a member
State of both the European Union and NATO and an
anchor of stability and cooperation in the region. The
last thing we need today, while the entire international
community is facing all the new challenges of the
twenty-first century, is an indicted war criminal let
loose to evoke ghosts from the past, stirring up hatred
and national intolerance. All those who are in a position
to stop that, whether through legal action or public
statements, must do their utmost. Inaction in that regard
is not an acceptable option.

Croatia will continue to support both the immediate
goal of the ICTY - ending impunity and prosecuting
those responsible for the most serious crimes in the
former Yugoslavia - as well as its more ambitious
and long-term one of contributing to lasting peace in
the region. We fully respect the independence of the
Tribunal and its Trial and Appeal Chambers and are well
aware of the challenges they face. We also agree that
reconciliation and confidence-building must primarily
come from within societies. However, the Tribunal does
not exist in a vacuum, and its decisions do have an impact
on the ground, whether positive or negative. It would
not be prudent to ignore that important fact. Clearly,
the decision to provisionally release a person who has
been charged with numerous war crimes committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia can only add to
the growing distrust of international tribunals and the
justice they provide, even among those who are strong
proponents of international criminal law.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our full and
continued support for the work of the Tribunal, despite
the criticism Croatia has voiced today and on previous
occasions. We will continue to cooperate fully with
the Tribunal and we hope that the lessons learned
will be used appropriately for improving international
criminal justice and the future work of the International
Criminal Court, which Croatia strongly supports.

