Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.

At the outset of this statement, we want to
express our sincere condolences to the Palestinian
people on the loss of President Arafat. He played a
pivotal role in striving for an independent Palestinian
State at peace with Israel.
We thank Lord Ashdown and Foreign Minister
Ivanie for their briefings to the Council on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
commend the contribution of the High Representative
to peace and stability in the country. The European
Union continues to support his policy of strengthening
State institutions, reviving the economy and promoting
the rule of law. Lord Ashdown's report (S/2004/807,n enclosure) shows that Bosnia and Herzegovina is on
the right track, even though the European Union
remains concerned about the continuing failure of
Republika Srpska to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

The Security Council will later be briefed by the
Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), Mr. Jaap de Hoop Scheffer. He
will look back at the role of NATO in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the Dayton Peace Agreements of
1995. As the Council is aware, NATO decided in June
in Istanbul to terminate the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
on 2 December 2004. On that date, the European Union
will assume the main role in peace stabilization under
the Dayton Agreements. NATO will remain in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, through its headquarters in Sarajevo,
providing advice on defence reform and undertaking
certain operational supporting tasks.

The European Union commends NATO for its
constructive role during the past years. The NATO-led
operations, the Implementation Force (IFOR) and
SFOR, have been key factors in establishing stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in implementing the
Dayton Agreements.

In resolution 1551 (2004), the Security Council
welcomed the transition from NATO to the European
Union. In anticipation of final authorization by the
Council, let me take this opportunity to underline the
significance of the upcoming transition. It is
significant, first and foremost, for Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also for the European Union itself and
for the United Nations.

Operation Althea, as the European Union military
mission will be called, is the final element in the
European Union's comprehensive policy towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also part of a broader
European Union strategy for the Balkans. The
combined European Union activities in the political,
economic and development fields, and now the security
field, should mutually reinforce one another. The
ultimate objective is to put Bosnia and Herzegovina on
a track towards the European Union. That will be
achieved through the strengthened stabilization and
association process. The European Union military
mission will complement that process, as will other
European Union activities such as the European Union
Police Mission, the European Union Monitoring
Mission, and the Community Assistance to
Reconstruction, Development and Stabilization
(CARDS) development programme.

That comprehensive approach reflects the
European belief that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina lies firmly in Europe. It exemplifies the
long-term commitment of the European Union. Given
that commitment, it is now up to the Bosnian
population to make the vision come true. They will
have to make the eventual choice of joining the
European political and economic union. Such a choice
requires fundamental reforms of State, economic and
judicial structures. Equally, they will have to confirm
the decision to join the European community of values.
Such a decision requires an environment of tolerance,
dialogue and respect for religious freedoms. And it
requires a tough stand, in words and in deeds, against
impunity for war criminals.

The right political will and the popular support of
the Bosnians, combined with the comprehensive role of
the European Union, could, and should, lead Bosnia
and Herzegovina away from conflict into a stable and
peaceful future. We wish the Special Representative of
the European Union, Lord Ashdown, all the best of
luck as he increasingly replaces his High
Representative hat with his European hat.

Let me say a word about the significance for the
European Union and United Nations. Operation Althea
will be the first major military mission of the European
Security and Defence Policy. It is our belief that, as
such, the operation is of significance not only for the
European Union but also for the United Nations.
Regional organizations have an increasingly important
role to play in peacekeeping and peace-building.

That is not just a matter of resources, given the
recent surge in peacekeeping operations. It is an
acknowledgement of the principle of subsidiarity.
Which organization has the most added value in a
given situation? Regional organizations embody
regional values. As such, they have a deep
understanding of the local situation. At the same time,
they are often better recognized by the affected
population. In addition, regional organizations can
frequently offer a comprehensive approach entailing
not only security and political arrangements but trade
and aid aspects as well. That combination of policy
instruments increases the chance of alleviating
immediate plights in a post-conflict situation, while at
the same time working on the root problems of a
conflict.

It is our belief that we are in just the initial phase
of increased cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Under the leadership of the
United Nations, as the body holding primary
responsibility for peace and security, we look forward
to the development of creative and constructive
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The European Union sincerely hopes
that Operation Althea will prove to be an outstanding
precedent for such cooperation. Likewise, we of course
hope that Operation Althea will prove to be to the
benefit of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
their quest for durable peace.

