Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this meeting. Thanks are due
also to Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for a
useful, timely and comprehensive briefing. It is also a
real pleasure to see the Secretary-General here today.

I am pleased that we have this opportunity to
commemorate the events of the last year in East Timor.
Today we face a situation in which militia violence in
East Timor is again rearing its ugly head, in which
personnel of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) have been
subject to fatal attack and in which the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has been forced by intimidation to suspend
its activities in the refugee camps of West Timor. So it
is not inappropriate to remind ourselves now of why
the Security Council and the United Nations are
involved in East Timor: because a year ago tomorrow,
over 90 per cent of the registered voters in the territory
braved appalling violence and intimidation to have
their say on how they wanted to be governed. A few
days later, on 3 September, the Secretary-General
announced to us that 78.5 per cent of those voters had
chosen independence.

I speak from the heart when I say that all of us in
the Council that evening were genuinely moved. The
East Timorese people had demonstrated their faith in
democracy and the rule of law with a massive show of
courage and determination. We reacted by immediately
issuing a presidential statement, which underlined the
need for the result to be implemented in an atmosphere
of peace and security, Without further violence and
intimidation.

Sadly, it was not to be. As is so often the case, the
spoilers , of whom Ambassador Brahimi has so
eloquently spoken in his report on United Nations
peace operations, sought to undermine the 5 May 1999
accords and the 30 August ballot through violence. To
its credit, the Council acted swiftly and unanimously to
authorize the dispatch of the International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) to restore law and order. We
should again thank the Australian Government for
taking the lead so steadfastly in that operation, and at
such an immense cost.

The Council needs to show the same level of
commitment and determination today. As Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi said, militias are again
attempting to undermine the peaceful implementation
of the ballot result by violence. The United Kingdom is
deeply disturbed by the deteriorating security situation
on both sides of the Timor border. Well-armed militias
are involved, and their actions appear to be
orchestrated towards some sinister goal. They are
targeting UNTAET personnel. Two have died so far.

That is unacceptable; this situation cannot be
allowed to continue. Special Representative Vieira de
Mello has already responded, as Mr. Annabi said, by
putting the downsizing of the military component of
UNTAET on hold. But Indonesia must cooperate more
closely with UNTAET to end the cross-border
incursions from West Timor, to disarm and disband the
militias and to prosecute militia members guilty of
crimes.

We were also appalled by the attack on three
UNHCR workers at the Naen refugee camp on 22
August. The Indonesian Government has expressed its
willingness to take the situation in hand; but we regret
that it has so far been unable to ensure security in the
camps. Fine words are not enough; it is now time to
turn them into deeds.

Against this background, we support the initial
decision of UNHCR to suspend its work in the refugee
camps until security is restored, hard though that
decision was. It is good news that, as Mr. Annabi has
told us today, UNHCR is now going back in. But it is
imperative for the Indonesian Government to act
quickly to bring the security situation in the camps
under control. It should disarm those who are
preventing UNHCR from carrying out its task and
bring to justice those who commit assaults on United
Nations personnel.

We are encouraged, on the more positive side of
the coin, by the Indonesian Government's initiative to
resettle East Timorese refugees who are still in West
Timor, either in Indonesia or in East Timor itself. But
we would welcome more information on the
implementation of this plan. The first step must be to
stabilize the security situation to enable the registration
process to be carried out.

Another encouraging development has been the
Indonesian Government's efforts to identify suspects
involved in human rights abuses last year. We look
forward to seeing those people brought to justice.

UNTAET has achieved a great deal over the last
year. Assistant Secretary-General Annabi's briefing
bears that out. He has asked for the Council's strong
support, and I am sure that he will have it. But much
more remains to be done. We in the Council must
remain vigilant. We must show our determination not
to allow the excellent work of Sergio Vieira de Mello
and UNTAET to be jeopardized by militia violence.
The United Kingdom stands ready to bring forward
formal Council action to this effect if it appears
necessary. Like all members of the European Union, on
whose behalf the representative of France will speak
later in this debate, we are fully committed to helping
the East Timorese people achieve the independence
that they voted for so overwhelmingly. Like others
around this table, we look forward to seeing East Timor
emerge as the first new democracy of the twenty-first
century.

