Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
public meeting on West Africa. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-General, for his
extremely comprehensive and very useful briefing on
the situation in West Africa.

The unstable and precarious situation prevailing
in West Africa as a result of the protracted conflicts in
the region remains a matter of serious concern to my
delegation. The ramifications of these conflicts, which
are strictly of a political nature, have adversely affected
both the economic and social lives of the entire
population of the West Africa subregion. Given the
interlinkages and spillover effects of the conflicts, it
has become a sine qua non condition to address the
issue on a regional basis.

The inter-agency mission that Visited West Africa
in March this year recommended in its report a regional
strategy to deal with the problems and to find ways to
mobilize international support and assistance for the
economic and social development of the subregion.
The report has confirmed beyond any doubt that
conflicts in West Africa should be addressed in an
integrated manner. The priority now should be to
elaborate the necessary strategies to implement those
recommendations in a time-bound manner.

In addressing the issues facing West Africa, the
inter-agency mission to West Africa has identified
weak governance as a major cause of the problems
throughout the subregion. The report highlighted the
need for building institutional capacity, promoting
inclusive political processes and popular participation,
the decentralization of the judiciary and the
strengthening of the rule of law and respect for human
rights. It is important that efforts be undertaken to
improve governance practices in several countries in
West Africa. We believe that international assistance
and support are crucial to achieving this end.

It is equally important, in my delegation's View,
for the international community to invest in capacity-
building. Because of the protracted conflicts, many of
the countries lack qualified human resources and policy
tools to respond to the challenges they encounter both
at national and international levels. The inability of the
Governments to create jobs and opportunities for youth
due to poor economic conditions and abject poverty has
been a major factor in contributing to instability in
many of those countries. It is therefore imperative that
the international community assist these countries in
restructuring their economies and in the creation of
gainful employment.

Economic and developmental stagnation in
several countries has resulted directly from the civil
conflicts. Civil wars in Sierra Leone and Liberia have
caused widespread destruction of their economic,
physical and social infrastructures. The problem is
compounded by the movement of several thousand
civilians who have had to seek refuge in neighbouring
Guinea, with the effect of exacerbating the already
fragile economic conditions of that country. A
particular characteristic of conflict, wherever it occurs,
is the setting in motion of a spiral of instability
affecting a whole region. West Africa is no exception
to this rule.

We commend the role played by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
addressing the conflict situation in West Africa. We
welcome the efforts of ECOWAS in the establishment
of early warning centres, and we urge the international
community to provide assistance for the full operation
of these centres. It is our hope that the early warning
system will act as a deterrent and will enable both
ECOWAS and the international community to take the
necessary measures to prevent conflicts before they
take on wide proportions.

ECOWAS must also be supported in the
implementation of its moratorium on small arms and
light weapons. The proliferation of small arms, despite
the arms embargoes imposed on some countries of the
region, has helped fuel conflicts by armed militia
groups throughout the subregion. Technical as well as
financial assistance should be made available to
ECOWAS, with a View to strengthening its capacity to
monitor and curb the flow of arms, especially to non-
State actors in the region.
We also commend the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) for the important work it is
doing in Sierra Leone. However, for lasting peace to
return to the West African subregion, it is imperative
that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme be completed at the earliest possible time.
The reintegration of ex-combatants into civil society
should feature as a priority in any peace plan. Adequate
and sustained funding should be provided for job
training, job creation, counselling and rehabilitation of
all ex-combatants in the subregion. Unless this is done,
the danger of a relapse into rebel activities cannot be
excluded. It is therefore a matter of serious concern to
my delegation that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme in Sierra Leone is facing
a serious lack of funding. We call on the donor
community to continue to assist the programme, which
represents a Vital step in bringing about peace and
stability.

We welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to establish a United Nations Office for West
Africa in Dakar, which would aim at improving the
reporting and policy development capacity of the
United Nations as well as enhance collaboration and
coordination with ECOWAS in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution and of peace-building. This
is a step in the right direction - a step that will
promote an integrated subregional approach to the
issue of peace and security in West Africa. We
encourage the United Nations Office to work together
with ECOWAS, with a view to playing an active role in
the field of preventive diplomacy.

The humanitarian situation resulting from
conflicts in West Africa remains a cause of major
concern. As calm returns to Sierra Leone, efforts
should be undertaken to encourage and facilitate the
return of the refugees to that country. Adequate
assistance should also be provided to Sierra Leone and
to Guinea for the effective reintegration and settlement
of the internally displaced persons in those countries.

We commend the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World
Food Programme and other humanitarian organizations
for their efforts in providing assistance to refugees and
to internally displaced persons. We wish to urge the
humanitarian organizations to ensure better
coordination with a View to sustaining the provision of
humanitarian aid, which the refugees will continue to
require for some time.

Today's meeting is most opportune, as it allows
the Council to reflect on the issues affecting the West
African subregion. A few weeks from now the heads of
State of the Mano River Union will meet at the summit
level to discuss the situation in the subregion. We
welcome this initiative, which should be aimed at
building confidence among the leaders of the region.
We believe that the Council should send a strong
message of encouragement to the leaders and express
its full support for their efforts to find a lasting solution
to the problems of West Africa.

We also commend the work undertaken by the
civil society in the region, particularly the Mano River
Women's Peace Network, whose contribution to
reducing tensions and building confidence has been
extremely significant.

Finally, I should like to express the serious
concern of my delegation at the delay in the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Despite the various appeals made by the Secretary-
General, this project is still facing severe financial
difficulties. The lesson that the Council should learn
from this is not to rely on trust funds for this kind of
project, which is far too important in the peace-
building process and in ensuring respect for the basic
rights of individuals. We appeal to the donor
community to provide the necessary support so that the
Special Court can start and complete its work as soon
as possible, especially now that the country is engaged
in the process of elections, which, hopefully, will lead
to a more stable and representative government in the
country.

