Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Robert
Serry for his briefing.

We are concerned that the peace negotiations
between Israel and Palestine have not produced any
meaningful progress before the deadline. The situation
on the ground has also been worsening. Harmful
activities, including continued settlement construction,
controversy over the release ofprisoners, rocket attacks
on populated areas in Israel and strong Israeli reprisals
have driven both sides to further confrontation and
mistrust.

Despite those setbacks, we still think that the door
to negotiations is not closed as long as all sides do not
give up on the goal of a more sustainable future for
all. All possibilities should continue to be explored,
including by building on the mediation efforts of the
United States, with the full support of the international
community. The role of the United Nations as part of
the Quartet should not be overlooked in continuing the
negotiation efforts.

As for the recent reconciliation agreement between
Fatah and Hamas, in order for that reconciliation to
proceed in a positive direction, we believe that it should
to contribute to the peace negotiations and avoid any
violence and confrontation. At the same time, it should
lead to genuine democracy and well-being for all
Palestinian people.

Turning to the situation in Syria, we are gravely
concerned about the unprecedented scale of death
and destruction, as the conflict enters its fourth
year. We strongly condemn the indiscriminate aerial
bombardments and ground assault now taking place
against densely populated civilian areas in Homs.
Gross violations of human rights and systematic war
crimes are ongoing. Flagrant violations of international
law are also taking place vis-a-vis humanitarian access,
as painstakingly articulated in the Secretary-General's
most recent report (S/2014/295).

The implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) and
improvements in the humanitarian situation in Syria
are simply not happening. As Under-Secretary-General
Amos reported, access to besieged communities has
not increased and is in fact getting worse, with only
6 per cent of civilians residing in such areas receiving
much-needed assistance. That is simply unacceptable,
and we once again call on the Syrian Government and
opposition groups to allow unhindered humanitarian
access so food and medicine can reach civilians
trapped in the crossfire. People are starving and dying
of disease as barrel bombs drop overhead, while the
Syrian authorities' bureaucratic hurdles are preventing
humanitarian access, in contravention of resolution
2139 (2014).

In that connection, we condemn the employment
of siege and starvation as methods of warfare, and
call for increased cross-border assistance. The Syrian
Government should cater to the request of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs so that
the most effective routes can be utilized to provide aid
to civilians. We appreciate the work of the World Food
Programme, World Health Organization, UNICEF,
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other humanitarian
actors operating in such difficult conditions on the
ground.

Regarding Lebanon, spill-over is no longer simply
a border issue. Syrian refugees now account for nearly
25 per cent of the total Lebanese population. We are
also concerned over the escalating number of terrorist
attacks related to the Syrian conflict and condemn last
month's attacks on the Lebanese army. We appeal to the
Syrian Government and opposition groups to respect
Lebanese sovereignty and to all Lebanese actors to
refrain from actions in Syria that inflame insecurity in
Lebanon, as stipulated in the Baabda Declaration.

To conclude, we reiterate that, as we strive to deal
with the crises in the region, greater initiative must
be harnessed through active diplomacy and increased
cooperation. We need to work together to ensure that
not only peace, stability and coexistence but also
accountability and justice become a reality for the
resilient people of the Middle East.

