Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate around the issues that lie at the very heart of
the Organization, namely, its efforts to establish and
pursue the most efficient way to maintain and rebuild
international peace and security. At the same time,
our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General for his
useful briefing on the subject.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union earlier in the debate.
However, allow me the opportunity to share a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.

In our view, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
represent but two sides of the same coin, closely
intertwined and deeply interrelated. The durability of
established ceasefires and signed peace agreements
depends to a large extent on the determination and
readiness to rebuild the national fabric and basic
institutions, as well as the ability to address the root
causes of the conflict.

The route that countries emerging from conflict
take at the very beginning of their recovery will
significantly determine their trends and prospects for
future success. My country has contributed its share in
overall peacekeeping efforts. At one point, Croatia was
participating in 15 different peacekeeping operations
simultaneously, and it is ready to continue to play its
part in the future.

While recognizing the primary responsibility
of national authorities in identifying priorities and
strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding, Croatia
strongly supports a comprehensive, coherent and
integrated approach to those efforts. That of course
first of all implies close cooperation between the host
Government and the international community, but at
the same time it entails efficient coordination among
all stakeholders in the process. In that context, Croatia
welcomes endeavours to further clarify the roles and
responsibilities of key actors in this field, in particular
within the United Nations family.

It is useful to bring to mind here the fact that the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) was established
with the aim of supporting countries emerging from
conflict by bringing together all the relevant actors,
marshalling the requisite resources and providing
strategic and concrete recommendations in order to
improve the coordination of peacebuilding efforts
within and outside the United Nations. In addition,
the PBC is there to fill gaps that often exist between
security and reconstruction, through an innovative
yet coordinated, coherent and integrated approach
directed at post-conflict recovery, reconstruction and
institution-building. Institution-building in key areas,
such as the security sector and the rule of law, which
have been identified as conditions sine qua non, is
the most essential prerequisite for any recovery and
sustainable development.

In that context, Croatia strongly supports efforts to
broaden and deepen the pool of civilian capacities for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
and an efficient exchange between the seekers and
providers of services with particular emphasis on
promoting cooperation among countries with similar
needs and experiences.

Croatia welcomes the Council's commitment to
regularly assess, together with other relevant actors, the
mandate and composition of peacekeeping operations
with a view to making the necessary adjustments,
according to the progress achieved on the ground,
thereby allowing for, on a case-by-case basis, the
reconfiguration, transition or withdrawal of the
operation.

More specifically, in accordance with the outcome
of the Security Council's and the Peacebuilding
Commission's thorough deliberations in July 2012,
Croatia strongly supports the calls for more dynamic
relations between the Council and the Commission.
The window of opportunity for that is open wider when
the Council is establishing and renewing the mandates
of United Nations missions, and it should be properly
utilized. We believe that the best practices developed
since the establishment of the Commission should be
used more systematically in the countries on the PBC's
agenda.

It is clear that the success of operations aimed
at keeping and rebuilding peace requires timely,
sustainable, predictable and flexible resources. Croatia
recognizes the critical part that peacebuilding funding
plays as an early investment towards sustainable peace
and development. In that context, Croatia notes with
appreciation the special roles that the Peacebuilding
Fund and the international financial institutions have
been playing in peacebuilding efforts, particularly in
helping to design poverty-reduction strategies and
economic development policies.

Finally, let me conclude by seconding the call that
we have heard so many times today for the adequate
participation of women at all stages of peacebuilding
efforts and for their full inclusion in decision-making
processes.

