Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Rajaa Altalli
for their briefings. I particularly wish to commend
Ms. Altalli for her unwavering commitment to making
the voice of Syrian civil society, the voice of the
suffering silent majority and the voice of women, who
must be heard and able to participate in discussions and
decisions concerning their country on an equal footing
with men, heard.

I wish to review two points. First, on the ground,

there must be a freeze at the fronts. This is crucial to
provide a reliefto an exhausted and bleeding population.
France is extremely concerned about the resumed
attacks by the regime and its allies in the North-West,
which now shows signs of a major attack and claimed
16 civilian victims yesterday. We continue to closely
follow the situation and strongly warn against such
an attack, which would only strengthen the terrorist
group, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, against whom we must
unite our efforts. I therefore hope to clearly reiterate the
call to end hostilities that France has already made on a
number of occasions in the Chamber.

As winter begins, the attacks will revive the
humanitarian catastrophe against which the United
Nations has repeatedly warned. In this regard, I
reiterate, as I did yesterday, that France strongly
condemns the indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, in particular medical
facilities (see S/PV.8694). War has rules that must be
respected. The fight against terrorism is a priority but
does not justify violating international humanitarian
law. To be effective and produce lasting results, the
fight against terrorism must be done while respecting
the law, which imposes a moral, legal and operational
imperative on all parties.

We remain vigilant with regard to the situation
in the north-east, where hostilities must not resume.
The resumption of fighting would jeopardize at great
sacrifice the results achieved by the international
coalition with local partners. Furthermore, this could
not only strengthen Da'esh and create conditions for a
new humanitarian crisis.

France is also concerned about the deterioration
of the situation in the south-west a year and a half
after its reconquest by the regime. The security
situation continues to deteriorate month after month,
with chronic instability illustrated by the increase in
attacks and assassinations. Nor has the humanitarian
situation improved at all. Public services remain
nearly non-existent, and the Syrian regime continues
to impose unjustifiable restrictions to humanitarian
access. France calls on the Council to be particularly
vigilant with regard to the evolution of the situation.

Secondly, with respect to the political process,
it is more urgent than ever to get it back on track for
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The Syrian regime's obstructions to the continuation
of the work of the Constitutional Committee are
unacceptable. This obstruction is contrary to the rules
of engagement previously agreed upon by the parties
through the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen. It confirms once again that the regime
continues to refuse to engage genuinely and in good
faith in a political process after more than eight years
of destructive war.

We support the Special Envoy and urge him to
continue his active efforts to unlock the situation. The
Astana guarantors must also put pressure on the regime.
Finally, should the next session of the Committee find
itself in a similar situation to the last session, we call
on the Special Envoy to make it clear to the Security
Council in his next briefing.

As Mr. Geir Pedersen pointed out in his briefing,
the Constitutional Committee is only one element of
a broader process aimed at implementing all elements
of resolution 2254 (2015). France reaffirms its full
support for the Special Envoy's efforts in this regard.
We encourage him to make similar progress on the
establishment of a secure and neutral environment,
which is essential for holding credible elections under
the supervision of the United Nations in which all
Syrians, including refugees and displaced persons,
must participate. Only by guaranteeing these conditions
of security and neutrality will the Syrians be able to
reclaim their future in the forthcoming elections.

Progress must also be made on the release of
detainees. The lack of progress on detainees at the
last meeting of the Astana guarantors underlines, once
again, the need to change the scale and method and give
the United Nations a free hand in the matter. We must
listen to the pressing demands of the people who dare
to overcome their fear, taking to the streets of Dara
once again to call for the release of their loved ones,
and we must not forget how the Syrian conflict began
in early 2011.

Without credible progress, France and the European
Union's position on reconstruction and sanctions will
remain unchanged. It will also remain illusory to expect
a dignified, safe and voluntary return of refugees
without a global agreement, including real political and
security guarantees, without which refugees will fear
for their lives. Finally, it is essential to ensure the safe
and unhindered access of the United Nations to observe
and accompany returns on the ground, which has not
been the case to date.

It is in all our interests to put Syria back on the path
to peace and stability. In order to move forward, we
need the efforts of all and to recreate unity within the
Council. France calls on all members of the Council to
demonstrate unity and responsibility in order to move
forward on the path to a political settlement and also
to respond to the immense humanitarian needs of the
Syrian population by supporting the draft resolution
renewing the mechanism for cross-border assistance
presented by humanitarian penholders (S/20l9/96l).

