Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank New Zealand for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I would also
like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.

The Middle East is at a critical juncture today,
characterized by the impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process, the continuation of the deadly conflict
in the Syrian Arab Republic, its deadly spillover into
other countries - most notably Lebanon - and the
conflict in Yemen.

Concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it
is glaringly apparent that without a final, just and
equitable solution to the conflict that ensures Israelis
their security and Palestinians an independent and
viable State, efforts to establish an effective and
sustainable peace in the Middle East will be illusory.
However, the issue of Palestine has been on the
United Nations agenda for more than six decades.
The Palestinian people see no hope resulting from
the efforts undertaken to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and give them a sovereign State within the
pre-June 1967 borders. The interminable negotiations
between the Israelis and Palestinians have worsened the
current impasse in the peace process of the last several
decades. The impasse also highlights the inability of
the international community to put the peace process
back on track. The status quo is becoming increasingly
intolerable, both for the Palestinian people and for
a large majority of the international community. The
impasse in the peace process - we need to call a spade
a spade 4 is attributable to Israel's refusal to accept a
two-State solution, that is two States living side by side
in peace and security.

Of course, peace initiatives cannot succeed if
colonization activities continue on a large scale, if
the separation wall continues to facilitate the seizure
of land from the Palestinians, if international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions continue to
be flouted by setting in concrete topographic changes
from one day to the next, if the collective punishment
and strident repression of the Palestinian people
continue to be commonplace, if the blockade against
Gaza continues, and if incursions by Israeli forces into
holy sites, such as the Al-Aqsa Mosque, continue to
increase. I could go on.

All of those actions only increase tensions and
weaken the possibilities for dialogue between the
two sides. The negotiation process therefore requires
an appropriate political environment and measures
that encourage mutual trust. To that end, it is the
international community's responsibility to intensify
its efforts to help both parties take the difficult and
courageous decisions needed to engage - in good
faith 4 in dialogue. In that regard, the Security
Council must fully assume its responsibilities in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Madrid principles, the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other agreements
recently reached between the parties, in order to achieve
a viable peace 4 one that will allow the Palestinian
people to live in an independent and sovereign State.
Accordingly, we urge both sides to resume dialogue,
and we commend any initiative that seeks to relaunch
the peace process by clearly establishing a framework
for future negotiations with a deadline, which would
put an end to the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories.

Even without a negotiated solution, the accession
of the State of Palestine to international organizations,
treaties and conventions - with the ultimate aim being
its full membership in the United Nations 4 could be
an alternative and should be encouraged. At any event,
the two-State solution should, under no circumstances,
be called into question, because it is the only option
possible for satisfying the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinians and for taking into account Israel's
security concerns.

Concerning Syria, Chad is deeply concerned by the
continuing violence and worsening of the humanitarian
situation in that country. The situation has been
exacerbated by the use of chemical weapons and other
banned material, as well as by atrocities committed by
terrorist groups tied to the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria and Al-Qaida. We are horrified to see the degree
of self-destruction in Syria and to witness Syrians
killing one another with such violence. The number
of wounded and killed increases every day. Civilians
are being deliberately attacked in contravention of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
various vital components of the infrastructure in that
country have been practically destroyed. We condemn
all violence - whatever its origin. The perpetrators of
human rights violations must be identified and brought
to justice. The scale of the violence, the inability of
the international community to facilitate a cessation
of hostilities between the parties and the absence
of a political perspective have further worsened the
suffering of the civilian population, who have been
abandoned to their sad destiny. Confronted with that
serious situation, the international community must
not sit idly by; it must take all steps necessary to
stop the violence and bring the parties back to direct
negotiations in order to arrive at a just and sustainable
political solution within the framework of the Geneva
communique' issued on 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). In that regard, we commend and support the
untiring efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, to find a way out of
the crisis.

With regard to Lebanon, we commend the efforts
of the Lebanese Government to fight incursions into
its territory by the terrorist groups Daesh and Jabhat
Al-Nusra. We call on all parties to the Syrian conflict
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. Moreover, we encourage all Lebanese actors
to dissociate themselves from the Syrian conflict and
to adhere to the Baabda Declaration of June 2012 so as
to protect Lebanon from repercussions of the regional
cr1s1s.

Lebanon still has to suffer the collateral effects
of the Syrian crisis and faces a great many security,
humanitarian and economic challenges. The long-
standing vacancy in the presidency is undermining
the stability of Lebanon and considerably hinders the
proper functioning of State institutions. The political
actors in Lebanon need to focus first and foremost
on stability and national interests and to demonstrate
flexibility to elect as soon as possible the country's
President in order to better respond to the multiple
challenges with which the country is confronted. We
urge the international community to continue to assist
Lebanon to surmount its difficulties and to reinforce its
resilience in the region.

I conclude with the situation in Yemen. We are
concerned by the ongoing conflict between the pro-
Government forces and the Houthi rebels and by the
ongoing degradation of the humanitarian situation.
In the absence of a genuine humanitarian truce, the
civilian population is trapped in the crossfire and is
lacking practically everything. We call on all parties to
the conflict to avoid the deliberate targeting of civilians
and the country's vital infrastructure and to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
also call on the parties to engage in good faith in an
inclusive dialogue so that they can reach a peaceful
and lasting solution to the crisis, in conformity with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015), and with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
as well as with the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference. From that point of View, the international
community should intensify its efforts to relaunch
the political process so as to avoid the erosion of the
legitimate institutions and the total foundering of the
country. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and we encourage him to
continue his work to find a solution to the crisis.

