Mr. Teixeira da Silva (France) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to associate itself
with the two preceding speakers in thanking Mr.
Annabi and also in pointing out that we are quite aware
of the magnitude and the difficulty of the tasks the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) is facing, as well as of the
undeniable progress that has been made. The pace may
seem slow, but this can obviously be explained by the
state in which East Timor finds itself and also by the
difficulties of mobilizing both human and financial
resources. This is particularly true since after the tragic
events of last year, East Timor is no longer on the front
pages of the newspapers or seen in broadcast news,
precisely because there is no tragedy. But the problem
here is that international attention and interest have
again declined.

I have two sets of comments and questions for
Mr. Annabi, in addition to those already made by the
two preceding speakers. I will address the security
issue first. Mr. Annabi spoke of a crime rate that
remains high: is this common crime, economic crime,
or acts that have a political motive, committed by
isolated elements or by organized anti-independence
militia elements?

My second question regarding security is about
the division of labour between the army and the
UNTAET police. This is a problem we have faced in
other operations - I am thinking in particular of
Kosovo - where in stabilizing some situations the line
may seem a bit fuzzy between the competence of
international police and the competence of military
units.

Regarding incidents that have taken place, I heard
Mr. Annabi mention police intervention. What is the
particular task of the military troops of UNTAET, and
are there clear criteria for the division of tasks between
the international police and units that are specifically
military? Any clarification here would be most
welcome. We note that UNTAET decided to reduce the
military contingent by 500 men by October; that seems
to us a step in the right direction. Beyond October, are
there other plans to further reduce the military element,
or is it thought that there is a need not to move too
quickly in View of the situation? But to correctly assess
that, we need to have a rather clear View of the division
of labour between the police units and the military
units.

My last point in this area: could Mr. Annabi
provide more information regarding the training of
local police, since, indeed, the goal here was to have
local police take over from the international police
units?

My second comment is to supplement the
question raised by Ambassador Eldon concerning the
problem of financing the UNTAET Trust Fund and the
World Bank trust fund. There is a third pillar here
which we must not forget: the peacekeeping budget,
the special budget of UNTAET. Any indications
regarding the state of contributions and the gap
between the necessary budget and contributions would
be most welcome, because above all this mission needs
to function. Does the present state of contributions not
represent an obstacle to the proper functioning of this
mission?

