Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel for her
briefing and for her dedicated work on the ground.

As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/866) indicates, the Sahel region continues to
face grave security, development and socioeconomic
challenges. Close coordination of the activities by
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and other regional and subregional actors, ensuring
complementarity of effort and enhancing the delivery
of assistance and support are crucial. The European
Union remains a dedicated partner in those efforts and
is implementing its respective strategy and an action
plan adopted earlier this year. As part of the European
Union Training Mission in Mali, Lithuania has and
deployed instructors to train Malian forces Koulikoro,
and we will continue to do so.

The 20 November assault on the Radisson Blu
Hotel in Bamako was the latest in a series of deadly
attacks. We strongly condemn that murderous attack
and express our condolences to all those affected.

The terrorist threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and groups such as the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, Ansar
Eddine, Al-Mourabitoun, as well as human smuggling,
trafficking, the free flow of arms into the region,
further compounded by the Libya crisis, continue to
aggravate Sahel's vulnerabilities.

We commend the implementation of projects and
flagship programmes by the United Nations family
aimed, inter alia, at strengthening security cooperation,
border protection, counter-terrorism coordination and
information-sharing and countering violent extremism
and radicalization in the Sahel. It was encouraging to
hear from the Special Envoy that there is more progress
in terms of better coordination of the work.

We also welcome the efforts of the G-5 Sahel to
reinforce regional security cooperation capacity by
carrying out joint cross-border military exercises, as
well its members willingness to work together on cross-
border issues such as organized crime, radicalization
and the root causes of illegal migration.

Tackling poverty and social exclusion and lingering
grievances of individual communities within the
Sahel countries remains crucial. As the Speical Envoy
underlined, despite the fact that a huge percentage of
the population is below the age of 25, youth are not
systematically involved in decision-making and lack
education and employment opportunities. Such a
situation is a ticking time bomb because, as she also
noted, disaffected young people are easy prey for
terrorist recruiters and organized crime. The countries
of the region need to develop sustainable livelihoods,
with the support of international partners, strengthen
the presence of the State throughout the respective
countries, ensure the delivery of basic social services
and guarantee access to justice.

In all of the countries of the region, there is a clear
need to develop rule-of-law, law enforcement and
judicial capacities to be able to detain and try terrorists
and radical extremists. Tangible improvements are
also urgent in the detention and penitentiary systems,
considering the fact that prisons can often serve
as recruitment grounds for violent extremists and
criminals, especially in conditions where regular
criminals and petty offenders are held together with
terrorist suspects for lengthy periods. Concerns with
regard to the safety and security of judges who try
terrorist cases must also be taken into account and
addressed.

In our View, more attention is required on preventing
recruitment and radicalization among vulnerable
refugee and displaced persons communities, especially
in border zones, where terrorist extremists can come and
go as they please owing to porous borders. Such zones
are in general subject to particular vulnerabilities, and
it is therefore no wonder that when Boko Haram first
struck the Niger it did so in the border zone of Rosso-
Diffa.

The role of women, civil society representatives
and religious leaders remains essential to counter
radicalization. Some good practices exist among the
countries of the region - for example, on promoting
moderate Islam, the training of Imams in Mali - that
could be shared and applied more broadly.

In conclusion, I would like to ask the Special Envoy
a couple of questions with regard to counter-terrorism
efforts. How would she assess progress in developing
national cGunter-terrorism/counter-violent extremism
strategies in the countries of the Sahel? How could the
Security Council aid those countries in that regard?
Earlier this year, there were recommendations to
strengthen her Office's capacity on countering terrorism
and violent extremism. Has anything been done since?
How can we help her to strengthen the ability of her
Office to deliver on the ground?
