Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the initiative
of the Chinese presidency to hold this open debate,
which is timely, especially in the light of the upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his excellent briefing this morning.

The scourge of terrorism continues to plague our
societies. Last month, eight cities across Africa, Asia
and Europe were targeted by terrorist attacks - attacks
against the very foundation ofpeaceful, democratic and
open societies. In times like these, there is a risk that
we allow divisiveness, fear and hatred to get the upper
hand. Political rhetoric is calling for banning Muslims
from entering our territories or for equating Syrian
refugees with terrorists. We must resist all forms of
scapegoating or fearmongering. Targeting a certain
religion, region, nationality or ethnic group plays right
into the hands of the terrorist ideology that we seek
to counter.

A comprehensive and balanced implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is needed. All
four pillars should be given emphasis. First, we need to
continue to strengthen measures to enhance security.
Killing is killing, regardless of any ideology invoked
in its defence, and terrorism is a crime, whatever its
cause. It is essential to ensure without delay the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions on the
financing of terrorists, on foreign terrorist fighters and
on sanctions.

Secondly, we need to put more emphasis on two
pillars that are often overlooked, namely, dealing with the
conditions conducive to terrorism, and ensuring respect
for human rights and the rule of law. They are essential
to making our work against terrorism sustainable over
the long-term, as well. The Secretary-General's Plan
of Action on the Prevention of Violent Extremism is
both timely and critical. We all agree that dealing with
the root causes of violent extremism and radicalization
is essential. In that regard, the initiative launched by
the United Nations Development Programme Regional
Bureau for Africa, "Preventing and responding to
violent extremism in Africa: A development approach",
is a good example of how development initiatives can
make a contribution.

Thirdly, ensuring a tailor-made implementation
at different levels will be key. Regionally, the United
Nations system must work with organizations, such as
the African Union, the European Union, the League
of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Those organizations bring added value,
given their networks, established programmes and
the internal collaboration among their member States.
Nationally, the United Nations must work closely
with Governments and stand ready to support the
development of national action plans, when invited.
Locally, the potential for working with civil society must
be fully realized. Women's groups, youth networks and
faith-based organizations play a fundamental role in
promoting the kind of tolerance, dialogue and inclusion
that is essential if we hope to succeed in preventing
violent extremism and terrorism.

Finally, a better coordinated United Nations
approach is necessary, so as to utilize scarce resources
efficiently and to support countries in capacity-building.
The interconnectedness of the decisions of the Security
Council, the actions of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate with the other parts of the United
Nations system, including funds and programmes,
should be strengthened.

Terrorists seek to divide communities and spread
fear. Dialogue is the best long-term method for
neutralizing the divisive forces of racism, xenophobia
and Islamophobia. No one is born a terrorist. The
strongest counter-narrative against polarization is
inclusion. At this critical point in time, we must
be resolute and stand united. In June, we will have
an opportunity to demonstrate our unity, adopt a
comprehensive approach and reaffirm our support for
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We hope that
we can seize that opportunity.

