Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for the end of mandate
report on the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) (S/2006/251), as well as for the proposal
contained therein on the establishment of a follow-on
integrated United Nations office, in response to the
request made by Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri in his
letter of 17 January to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/39, annex), and reiterated in a letter of
2 March (S/2006/157, annex) from Foreign Minister
J ose Ramos-Horta, who is present today, and in a letter
of 2 April (S/2006/230, annex) from President Xanana
Gusmao.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, and his staff for the
excellent work they have done.

Portugal subscribes to the statement just made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to add a number of comments.

I congratulate the Council on having convened
this public meeting. It gives us an opportunity to hear
the views of Timor-Leste, as put forward by the
Foreign Minister, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and of its
partners, particularly regarding the Secretary-General's
proposal for the establishment of a follow-on
integrated United Nations office in Timor-Leste.

I think that it is fair to say that from 1999 to date,
Timor-Leste has probably been the major success story
of the United Nations. There have been other good
stories to tell in recent years in the context of the
management of international peace and security, but
none compares in terms of the degree of success
achieved in Timor-Leste thus far.

I would like to pay tribute to all those who have
been directly involved in that success, above all to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. I also would like
to evoke the memory of Sergio Vieira de Mello, a man
who did an outstanding job in Timor-Leste and who
became a symbol for all of us. He embodied the
principles and the highest values of this Organization,
and he paid the ultimate price in its service.

As mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
report, Timor-Leste has made impressive progress in
many areas of governance, institution-building and
capacity-building, with the support of UNOTIL and
bilateral and multilateral partners. We also commend
the people and the leadership of Timor-Leste for their
perseverance and their determination to succeed. For us
that is no surprise, as the Portuguese people are keenly
aware of the suffering endured by the East Timorese
people during their struggle for self-determination. We
shared that suffering, and we celebrated together when
the moment of freedom arrived at last.

The solidarity of the Portuguese people is the
reason why Portugal remains, by far, the largest donor
to Timor-Leste. Since 1999, Portugal has contributed
more than €400 million. The Secretary-General's
report mentions some of our contributions in the areas
of justice and electoral assistance, but our cooperation
extends to many other areas, namely, education, health,
social protection, police, the armed forces, customs and
finances. That puts us in the special position of being
able to agree with the analysis of the Secretary-
General, which takes into due consideration the
requests presented by the authorities of Timor-Leste:
"many of the country's institutions are at a nascent
stage and will require the continued assistance and
support of the international community" (S/2006/251, para. 50).

The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for 2007 - the first since the country's
independence - will be a major test and, we sincerely
hope, "a significant step forward in the process of
strengthening this fragile democracy" (Ibid.), as the
Secretary-General puts it.

As Security Council members recognized in the
letter of 28 March from the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/ 196) requesting the Secretary-General
to present options for how the United Nations can best
provide assistance to Timor-Leste following the end of
UNOTIL's mandate, we must take into account that
peace and democracy in Timor-Leste need to be further
consolidated.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General
are based on a fair analysis of the situation on the
ground. We support the proposals regarding the
mandate and the components of a small integrated
United Nations office in Timor-Leste. Those proposals
are the minimum required to face the challenges ahead.
I must also underline the following points.
In recent weeks, we have witnessed some
disturbing developments related to the political and
security situation in Timor-Leste. The latest incidents
involving ex-soldiers and the police reveal the
existence of serious systemic problems within the
security forces. That situation requires international
support in terms of capacity-building for this critical
sector. The United Nations should provide assistance to
the Government of Timor-Leste in addressing some of
the systemic problems within the security forces. An
approach based solely on bilateral assistance
programmes will not be sufficient, given the political
sensitivity of this issue.

Portugal has a long-standing commitment to the
promotion of human rights, especially in the case of
Timor-Leste. We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General in response to the letter dated 28
September 2005 from the President of the Security
Council (S/2005/613), which requested the Secretary-
General to outline a "practically feasible" approach to
the question of accountability in Timor-Leste. We
support the Secretary-General's appeal regarding the
need to ensure that all those responsible for serious
crimes committed in Timor-Leste are held accountable
so as to respond to the legitimate desire for justice on
the part of all those affected by violence. Portugal will
continue to be supportive of the initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General in that regard.

Last August, the Secretary-General wrote that
"Timor-Leste still has the lowest level of human
development in East Asia and the Pacific and
remains among the 20 poorest countries in the
world. Moreover, economic growth is expected to
be modest in 2005 due to stagnant employment
opportunities, a continued downsizing of the
international presence and a decline in bilateral
and multilateral assistance." (S/2005/533, para. 36)

I also dare to say that we should not count on any
miraculous solutions arising from the potential
revenues from oil and gas exploitation. As stated in the
same report, in the near future "the country will
continue to depend on external assistance to finance its
economic, social and human development and to
reduce overall poverty" (Ibid.).

Timor-Leste has been an investment of high
return for the Security Council. The case of Timor-
Leste is referred to in academia and the media as an
example of the indispensable role and the effectiveness
of this body. But the time has not yet come for Timor-
Leste to be off the Security Council's radar. We should
do everything in our power to secure this investment
and strengthen the fragile democracy in the world's
newest country.

Portugal underlines the importance of sustained
multilateral and bilateral assistance to Timor-Leste. We
recall the responsibility of the international community
and of the Security Council in relation to Timor-Leste.
Portugal will therefore remain committed to the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Timor-Leste.

May I also say that I take due note of the United
States proposal of a technical rollover for the mandate
of UNOTIL. I believe it is wise to reassess the
situation in the light of recent developments.

