Mr. Vieira de Mello: First of all, allow me to
thank all those who took the floor for their strong
expressions of support, not just for the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
but for the East Timorese at large in this difficult
transition to independence.

The representative of Malaysia, Ambassador
Hasmy, encouraged us to forge more bilateral ties and
arrangements with the Republic of Indonesia. He is
right, and, as he knows, in the very early stages we
launched a process of bilateral negotiations with
Indonesia, which was reinforced, during the visit of
President Wahid to Dili on 29 February, by the signing
of a joint communique between Foreign Minister Alwi
Shihab and myself which charted the future of those
bilateral negotiations. Those negotiations continue and,
I must say, have made a great deal of progress in a
number of important areas in terms of creating the
framework for future relations between East Timor and
its main partner, Indonesia.

The joint border agreement that we signed in
Denpasar on 14 September is one such example. In
fact, the suggestion for the establishment of a Joint
Border Committee came from us in March, in
discussions both in Kupang and later in Jakarta with
the then Minister of Defence, Juwono Sudarsono, as
well as the Commander of the ninth military region,
General Kiki Syahnakri. I am delighted that the
document is signed, because it is very broad. It covers
not only security but a number of other trade and cross-
border types of contacts between the Indonesian
Government and UNTAET; the exploitation of natural
resources, including water, on both sides of the border;
veterinary concerns; and so on. It is an all-
encompassing document which, I am sure, will lead to
substantial improvement in the relations between East
Timor and West Timor in particular.

Our philosophy, I want to reassure Ambassador
Hasmy, has not changed and cannot change. Relations
of confidence, partnership and cooperation are vital in
the long term for East Timor, and I know that President
Wahid of Indonesia and his Government share that
view.

I am also very happy that there has been
unanimous recognition here that dealing with the
question of militias, including, I must underline once
again, the arrest of their criminal commanders, is the
central issue before us. I have also pointed out to
Coordinating Minister Yudhoyono that, as far as
disarmament is concerned, we are particularly
interested in the confiscation and destruction -
preferably public destruction - of weapons such as
G3s, SKS rifles, M-16s, rocket launchers, grenades and
ammunition for these, rather than homemade weapons.

Having listened to the representative of Indonesia
a while ago, I fear that the message I tried to convey
earlier has not been fully apprehended - that is, that
the militia must be clearly separated, in theory and in
practice, from well-meaning pro-integration political
leaders, with whom we have always been open to
discussions and with whom we shall remain open to
re-establish dialogue. I provided the Coordinating
Minister, in our meetings in Jakarta and in Denpasar -
the President of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT), Xanana Gusmao, was present at
one of those meetings - with a long list of examples
of efforts made by the CNRT leadership, by the
FALINTIL commander and by us - including your
obedient servant - in order to establish a constructive
dialogue with those political leaders, to no avail so far.

I have given the example of a meeting to which I
invited the leader of UNTAS, Mr. Domingo Soares. He
chairs that umbrella organization of pro-autonomy
movements. I invited him to my hotel in Jakarta in late
March and handed over to him my personal response to
a letter he had addressed to me raising many questions
about the electoral process last year, the process that
led to the popular consultation. We had a very
constructive, in fact very cordial, meeting with him and
with seven of his senior colleagues. He promised that
he would share the contents of my letter with other
UNTAS leaders who were not present in Jakarta and
that he would come back to me with proposals on the
next steps for this dialogue leading to lasting
reconciliation between the East Timorese. I have been
waiting every since for that call, and, believe me, I
have tried to provoke that call by requesting my
colleagues to re-establish contact with him and telling
him that we were waiting for his proposals, as was the
presidency of the CNRT. This is only one of the many
examples that I could give here, but I do not want to
bore the Council with a detailed catalogue of those
initiatives.

Regarding the Defence Force, I am grateful for
the broad support that I have heard from those who
addressed this question for the proposed course of
action and for the convening of a meeting of interested
countries, which, with the support of the Council and
that of the Secretary-General, I now intend to convene
later in the month of October or in early November. I
thank Council members also for the expressions of
concrete support from several speakers in preparation
for that meeting.

Let me also state, commenting on something that
Ambassador Wibisono just said, that I do not believe it
is possible to establish a symmetry between the
FALINTIL and the militia. I have briefed the Council
on the future of the FALINTIL. This was at the core of
the problem we faced earlier this year - the problem
that led the United Kingdom to propose an independent
study, which was carried out by the Centre for Defence
Studies of King's College in London. That study, as we
know, focused not only on the future defence force for
East Timor, but also on the role that the FALINTIL
could play in the creation of that defence force. I have
alluded to this in the past. I alluded to it again this
afternoon. It is something on which I also briefed the
Coordinating Minister for Political, Social and Security
Affairs of Indonesia on Monday of last week in
Djakarta. So I think the future of the FALINTIL is
clear in everybody's minds. I am afraid that that is not
yet the case as regards the militia.

I also take note of the remark by Ambassador van
Walsum and his reference to the likely need for an
international force to remain in place and continue to
provide for East Timor's security until the Timorese
are able to fend for themselves. I would add that this
will be necessary not just in the security area, but in a
number of other capacity-building areas where
obviously we shall not have attained a benchmark by
the time East Timor accedes to full independence.

In response to Ambassador Hasmy's question on
the downsizing of the military component of UNTAET
I was a strong supporter of the gradual downsizing of
our military component. But I have recommended that
the downsizing be suspended - and the Secretary-
General agrees with that recommendation - until the
security situation improves, until it is clear to the
Council and to us that the downsizing can resume
without putting in danger all that we are trying to
achieve on the basis of the mandate that the Council
entrusted to us.

The representative of Namibia asked me whether
there was a contingency plan for the possible sudden
influx of refugees from West Timor, and Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica noted that such a contingency plan
was in place. We have established a joint operation
centre at the headquarters of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Dili. I visited this centre last Saturday and was briefed
about the concept of operations, as it were, in the event
that we were to be faced with a large-scale influx. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) - the Office for which I am responsible here
in New York - will be entrusted, as is normal, with
the coordination of the humanitarian agencies,
including the International Committee of the Red
Cross, which will have an important role to play
should such an influx occur. The military component of
UNTAET, our police, as well as other civilian
components of the Transitional Administration and,
needless to say, the East Timorese partners are
represented in that mechanism, which is now prepared
for an influx of up to 100,000 refugees.

Council members know that our estimates vary.
The United Nations believes that there remain about
100,000 to 120,000 refugees; the Indonesian
Government believes that the figures is 130,000. In
fact, nobody really knows, because we were never able
to carry out a thorough registration of the refugee
population. But we are ready on the East Timorese side
to receive as many as 100,000, although we do not
believe that many are likely to voluntarily go back. We
have several transit centres established, and sufficient
goods and facilities are available to care for this fairly
large number of people - with the hope that this will
never materialize and that we will, on the contrary, be
able to carry out the return of these people in
accordance with the comprehensive plan of action put
forward by Foreign Minister Shihab.

No one wishes more than the East Timorese and
ourselves to see this question of the refugees
resolved- including the local settlement or
resettlement in Indonesia of those who wish to remain
there, and who are perfectly entitled to make that
choice. The international community, as I have stated
many times before, must provide Indonesia with the
necessary support for that part of the equation to be
effectively addressed.

I repeat that the comprehensive plan of action of
the Indonesian Government is viable, and we support
it. UNHCR, the International Organization for
Migration and other humanitarian agencies can proceed
with the registration of the refugees, and with their
return or settlement in Indonesia, in close partnership
with the Indonesian Government, and UNTAET will
fully support that process. In fact, as we all know, the
problem could have been solved long ago had the
militia been removed from these refugee settlements
and had humanitarian agencies been allowed to do their
job and determine freely who wishes to return and who
wishes to remain.

Ambassador van Walsum of the Netherlands
asked me how much progress had been achieved in
involving the East Timorese, or rather whether the East
Timorese felt they had ownership of the process. I wish
that my friend and partner, Jose Ramos-Horta - who
is present and whose cooperation with us and support
for UNTAET I wish to salute and pay tribute to -
could respond, because this is a question that the
Timorese might be in a better position to answer.

Let me simply say that the following are
significant steps in that direction: the cabinet
structure - the fact that we will soon be appointing
deputy cabinet members in all the four cabinet pillars,
not only in the four that are currently the responsibility
of the East Timorese; the appointment of a Timorese
inspector general of the Transitional Administration;
the appointment in the coming days of a person of East
Timorese origin who will be in charge of planning,
development, environment and gender issues, also as
part of the Transitional Administration; the fact, as I
have indicated, that I have just appointed 13 district
administrators and deputy district administrators; the
fact that we have so far recruited 5,400 civil servants,
out of the total of 10,000 approved as part of the first
fiscal year, 2000-2001; the fact that I will soon be
appointing the 33 members of the new national council,
following broad consultations at the central and district
level; and the fact that the judiciary is composed, in its
vast majority, of Timorese judges, investigating judges,
prosecutors and public defendants. Much more can still
be done, and I can assure the Council that we will
continue to consult with our Timorese partners to do as
much as we can to implement the mandate that the
Council has given us.

I keep saying that there is no better way of
preparing the East Timorese for self-governance than
through self-governance. So I can assure the Council
that the Timorization process will continue and in fact
be further accelerated.

(spoke in French)

Ambassador Levitte asked me my evaluation of
the coalition Government and what improvements
might be made to it. My evaluation is absolutely
favourable. I am impressed by the sense of
responsibility and commitment shown by the four
Timorese members of our cabinet structure, and by the
cohesion and harmony that exists among them and
between them and us - the international side.

What improvements might be made? I would say
that undoubtedly we should in the next few weeks
make the coalition Government more representative
than it is at present. We need to see an increasing
affirmation of the diversity of the Timorese political
force. It remains to be seen what will happen next, Mr.
Ambassador.

(spoke in English)

The representative of Jamaica referred to
assistance in the form of quick impact projects. She
must have known she was touching on a subject very
close to my heart. I can assure that through the
UNTAET fund and other, smaller OCHA and UNHCR
funds, as well as through bilateral contributions made
since late last year, these quick impact projects are the
ones that perhaps provided the East Timorese
population with the most visible, the most immediate
confirmation of international solidarity. I regret to say
that all those funds are now practically exhausted and
that all that we have to rely upon is the World Bank-
funded community empowerment project, which has
taken over the funding of this type of project. This is
certainly one of the big lessons of this operation. We
should in the future provide missions of this kind, as
we have seen in the past, with sufficient funds to
launch these kinds of projects across the entire country.

I believe I have covered most of the questions
that were put to me.

(spoke in French)

Ambassador Levitte raised a question on behalf
of the European Union and the associated countries. He
referred to the budget for the first fiscal year, 2000-
2001, which was adopted at the donors conference in
Lisbon. I would like to say in that connection that the
budget adopted, less than $60 million, which should
have been enough to enable us to govern Timor and
supply the Timorese population with the services that it
so sorely needs, is one that I have often described as
cruel. It is entirely inadequate. But we knew that we
had to remain within the limits of the resources that the
donor countries were willing to make available to us.
The budget will not enable us to fund a number of
activities that seem indispensable to us and that we are
identifying as we discover the magnitude of the task
that the Council has entrusted to us. I am afraid, and I
wanted to inform the Council right away, that I will
have to approach the donor countries with certain new
needs at the donors conference in Brussels in early
December. I thank Ambassador Levitte for having
given me this opportunity to raise this very urgent
problem because, on a daily basis, we discover new
needs that are not covered by the first consolidated
budget for the fiscal year 2000-2001.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay a
heartfelt tribute to my friend Bernard Miyet. This
afternoon's meeting is, I believe, the last one he will be
attending as Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and I would like to tell him that his
leadership over the last three and a half years in this
very important task was of crucial importance in
preserving the role of the Organization in peacekeeping
and peacemaking. We know that this is not an easy
task, in particular, in the implementation of the
ambitious mandates we are given by the Council
nowadays, the new generation of mandates of
administration and governance, such as the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). I would like to express to him, on behalf
of all my colleagues in UNTAET and on behalf of all
the peacekeeping mission staff throughout the world,
our warmest gratitude and our abiding friendship. We
wish him the best in his new activities.

I thank you very much, Mr. President, for having
invited me here today, for the opportunity to make this
presentation today and for your guidance and support.

