Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing such an important and
timely open debate. We welcome resolution 2171 (2014),
adopted today. We also want to thank the Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings today.

The delegation of Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the delegation of the European
Union. We fully share the ideas expressed by the
European Union on ways to improve the United Nations
performance in the prevention of conflicts. At the same
time, we would like to reflect on the key issues that are
very important from the perspective of our country.

The idea to establish a mechanism for the prevention
ofconflicts is at the very heart and essence ofthe United
Nations. Severe consequences of the First and Second
World Wars and the strong will of States to prevent
such conflicts in future led to the creation of the United
Nations and the adoption of its Charter. The Charter of
the United Nations gives the main bodies of the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, the necessary
leverage to effectively prevent conflicts. Of course, that
mechanism is not perfect. But it can function quite well
if there is goodwill on the part of all players.

For many years, the United Nations and its main
bodies have been helping to improve the technologies
and techniques of conflict prevention within the
authority and power invested in them by the Charter.
And many of the ideas that have been expressed
today merit serious attention. However, we believe it
is impossible to succeed if the Organization cannot
adequately respond to the main challenges and gaps
that prevent it from being an effective global actor in
the field of security.

Respect for the rule of law at the international
level is the basis for international peace and stability,
a key precondition for the prevention and settlement of
conflicts and a guarantee of predictability in and the
legitimacy of international relations. It begins with
strict adherence to the Charter of the United Nations
and other international treaties in force by States
parties.
A lack of responsibility and impunity for the
violation of the Charter and international treaties, which
Ukraine considers as a guarantee of peace and stability
in relations with its neighbours, have been among the
main causes of aggression against my country and the
occupation of Crimea. The Security Council had all
the necessary levers available and should have taken
actions to prevent that conflict in order to secure peace
and stability in the region. Unfortunately, despite
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine by almost all Member States of the Security
Council, the abuse of the veto power by one of the
permanent members actually blocked any practical
measures by the Security Council. The problem is that
by taking advantage of its veto power, the Member
State has committed aggression against Ukraine, even
though, before that, that State had always recognized
the territorial integrity and State borders of my country
in accordance with the relevant bilateral treaties.

In that context, I should like to emphasize that
permanent membership in the Security Council and the
veto power are not just a privilege or matter of good
luck. They entail the obligation and duty to responsibly
take care of the peace and security of our world. Abuse
of that status seriously undermines the authority and
credibility of the Organization and erodes the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Within the framework of the Organization, we have
already started discussions on non-use of the veto in the
case of mass atrocities. My delegation welcomes that
initiative. We hope that, very soon, we will be able to
engage in a substantive discussion on the prevention of
the use of veto power in cases of aggression.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we can and
should propose and discuss ideas aimed at improving
United Nations mechanisms of conflict prevention.
There is no doubt that this is very important work.
That is why the topic was a main feature of Ukraine's
Security Council membership in 2000 and 2001, as well
as its membership in the Peacebuilding Commission in
2011 and 2012.

However, without solving the problem of abuse
of the veto power and without a proper mechanism
ensuring compliance with international treaties, all
our efforts to prevent conflicts may fail any time, and
any State Member of the Organization could become a
victim of that failure.

