Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for their briefings. As my other
colleagues have mentioned, we thank Mr. Michael
Keating, not only for his briefing today, but also for his
commitment, efforts and determination in supporting
the well-being of Somalia and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I also
echo my colleagues in welcoming the new Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia and take this opportunity
to pay tribute to his predecessor, Ambassador Tekeda
Alemu. The new representative has our full support.

Bolivia welcomes the efforts of the African Union,
the United Nations and countries of the region to achieve
peace and security in Somalia and overcome ongoing
terrorist threats. We also underscore and commend
the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to
build and consolidate the political process of peace
and reconciliation, in the framework of its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, with a focus on
defining its priorities for development, strengthening
resilience and promoting socioeconomic transformation.

We would underscore also the initiatives taken by
the Federal Government in the areas of peacebuilding,
State-building, the strengthening of the rule of law,
security-sector reform and other key objectives, which
demonstrate its ongoing commitment to achieving
political and social stability and, above all, to providing
protection to the civilian population.

On security-sector reform, we note that it is vital
that Somalia take ownership of the process, which
must be built on a relationship of mutual trust and be
consensus- and inclusivity-based with respect to both
Federal Government and the federal states. To that
end, we underscore the importance of the work of
UNSOM. in providing support to the Office of National
Security, which we deem of paramount importance
to building capacities in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as effective
weapons and ammunition management, maritime
security and strengthening the capacities of the
country's police forces. In this respect, we would echo
those who call for effective coordination of the various
international stakeholders involved so as to ensure that
all cooperation efforts in the security field are made
in close coordination with the Federal Government
of Somalia.

At the political level, we are concerned at the
persistent tensions between certain federal states and the
Federal Government, as political rivalries undermine
Government oversight and hamper all the efforts of
our Organization and the international community. In
that regard, the political road map for Somalia shows
significant progress that we are certain will be reflected
in significant advantages of mutual benefit to both the
Federal Government and federal states.

Bolivia fully supports the efforts of the international
community to implement initiatives for mediation
and preventive diplomacy that support the quest for
a peaceful and sustainable solution to the conflict
in Somalia. In this regard, it behoves us continually
to highlight the work of the African Union Mission
in Somalia and its personnel, some of whom have
sacrificed their lives in the service of their mandate.

We fervently appeal to the parties to use peaceful
mechanisms for resolving conflicts and disputes. We
stress the need for the use of political means, including
inclusive dialogue. Sustainable peace must be brought
about through political tools if political solutions are to
be found.

Dialogue means learning and requires reflection
and the recognition not only of differences but also
of areas of common ground. It also facilitates crisis
recovery and can avert an escalation of violence insofar
as the priorities and needs of all stakeholders are borne
in mind.

On another tack, we are deeply concerned at the
continual deterioration of the security situation. As
several colleagues have already mentioned, the presence
in Somalia of the Al-Shabaab terrorist group and a self-
declared faction of the so-called Islamic State continues
to highlight the imperative need to identify the means
necessary to counter such threats.

Asymmetric attacks using car bombs, improvised
explosive devices, including those controlled remotely,
have caused the loss ofhundreds of lives and significant
material damage. The kidnapping of Government
and international staff, the kidnapping, recruitment
and indoctrination of children as fighters, as well as
sexual violence against women and girls, particularly
those who have suffered forced displacement, all
are alarming.

We commend the coordination between UNSOM
and the United Nations Development Programme in
the implementation of support programmes for the
protection of victims of sexual violence and in the
establishment of preventive measures. The protection
of women, boys and girls is and must be a priority.

To conclude, we are certain that the collective
response, both to terrorist threats and to political
instability in Somalia, must be robust and consistent.
The international community must continue its
strengthened cooperation for the full implementation
of the national security architecture throughout Somali
territory, so that in the near future the Somali security
forces can take full responsibility for maintaining the
security of their country and their people.

