Mr. Al-Moualimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, upon your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success in your work.

I would like also to express my sincere
condolences to cote d'Ivoire on the passing of our
colleague Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire, and to wish his family
patience and solace.

Alaa Zamli, Hussein Madi and Mohammed Ayoub
were all 14-year-old boys. They were in the flower of
their youth. Another 40 children like them were singing
patriotic songs that included the following lyrics:

"Return is a right like the sun that rises in our
hearts and minds;

"The ray of justice will lead us to Palestine
and Jerusalem".

The ray of justice is guaranteed by international
resolutions and charters. The ray of justice that those
boys never saw because of bullets fired at them and at
their friends by the occupation soldiers of the occupation
forces in cold blood, without a semblance of human
conscience. The Palestinians have claimed nothing
other than the right to life, the right to return to their
lands, which they were forced to leave, the right to self-
determination and establishing their independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital and the right to demand that
the Security Council enforces its resolutions pertaining
to the protection of the Palestinian people, in particular
resolutions 605 (1987) and 904 (1994).

We call for the establishment of an international
investigative commission to shed light on the events of
30 March and thereafter, and to hold Israel accountable
for the murder of unarmed civilian protesters, and let the
perpetrators of those crimes be subjected to deterring.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia emphasizes the
centrality of the Palestinian cause in relation to the
Arab nation, as well as the importance of the Arab
identity of Jerusalem, the right of the State of Palestine
to govern all its territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, and the urgent need for Israel to
withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Arab Golan. Saudi Arabia also underscores
its strategic preference for peace and the need to settle
the Israeli-Arab conflict in accordance with the Arabic
Peace Initiative, introduced by my country in 2002.
King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Custodian of the
Two Holy Mosques, reiterated his firm stance on that
unchanged and principled position, when he announced
at the twenty ninth Arab Summit, held recently in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia that

"the Palestinian question is our first cause, and
would remain our first cause until the Palestinian
people enjoy all their legitimate rights, in particular
the establishment of their independent State with
cast Jerusalem as its capital".

Iran continues to interfere in the internal affairs
of Arab States and foment, support and embrace
terrorism. Iran provides the first line of support to
Hizbullah - a terrorist group that flaunts its arrogance
and dominance in Lebanon, wages war in Syria and
perpetrates the most extreme killings, siege and ethnic
cleansing. Iran is supporting the Houthi militias in
Yemen and providing them with arms and missiles
that are, in turn, fired against my country. The number
of missiles launched so far against Saudi Arabia has
reached 125.

Independent United Nations reports have
demonstrated that the missiles fired against my country
were manufactured in Iran. The final report of Panel of
Experts on Yemen found that,

"the Islamic Republic of Iran is in
non-compliance with paragraph 14 of resolution
2216 (2015) in that it failed to take the necessary
measures to prevent the direct or indirect
supply, sale or transfer of [arms to the Houthis]"
(S/2018/68, p. 2)

In the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
published following the Secretariat's visit to Saudi
Arabia, he indicated that,

"The Secretariat also observed three actuators that
bore the castings of a logo similar to that of the
Shahid Bagheri Industrial Group, an entity on the
list maintained pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015)
and a subordinate to the Aerospace Industries
Organization of the Islamic Republic of Iran."
(S/2017/1030, para. 29)

According to those reports, Iran is flagrantly
violating resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015). It is
high time that the Council take a firm stand with regard
to Iran and urge the international community to avoid
complacency in the face of those acts of aggression
and terrorism, which are undermining regional and
international peace and security. It is also high time
to deal with Hizbullah seriously and lift the lid off its
terrorist operations in Syria, Lebanon and other parts
of the world, and combat the flow of illegal arms into
Hizbullah's hands and its practices, which run contrary
to the Lebanese Constitution.

With regard to Syria, Saudi Arabia condemns the
horrific chemical-weapon attack perpetrated by the
Syrian regime in Douma in eastern Ghouta, which
led to the deaths of dozens of innocent women and
children. That crime demonstrates that the Syrian
authorities have not discontinued the use of chemical
weapons against civilians in Syria. Such a crime calls
for a serious response and firm stance on the part of the
international community to end the human suffering
and ensure that the perpetrators be held accountable
and punished.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia once again calls
for delivering immediate humanitarian assistance to
those in need throughout Syria regardless of their race,
religion or political affiliation. It is necessary that all
those detained and kidnapped be liberated. It is also
critical that all refugees and displaced persons be
allowed to return to their homes with dignity.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has expressed that it
is keen to provide its assistance to the brotherly people
of Syria to alleviate their suffering. Accordingly, my
country announced its pledge of $100 million at the
donor conference held in Brussels from 24 to 25 April
in support of Syria. That brings the total amount of aid
that Saudi Arabia has provided to its Syrian brothers in

Syria and in neighbouring countries to almost $1 billion
to date.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reaffirms the need
to end the tragedy experienced by the Syrian people.
It is crucial that we move towards a peaceful solution
based on the first Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). The international
community must meet its obligations with regard to the
protection of civilians in Syria. The optimal solution to
the crisis is indeed through consensus among Syrians
and an agreement that meets the needs of the people,
ends their suffering and meets their aspirations for
freedom, stability and prosperity.

