Mrs. Boura (Greece): 1 would like to thank the
Lithuanian presidency for taking the initiative to
organize this timely and important debate on the
protection of journalists in conflict situations. I
welcome the remarks made by the Deputy Secretary-
General and the Director-General of Reporters Without
Borders.

Greece aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. I would like to add
a few words on this issue of major significance in my
national capacity.

As the Secretary-General confirmed in his
report on the safety of journalists and the issue of
impunity (A/69/268), there has been an upward trend
in the number ofjournalists killed in recent years and
increased targeting of journalists and media workers.
More than half of the 61 journalists killed in 2014 were
covering war regions; 17 of them were killed in Syria.
The numbers taken hostage, tortured or subjected to
forced disappearance draw an even more dismal and
alarming picture. Local journalists are the majority of
victims, while women journalists are regularly targeted.
Resolution 2222 (2015), adopted today, which Greece
co-sponsored, highlights the importance of the issue
and of the new challenges that should be addressed. It
is a positive development that we strongly welcome.

Over the past few years, the United Nations has
actively engaged the international community in
creating a safe and enabling environment for journalists
and media workers. The United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
launched by UNESCO, is a comprehensive approach
for an inter-agency mechanism to create a free and safe
environment for journalists and media professionals in
both conflict and non-conflict situations.

In 2013, Greece, togetherwith across-regional group
of States, introduced resolution 68/163 on the safety
of journalists and the issue of impunity, proclaiming
2 November as the International Day to End Impunity
for Crimes Against Journalists. That resolution, whose
text was adopted for a second consecutive year in 2014
as resolution 69/185, condemns all attacks and violence
against journalists and media workers.

However, improved awareness and normative
progress are not enough to guarantee the safety of

journalists. The safety of journalists who work in
conflict areas is by no means assured and their working
conditions are increasingly deteriorating. The heinous
crimes committed since August 2014 by the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) constitute a
blatant example. Only a month ago, seven journalists
and media workers were found brutally assassinated
near Derna, the Libyan city controlled by ISIS. Such
barbaric crimes should strengthen the resolve of the
international community to take all necessary measures
to bring the perpetrators to justice. As the Secretary-
General stressed in his report, impunity remains the
biggest obstacle to effectively ensuring the safety of
journalists.

To achieve those goals, it will be necessary to
engage all stakeholders. Only through a comprehensive
approach involving United Nations agencies,
peacekeeping missions, civil society and States will we
be able to begin to reverse the vicious circle ofimpunity
and to protect journalists working in war-torn regions.

Training is vital to achieving results in promoting
the safety of journalists in conflict areas. Journalists
and other media workers reporting from war zones
should be physically fit, emotionally prepared,
appropriately equipped and adequately insured. Such
prerequisites are rarely fulfilled, especially in the case
of freelance journalists or independent media workers.
Media agencies should be encouraged to provide their
employees with adequate training before sending them
into conflict regions. Their goal should be to train
journalists to face combat risks and battlefield hazards,
as well as to provide them with emergency first-aid
skills.

In that regard, States could lend their expertise
through specialized agencies, military personnel and
infrastructure. Greece is prepared to engage in that
direction by offering its existing infrastructure to
provide relevant training. The Hellenic Multinational
Peace Support Operations Training Centre, located in
the region of Macedonia, in northern Greece, is already
scheduling the launch of relevant training courses.
Having developed expertise in providing essential
practical knowledge to military personnel, police and
civilians, the Hellenic Multinational Peace Support
Operations Training Centre is ready to offer training
for conflict situations to journalists and media workers.

We must redouble our efforts to enhance the safety
ofjournalists and to put an end to impunity. It is often
said that truth is the first casualty ofwar. United Nations
Member States must remain strongly committed to
ensuring better protection for the courageous journalists
who strive to keep truth alive.

