Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings this morning. South Africa would like to reiterate that the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen, intensified by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, is indistinguishably linked to the political impasse. As such, our intervention today focuses on the humanitarian as well as the political situation. On the humanitarian situation, South Africa continues to express its concern regarding the devastating effect of the conflict on the people of Yemen, in particular women, children, the elderly, internally displaced persons and those living with disabilities. We express our concern that the surging violence risks worsening the widespread human-made hunger crisis in Yemen, where two thirds of the population require food aid. Although there has been ongoing humanitarian assistance, more than 20 million Yemenis still face the harsh reality of food insecurity. Millions of Yemenis do not know where their next meal will come from, or are in acute need of assistance to obtain drinking water, and millions of children require treatment for malnutrition. South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to agree to a unified set of measures to counter the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, improve the delivery of humanitarian aid and provide impetus to the overall political negotiations to end the war and alleviate the suffering of the people. We have consistently highlighted the importance of all parties abiding by their obligations and responsibilities under international humanitarian law and international human rights law and taking all the measures necessary to end and prevent violations against civilians. On the political impasse, South Africa is concerned that the fighting in Yemen has intensified in recent days, threatening to unravel an already stalled peace process and deepen the world's worst humanitarian catastrophe. This past week, Al-Hudaydah saw the worst escalation in violence since the truce two years ago. The number of civilian casualties nationwide in September was the highest since last November, with 67 killed and 123 injured. We therefore urge all parties to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities in line with the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire and resolution 2532 (2020), and to also agree on confidence-building measures, such as the payment of civil servants. The reopening of Sana'a airport and the lifting of the siege are required to restart the peace process. We reiterate our position that the military response is not a viable solution, and we call on all parties to approach the resumption of political negotiations in a spirit of compromise, placing the interests of all Yemenis at the centre of a negotiated political settlement. We appeal to parties to avoid the stance of going for absolute positions in the negotiations. South Africa calls on all parties to engage in good faith and without preconditions with Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in order to reach a comprehensive, negotiated settlement to end the conflict, and that this be done in parallel to continued efforts to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements. We applaud the progress made under the Stockholm Agreement, which led to the exchange of more than 1,000 prisoners. We urge the parties to rapidly implement that agreement and for further measures to be taken towards implementing the Agreement. We also are encouraged that such progress can resolve the lack of access and inspection of the FSO SAFER oil tanker so that this looming threat will be dealt with on a purely technical basis, without politicization. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only solution to the conflict in Yemen is an inclusive Yemeni- led and Yemeni-owned political settlement that delivers on the hopes of the people for a strong economic and political future. In that context, we also call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of an inclusive political process.
