Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom voted in favour of the resolution today, but I
would like to give an explanation of our position. I
would like to place on record the United Kingdom's
strong support for the role and responsibilities of the
High Representative, who is also the European Union's
Special Representative. We welcome Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak to this role and we pledge our commitment to
cooperate with him as he discharges his responsibilities
under the Dayton Peace Agreement and subsequent
Peace Implementation Council (PIC) decisions and as
he leads the international community on the ground
and helps advance, in partnership with the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnia's Euro-Atlantic
integration.

As the resolution notes, it is the PIC Steering
Board that appointed the High Representative and that
decides on the mandate of his Office. While formal
agreement of the Security Council is not necessary, we
welcome the Council's support for those decisions. We
hope that the leaders in Bosnia will see the adoption of
this resolution as an indication of the international
community's firm backing for Mr. Lajcak and his
Office and for his future decisions, as it has backed all
previous High Representatives and their decisions.

We are disappointed at the nationalist sentiments
expressed by some Bosnian leaders in recent months.
These serve only to retard the reform process and
hinder the building of a multi-ethnic, democratic and
prosperous country on the verge of getting into Europe.

Our understanding is that nothing in this
resolution or those it recalls impacts on other Balkans
issues being considered by the Council.

Finally, I would like to say a word about the PIC
declaration of 19 June 2007. That declaration
confirmed that the Office of the High Representative
would remain in place and would continue to carry out
its mandate and that the aim is closure of the Office by
30 June 2008. The PIC will review the situation in
October 2007 and in February 2008. Those assessments
will naturally take into account the position of security
07-40581
and stability in the region. We hope that that security
and stability will be well and truly established by that
point and will be irreversible.

