Mr. Mayr-Harting: I thank you, Madame, for
giving me the floor for the first time in my new
capacity.

The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania; as well as the
Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.

At the outset, let me express our deep
condolences and sympathies to the people and
Government of Turkey for the tragic loss of life in
yesterday's earthquake, as well as to the people and
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the
passing of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan
Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
The events taking place throughout the Middle
East and Northern Africa in the past months have taken
on truly historic proportions that will not only shape
the future of the entire region, but also have
repercussions far beyond the countries concerned. The
fundamental changes witnessed across the Arab world
have made the need for progress in the Middle East
peace process all the more urgent. Recent events have
indeed shown the necessity of heeding the legitimate
aspirations of peoples in the region, including those of
Palestinians for statehood and of Israelis for security.

The statements delivered by President Abbas and
by Prime Minister Netanyahu at the United Nations a
few weeks ago (see A/66/PV.19) were different in
many ways, but they coincided in their shared
expression of the need to return to negotiations, of
support for a two-State solution and of desire for a
peaceful and comprehensive resolution of the long-
standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The European Union (EU) reiterates its appeal to
the parties to resume negotiations under the terms, and
within the timelines indicated in, the Quartet statement
of 23 September. The European Union welcomes the
positive statements of both parties in that regard. The
European Union underlines the Quartets crucial role in
facilitating the resumption of direct talks between
Israel and the Palestinians, and recalls its readiness to
support all efforts to bring the parties back to the
negotiating table. In that regard, the European Union
reaffirms its clear positions with regard to parameters,
principles and issues, including the conclusions of the
Foreign Affairs Council in December 2009, December
2010, May 2011 and July 2011, as well as the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union at
the Security Council on 21 April (see S/PV.6520). The
European Union fully supports the Quartet's call on the
parties to refrain from provocative actions and to
respect the obligations of both parties under the Road
Map.

The European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton,
hosted a meeting of the Middle East Quartet envoys on
9 October in Brussels to follow up on the 23 September
Quartet statement. As a result of that meeting, both
parties will be invited to another meeting with the
Quartet envoys on 26 October in Jerusalem. At that
meeting, an agenda for negotiations and working
methods will be discussed.
The European Union deplores the recent Israeli
decisions to advance settlement expansion in the Gilo

and Givat Hamatos settlements, which run counter to
the Quartet's efforts. The European Union deplores
steps to legalize, under Israeli law, houses in West
Bank outposts. The European Union reiterates that
settlements in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a
two-State solution impossible. All settlement activity,
including in East Jerusalem, should cease immediately.
New construction plans should be abandoned. The
European Union also calls upon both sides to avoid
steps that run counter to the Quartet's efforts to restart
negotiations.

The European Union remains one of the major
supporters and contributors to the Palestinian State-
building efforts led by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad. The European Union welcomes the
outcome of the reports stating that the Palestinian
Authority is above the threshold for a functioning state
in the key sectors studied by the United Nations, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and
that Palestinian institutions compare favourably with
those in established States. The European Union
expects the Palestinian Authority to continue its
institution-building efforts and to uphold current
standards in terms of transparent and efficient public
finance management.

The European Union remains dedicated to
continuing its support to the Palestinian Authority's
successful State-building efforts. The current fiscal
crisis of the Palestinian Authority risks putting in
danger the achievements made so far in institution-
building. The European Union therefore underlines the
necessity of providing predictable and further support
to the Palestinian Authority, and calls for equitable
burden-sharing by the international donor community.
The EU supports the organization of a new donor's
conference in Paris, in the context of a relaunch of the
peace process.

The European Union welcomes the release of
Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit. His return home
after five years of captivity puts an end to the long
ordeal that he and his family have endured. The
European Union hopes that his release and the related
prisoner exchange will have a positive impact on the
Middle East peace process, and encourages both sides
to continue taking de-escalating steps.

The situation in the Gaza Strip remains of
particular concern for the European Union. The
crossings must be opened to allow for the flow of
humanitarian aid, imports and exports of commercial
goods and the movement of people between Gaza and
the West Bank, while addressing Israel's legitimate
security concerns. The further dismantling of the
restrictions on access and movement in the West Bank
and Gaza is key for allowing for increased investments
and the development of the economy and
infrastructure. The European Union recalls its
readiness to assist in the reconstruction and economic
recovery of Gaza in close partnership with the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009) and on the basis of the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access.

In conclusion, with regard to Syria, the European
Union condemns in the strongest terms the ongoing
brutal repression led by the Syrian regime against its
population, as well as the widespread human rights
violations, including the killing, mass arrest and torture
of civilians, peaceful protesters and their relatives that
may amount to crimes against humankind. It also
condemns actions aimed at inciting inter-ethnic and
inter-confessional conflict, as well as recent targeted
assassinations of renowned political figures such as
Mashaal Tammo. According to the Deputy United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, more
than 3,000 people, including children, have died since
the beginning of the unrest. The European Union
deplores those deaths and expresses its condolences to
the families of the victims. The European Union
demands that the Syrian authorities put an immediate
end to the violence in order to prevent further
bloodshed. Those responsible for, or associated with,
the repression must be held to account by the
international community. President Al-Assad must step
aside to allow a political transition to take place in
Syria.

The European Union is deeply disappointed that
the Security Council has not yet been able to adopt a
resolution on the current developments in Syria, even
after months of ongoing brutal abuses by President
Al-Assad and his regime. The European Union will
continue to press for strong United Nations action to
increase international pressure, and urges all members
of the Security Council to assume their responsibilities
in relation to the situation in Syria.
