Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor this time and
not preventing our delegation from taking the floor
today, like you did so skilfully yesterday, using your
prerogative as President and showing no respect to
my delegation.

I thank Mr. O'Brien very much for his sobering
briefing, which once again drew an absolutely
horrifying picture of the reality in and around Aleppo.
It was a truthful picture, not an imagined one.

I agree with the colleague from New Zealand who
said that it is unfortunate that we are not able to come
together to stop this tragedy. But I am not ready to
accept this collective blame, simply because it isjust one
delegation - it is your delegation, Mr. President - that
is preventing us from doing that. Nor am I ready to
accept your attack, Mr. President, on the United Nations,
and personally on our own respected colleague from
the United Nations, Mr. Stephen O'Brien. He just states
the facts, and he is not attacking Russia at all. He is
just stating the facts. Your statement in your national
capacity, Mr. President, creates an impression that
you are living in some sort of parallel world, a kind of
twisted treality that is completely opposite to what we
see and hear every day, every minute - actually for
many months now - from the media, from the ground,
from the witnesses, from independent services, from
the United Nations sources.

The deteriorating security environment in Syria
continues to negatively impact the humanitarian
situation. Military activities, air strikes and shellings go
unabated on all active fronts of the Syrian battlefield:
Aleppo, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Hama and so forth.
It all results in a further increase in the number of
people living under siege, which has now reached, as
we have just heard, more than 800,000 civilians in 18
different locations.

It is impossible to comprehend that the Syrian
Government continues to bomb its citizens. Just this
Monday, at least 10 air strikes by the Al-Assad regime's
air force and its allies hit the town of Khan Shaykhun,
killing 7 civilians and injuring more than 50, according
to reports from the ground. Six civilians were killed
in Russian air strikes in the town of Kafr Takharim on
Monday. Two more were killed in the rocket shelling
by regime forces in the town of Durin on the Al-Ghab
plain. The list goes on as a grim reminder of the reality
in Syria.

News reports about the leaflets disseminated by the
regime forces in eastern Aleppo is more proof of the
Damascus cynicism. I was going to provide a quote,
but my colleague from the United States has already
done so.

It is dismaying to see that instead of focusing on
how to revitalize the nationwide ceasefire, the Russian
Federation is moving new types of arms and bomb
carriers to bases in closer proximity to Syria. Some of
them are moved from the territory of Crimea, which
is part of Ukraine and which Russia illegally annexed.
The recent deployment of the Russian naval battle group
in the vicinity of Syria sends a signal of clear intention
to further bolster the bombing campaign there. It can
hardly be interpreted as a confidence-building measure
or as a signal that the circumstances are conducive to
return to the negotiating table.

We again stress the urgent need for the United
Nations to look into the alarming reports of the
extensive use by Russia of incendiary weapons and
other indiscriminate weapons, including bunker-
busting bombs. We reiterate that those accused of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and those who are
behind them should be brought to justice.

Finally, we join the United Nations and our
colleagues in calling on all parties to the conflict
to immediately provide unconditional, unimpeded
and sustained access to the people in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas across Syria. Providing regular
humanitarian breaks and observing human rights are
the obligations of all parties to the conflict, not gestures
of goodwill that one party agrees to do today and rejects
tomorrow in order to gain political dividends. It is not
mercy, but a duty.

