Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see such an important presence in the
delegation of Bulgaria here, with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs presiding over this important meeting.
We would also like to welcome and express our thanks
to Mr. Guehenno for his briefing.

Spain fully endorses the statement that will be
made by the Permanent Representative of Italy, on
behalf of the European Union. My country has
unreservedly supported the "standards before status"
policy, which it feels is fully valid. In this regard, we
believe that the initiative of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, reflected in the
document "Standards for Kosovo", is a reaffirmation of
this policy and a step forward towards full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). The
establishment of guiding objectives for compliance
with the standards set forth in this document through
an implementation plan, which includes impartial,
measurable and precise criteria, is the necessary
complement for making this "standards before status"
policy a tangible reality.

Full compliance with the provisions of both
documents is a necessary precondition for us to begin
consideration of the question of the status of Kosovo.
The objective set forth by the international community
for Kosovo is none other than that of ensuring
democratization and stabilization of the province and
consolidating a multi-ethnic society that guarantees
fundamental rights and freedoms for its citizens, with
values compatible with those of Europe. This is the
nature of the "standards before status" policy, the
objective of resolution 1244 (1999) and the general
European strategy for the region. Ultimately, for Spain,
the review process in 2005 - or subsequent processes
of review - should consider in a comprehensive
manner whether the Provisional Institutions and the
level of economic development in Kosovo have
attained those standards.

Therefore, it is not so much a question of
timetable but rather one of the emphasis to be placed
on the substantive elements of the policy. The
European Union has a general strategy for the five
States of the region - a process of stabilization and
association. Such a global and balanced approach
implies that Kosovo should apply the same standards
and have the same institutions and legislation as its
neighbours. Thus, the institutions of Kosovo should be
the first to be interested in establishing sustained,
substantive and direct dialogue with Belgrade, which
should effect the same reforms as Pristina.

