Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Mr. Tiebile Drame, Minister for
Foreign Affairs ofMali, to today's meeting, and we thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing.
At the outset, we would like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of Mali
regarding the terrible tragedy in the village of Sobame-
Da, where approximately 100 innocent civilians were
killed as a result of an inter-ethnic clash on 10 June.
We hope that those responsible for it will be found
and duly punished. That tragic event, like the equally
tragic attack on the village of Ogossagou in March,
demonstrated once again the magnitude and gravity
of the threats facing the country and the region, as
well as their vulnerability to the destabilizing forces
represented by terrorists, organized criminals and
ideological extremists.

The developments in the situation in Mali in
general are very worrying. We have seen that the
number of terrorist attacks on both military personnel
and civilians has increased in the past few months.
Human rights violations are rampant. In central Mali,
inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflicts continue to
simmer and sometimes flare up. It appears that the
issue here is not merely the centuries-old differences
between the nomadic and settled populations. Militants
are intentionally trying to gain the support of local
residents by skilfully playing on existing disputes. It
will be crucial to restore the Government presence
there if those challenges are to be dealt with.

The worsening humanitarian situation is extremely
worrying, and the number ofpeople in need ofassistance
is increasing. We urge all external donors to fund the
humanitarian appeal as quickly as possible. We should
point out that when the situation seems hopeless, Mali's
young people have no option but to join the ranks of
terrorist, extremist or criminal groups. In that regard, it
will be crucial to ensure that the efforts in the country's
central and northern areas to stimulate economic and
investment activity and restore social services do not
let up.

We welcome the efforts of Bamako, Mali's
political stakeholders and the Platform coalition and
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad signatory
groups to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We hope they will strictly
respect the timeline for implementing its key provisions
with regard to the reconstitution of Mali's security
forces, administrative and territorial reforms and the
preparations for a constitutional referendum. Any
delay in that regard will only exacerbate the existing
threats and the country's vulnerability in the face of
the destabilizing forces represented by terrorists,
organized criminals and ideological extremists. At the
same time, we call on our colleagues not to impose
additional restrictive measures. It is important to allow
the existing sanctions regime to prove its effectiveness.
We believe that Mali's law-enforcement agencies will be
working more actively to suppress the illegal activities
of sanctioned individuals, as well as others sabotaging
the political process.

We support the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which is playing an important role in stabilizing
the country. We believe that it is important not to
undermine its effectiveness. We call on our colleagues
to take a balanced approach to deciding on its future.

The situation in Mali is an important factor in
African security as a whole. However, it is very unlikely
that peace can be achieved there without normalizing
the situation in the region. The issue of Libya continues
to play a negative role in this. The links between the
terrorists operating in Mali and in the region as a
whole are becoming increasingly clear. In that regard,
we support the concrete steps that the countries of the
Group of Five for the Sahel have been taking to form
a joint force to combat terrorism and organized crime,
and we hope that their role in ensuring regional security
will increase.

