Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking the representatives of Chile
and Sweden for their statements.
"Oh, there is no doubt." Those are the words of the
late Nelson Mandela on the eve of black majority rule
in South Africa, describing the role that international
sanctions played in ending apartheid. Indeed, there
is no doubt that sanctions have also advanced the
Security Council's goals on a range ofissues, including
the prevention of conflict, protection of human rights,
protection of civilians, nuclear non-proliferation and
even responsible utilization of natural resources.
In Western Africa, the timely application of United
Nations sanctions, including asset freezes, travel bans,
arms embargoes and natural resource trade bans, helped
bring peace to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire
over a period of almost two decades.

These are flexible tools. In the case of Liberia, the
Council imposed measures at the height of violence
instigated by Charles Taylor that cost thousands of
lives. Then, as a democratic transition occurred, the
Council crafted the sanctions anew to target human
rights violators and those who continued to threaten the
peace, security and stability of the country. Over time,
the Council adjusted these measures to accompany
and encourage progress and stabilization and support
good governance of natural resources. In turn, this
spring, the Council is poised to terminate this sanctions
regime - a true testament to how far Liberia has come.

Today, the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities is helping to choke off the
sources of funding for the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and is working to mitigate the global threat
posed by foreign terrorist fighters. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is working to prevent the flow of sensitive nuclear and
ballistic missile technology to North Korea, to cut off
financial relationships and transactions that the fund
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's prohibited
activities and to freeze the assets of those involved
in violating sanctions. Targeted sanctions have also
helped to address crises in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, marginalizing spoilers and helping
address violations of international humanitarian law.

Sanctions can be one of the most effective tools we
have to prevent greater violence or change the calculus
of countries that Violate serious rules of international
law, such as those that seek to develop nuclear weapons
in Violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, those that threaten to commit
genocide, those that abuse human rights or provide
support to terrorists. Most recently, robust enforced
United Nations sanctions helped resolve international
concerns over Iran's nuclear programme, leading to
a historic deal between the five plus one group and
Iran - the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

Under this deal, which will ensure that Iran's
nuclear programme is and will remain exclusively
peaceful, we agreed to lift nuclear-related sanctions
on Iran, in exchange for the verified completion of a
series of steps to roll back its nuclear programme. As
demonstrated in this case, sanctions are not intended
to be permanent. Cooperation and dialogue can pave
the way for the lifting of sanctions. Sanctions, when
imposed judiciously and in concert with comprehensive
strategies, can produce diplomatic breakthroughs. We
have seen that, including in countries we will hear from
today.

Of course, sanctions cannot be and never are an
end in and of themselves. They must targeted, deployed
with purpose, and grounded with a clear strategy for
promoting international peace and security. Sanctions
have proven to be a tool that when used properly allows
bodies such as this one to advance our shared interests
in the protection of human rights, territorial integrity,
justice and other values central to the Charter of the
United Nations.

I note the representative of the Russian Federation's
characterization of the United States role as penholder
for the Sudan sanctions regime. Let us be clear. When a
member of the Security Council blocks the publication
of a Panel of Experts' report, they are not acting in
the interest of progress; they are frustrating it. It is
the opposite of transparency. Those who frustrate the
functioning of our sanctions regimes, whether in South
Sudan, Darfur or Yemen, are usually zealously guarding
prerogratives other than the values that animate the
Charter of the United Nations.

In the light of the contribution of sanctions to the
Council's work, I should like to make three brief points
about sanctions committees.

First, the sanctions committees should do more
to ensure that their work is integrated with other
United Nations tools. For example, we support regular
meetings to assess the role of sanctions in the Security
Council's overall political strategy towards a targeted
country or region. Such discussions should occur on
a rolling basis, perhaps joined by relevant Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, to ensure that
the sanctions are calibrated to evolving and changing
situations on the ground. To better integrate this work,
committee chairs and Special Representatives should
have regular dialogue to ensure that their work is
mutually reinforcing.

Secondly, we agree strongly with our Council
colleagues who insist on greater transparency in the
work of the committees. Too often, the committees are
opaque to the outside world. We need concrete ways
to improve transparency, such as through more open
briefings, the release of written background materials,
more travel by committee chairs to affected regions,
and further dialogue between communities and
affected States on implementation challenges. In this
vein, I would note again that United Nations sanctions
expert panels, which report to the committees, play a
key role in promoting this transparency. Their analysis
and findings help the international community to
understand the role of sanctions and how they must be
implemented.

When procedural steps are taken to block the
normal public release of these reports, our interests and
transparency are frustrated. Just yesterday, when we
adopted resolution 2265 (2016), on the Sudan Panel of
Experts, the resolution had no new elements informed
by the compelling data presented by the Panel because
the Panel's report had been blocked from publication,
ensuring that Member States could not benefit from the
Panel's findings and judge its reporting on its merits.
We should not create panels of experts and give them a
mandate to find facts, only to block their findings from
being published when the facts are inconvenient.

My third point is that the United States believes
that sanctions committees must significantly improve
their ability to respond to wilful violations of
Security Council resolutions. This point should not be
controversial, given that individuals and entities that
facilitate violations are obviously working to thwart the
will of the Council. Yet sanctions committees frequently
shy away from effective responses to Violations. In
some cases, sanctions committees have been unable
to agree to take any action even when confronted with
unambiguous evidence of wrongdoing. Such inaction
undermines the international rule of law, not to mention
the Council's credibility.

As stated at the outset, we welcome further
discussion on how to enhance the work of sanctions
committees. We particularly welcome any opportunity
for the Council and its subsidiary bodies to elevate
attention to sanctions and eliminate excuses for
non-compliance.

