Mr. Brencick (United States of America): I offer
special thanks to High Representative Ashdown for his
insightful briefing to the Council this morning.

In the 10 years since the end of the war and the
signing of the Dayton Accords, the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have accomplished a great deal, as
Lord Ashdown has pointed out. Their country is today
a land at peace. Over 1 million refugees have returned
to their homes. Significant progress is being made on
strengthening or creating State institutions, including
the establishment of a State Border Service, a State
Investigation and Protection Agency and a national
intelligence service, as well as in reaching agreement
on a process to reform national police structures. As a
result of these reforms and others, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has received approval from the European
Union to begin negotiating its stabilization and
association agreement and has also met important
criteria, as has been noted, for participation in NATO's
Partnership for Peace.

I want to emphasize that most of these reforms
have occurred during High Representative Ashdown's
tenure in office and were accomplished in large
measure, in our view, due to his tireless support for and
dedication to the reform process in Bosnia.

Another area where we have seen progress and
where we want to encourage more is on constitutional
reform, and in this I agree fully with what Lord
Ashdown has said. Constitutional reform is the next
great challenge for the people of Bosnia, and we will
support their efforts to eliminate duplicative
governmental structures, to break down ethnic and
political divisions and to build a sustainable State.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken some notable
steps on International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) cooperation, as has been noted. But
critical deficiencies remain. As called for in numerous
Security Council resolutions, all persons indicted by
the ICTY must be arrested and surrendered to the court
in The Hague, particularly Karadzic and Mladic. Close
to 10 years after the end of the war, it is long past time
to resolve this issue at last and put it to rest. The tenth
anniversary of the tragedy of Srebrenica has already
passed and the tenth anniversary of Dayton is next
week, so further delay is unacceptable.

