Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I will
deliver a shortened version of my prepared statement in
the interest of time. I ask the Security Council to take
note of my written text.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Republic
of Korea for having organized this open debate, which
is of great importance because this is an issue that
concerns all Member States.

It goes without saying that Switzerland fully
supports the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004) and
its follow-up resolutions. The resolution, unfortunately,
remains important in the light of the persistent
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, and by their
potential use by non-State actors. We should therefore
continue our efforts to effectively implement the
resolution. In that regard, I will briefly address three
points.

The first concers the importance of national
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and role of
international instruments in that regard. Switzerland
has for its part made its expertise availability to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to assist in the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. In the area of exports, Switzerland controls
the transfer of dual-use items in a broad and systematic
manner. The written text of my statement contains
further detail.

Secondly, international assistance can play a useful
role in advancing implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In that regard, in 2011 Switzerland, at Iraq's
request, provide such assistance in the area of bio-
safety and bio-security. That cooperation also involved
the Verification Research, Training and Information
Centre, a non-governmental organization.

Thirdly, regional organizations also have a role. For
example, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), with Switzerland's support, carries
out awareness-raising activities, provides specific
information and assists States in developing national
legislation and national action plans. A few weeks ago,
the OSCE Points of Contacts on resolution 1540 (2004)
met in Vienna.

While the implementation of existing provisions
remains a priority, we must also anticipate new
challenges, such as the implications of dual-use and
convergence in the areas of biology and chemistry
resulting from revolutions in the life sciences, and find
meaningful ways to address them. While such advances
have enormous potential for public health, biomedical
science or agriculture, there is also growing risk of
State or non-State actors exploiting such sciences to
illicit ends.

As current Chair of the Biological Weapons
Convention, Switzerland is aware of such risks and
will therefore launch a series of workshops focused on
the implications of the convergence of chemistry and
biology. We will inform the 1540 Committee regarding
the results of that initiative.

In conclusion, the international community must
continue its efforts to manage the risks posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Their
use could have severe humanitarian consequences and
major repercussions for security, the economy and the
environment. This also concerns the very existence of
such arms: until they are prohibited and abolished, they
will continue to represent a risk to peace and security
throughout the world.

