Mr. Rahman (Malaysia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
Palestinian question, including East Jerusalem,
continues to have fundamental importance for peace
and security in the Middle East and in the world at
large. The Movement remains committed to a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Further, it
remains supportive of the Palestinian people in
exercising their inalienable right to self-determination
for an independent and sovereign State with East
Jerusalem as its capital and for their freedom and
dignity. The Movement reaffirms its support for the
Middle East peace process, based on the relevant

General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the principle of land for peace, the Arab peace
initiative, the illegality of any territorial acquisition
resulting from the threat or use of force, and the road
map.

The Non-Aligned Movement is gravely
concerned about the current, deteriorating situation in
the Gaza Strip, which has escalated in the past few
days. We condemn the kidnapping and detention by
Israel of Palestinian cabinet ministers, members of the
Legislative Council and other officials. At the same
time, we condemn the kidnapping and detention by
Palestinian militants of an Israeli soldier. We strongly
condemn the killings - including the extrajudicial
killings - and wounding of civilians as a result of
recent events. Further, we strongly condemn the
excessive and indiscriminate use of force by Israel
against the Palestinians and acts of violence and
terrorism carried out by Palestinian militants against
Israeli civilians.

In the light of the current situation in the region,
the Movement urges Israel in particular to exercise
maximum restraint and to ensure respect for its
obligations under the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949. The Movement further urges both
sides to take all necessary measures to stop the vicious
circle of violence, which has caused a great number of
casualties and a great amount of destruction to public
infrastructure and property.

The release by both sides of all recently
kidnapped and detained individuals is a crucial first
step to de-escalate the worsening situation in the
region. The kidnapping and counter-kidnapping of
officials must be checked lest it become a dangerous
trend in the future that would be difficult to deal with.

In that connection, the Non-Aligned Movement
urges the Security Council, bearing in mind its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, to immediately intervene by
demanding that both sides release all recently
kidnapped and detained individuals and by compelling
Israel to, inter alia, cease its campaign of aggression in
the Gaza Strip, abide by its obligations under
international law and immediately cease its military
attacks against Palestinian civilians and its destruction
of civilian property and infrastructure. The Council
should support and assist efforts by President
Mahmoud Abbas and the Palestinian Authority to
prevail upon groups in its territories to halt all rocket
attacks against Israel and attacks against Israeli
civilians. The Movement urges both sides to act in
conformity with international law and to refrain from
taking steps that could further escalate the violence and
aggravate the already tense situation in the region.

It is incumbent upon both Israel and Palestine, in
their own interest and with the assistance of the
international community, to create the conditions
necessary for a resumption of negotiations to seek a
just, durable and comprehensive final settlement. That
entails, in particular, denouncing violent measures and
acts of terrorism and revoking unilateral actions by
Israel that could further undermine peace and stability
in the region. In that context, the Movement is
confident that the Quartet will continue to intensify its
efforts to achieve the full and honest implementation of
the road map.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses the
necessity of upholding international law and the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to the
question of Palestine. The Movement further stresses
the permanent responsibility of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, with regard to the
question of Palestine until it is resolved in all its
aspects. The Council is in a position to prevail upon
Israel and Palestine to be fully committed to a just,
lasting and comprehensive final settlement. The
Council bears the primary responsibility for ensuring
that they move in that direction. As the Movement has
stated in the past, the Council must not be reluctant to
invoke its authority and power, especially on this
question, for the sake of establishing peace for the
Palestinians and the Israelis, for the sake of the people
in the region and to serve and meet the collective
interest and desire of our global family of nations.

