The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.

I would first like to convey my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and Mr. Krahenbtihl,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, for their briefings.
In January, I made a statement in this Chamber to
the Council on this very agenda item (see S/PV.8449).
Among other things, I underlined that the Palestinian
question defined the credibility of the Council.
Unfortunately, nothing has improved since then. If
anything, the situation has deteriorated. Earlier this
month we saw yet another wave of violence in Gaza
that resulted in at least 29 casualties on both sides. I
appreciate the roles that the Secretary-General and
Egypt have played in working to de-escalate the
situation. However, we are concerned about the fact
that the construction of illegal settlements in West Bank
persists and has become a de facto annexation. That is
why Indonesia and Kuwait, together with South Africa,
organized an Arria Formula meeting on this issue two
weeks ago. We have seen the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and the increasingly
limited resources and capacity for humanitarian
assistance. We urgently need to revive the political will
of all the parties to work towards a credible peace plan
and improve the humanitarian situation on the ground.
In that regard, there are a number of bottom-line points
that I want to raise.

The first is the protection of Palestinian civilians.
I would like to recall the report of the Independent
Commission of Inquiry issued in February
(A/HRC/40/74). The report details the use of extreme
violence by the occupying Power, including towards
journalists, medical personnel and persons with
disabilities. That is clearly against the basic principles
of human rights. It justifies our belief that we have
no option but to provide international protection for
Palestinian civilians.

Secondly, we need to address the humanitarian
conditions. Improving the economic and social situation
is crucial. Not only is this a matter of fundamental
rights, but it would also prevent needless violence.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is facing another
year of crisis. We commend the work of its staff, who
have been instrumental despite the Agency's difficult
security and financial situation. We also thank those
who have stepped up their contributions to support the
Agency's programmes. Rest assured that Indonesia is
fully committed to doing so.

Thirdly, the peace process must be resumed.
The cycle of violence must end. All sides must show
maximum restraint and be willing to engage in
meaningful dialogue. There is an urgent need for a
credible process that allows all the relevant parties
to engage on an equal footing to work towards an
acceptable peace plan. A fresh perspective should not
mean abandoning internationally agreed parameters on
the issue. For Indonesia, there is no alternative to a two-
State solution.

Finally, the world has seen enough evidence of how
protracted conflicts in the Middle East have serious
repercussions on peace and stability in many other parts
of the world. This is indeed an issue that has global
consequences. Therefore, the Security Council must
make real progress on this issue, particularly on the
Palestinian question - the oldest item on the Security
Council's agenda.

All parties must exercise maximum restraint and
continue working in good faith to advance the peace
process by upholding the principles of multilateralism
through dialogue and negotiation so that we can arrive
at our common goal - a genuine and lasting peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.

