Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I too would
like to express my condolences and those of my country
to the Ambassador of Ethiopia for the terrible human
suffering resulting from yesterday's plane crash, and to
echo my Indonesian colleague's words about our own
nationals who were among the United Nations personnel
killed. So many people died, including members of the
United Nations family, who gave their lives for what we
all stand for.

I would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto for his
briefing. We fully support him and his work. Today I
want to focus on the fate of the Afghan people. The
figures that Mr. Yamamoto gave are truly alarming,
especially with regard to the number of civilian deaths,
the situation of children who have died or been injured,
the ongoing recruitment of children and the overall
poverty level, which is nightmarish. As my Indonesian
colleague just said, this is another example where
climate change has an effect on wealth and on peace
and security. The suffering of the people should move
us to act collectively and responsibly so that this pain
can end. Germany continues to be very engaged. We
are the second largest donor of humanitarian aid and
contributor of troops. Our Foreign Minister, Heiko
Maas, is actually in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif, where
our German troops are stationed, as we speak, in proof
of Germany's commitment to the Afghan people.

In his briefing Mr. Yamamoto said that while 2018
was the deadliest year of the past two decades - in
other words, since the United Nations has been engaged
there - at the same time, 2019 will be a year of
unprecedented opportunities, and we must do
everything we can to take advantage of them. In that
regard, I would refer to the convincing briefing by
Afghanistan's National Security Adviser, Mr. Mohib,
on the country's reform process, particularly with
regard to good governance, the fight against corruption,
gender parity, improving the business environment
and the availability of business opportunities. In the
context of gender parity, I would also like to welcome
the appointment of our colleague Mrs. Adela Raz as
Afghanistan's first female ambassador. I have to admit
that in the entire time that Germany has been a State
Member of the United Nations, it has not progressed
that far, but I am sure it will one day. I should
emphasize, however, that while it is one thing to have
laws and a Constitution on paper, implementing them is
something else. The proof of the pudding in the eating,
and therefore with regard to what Mr. Mohib said about
the fight against corruption, it is imperative that more
progress be made. With regard to the elections, I can
only echo Mr. Yamamoto's words.

Turning to the peace talks, we would like to applaud
all the efforts undertaken. I would also like to mention
the talks in Doha. Once again, let me repeat what
Mr. Yamamoto said, which is that it is crucial to ensure
that the Taliban talks to the Afghan Government. Only
Afghans can make peace with one another, and it has to
be an inclusive process and an Afghan-led operation. In
that context, I would like to commend Ms. Tapesh for her
briefing. Women must be included in the peace process
in a meaningful way. I would be interested to know how
many women are actually sitting around the table in the
talks in Doha or Moscow. I would be surprised ifwe get
anywhere close to parity. As Ms. Tapesh said, women's
human rights must not be compromised in the effort to
get to a peace agreement. While this is not an aim in
itself, if women and civil society are not included in
peace talks, if women's rights are not covered, we are
already laying the ground for the next conflict, because
the marginalization of parts of civil society, including
women, becomes a driver of new conflict. It is very
important that the Constitution of Afghanistan, as set
up, remains in place, supporting equal rights for women
and young people, as well as freedom of the media and
civil society, and of religion, including for ulemas.

Lastly, Mr. Yamamoto mentioned the importance
of transitional justice. Accountability for crimes is key.
Again, that is not merely an end in itself, it is also a
warning that people who commit crimes will always
have to be looking over their shoulders, because one
dayjustice is going to catch up with them.

So, as my colleague from Indonesia said, we in the
Council have to do our job. We have an important role
to play in clearly communicating our expectations for
the peace process and the future of Afghanistan.

