Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me start on a
positive note, namely, that Russia and Mr. Nebenzia's
intervention today insisted that we should not populate
the issue of the language law with other topics. That
is positive because, from our perspective, the adoption
or the discussion of a language law does not really
constitute a threat to peace and security and does not
need to be discussed in the Security Council. I see
a very positive shift in the position of Russia, which
until now has always insisted that questions that are not
directly related to peace and security or to human rights
issues be discussed in Geneva. So we welcome that.

Regarding the law itself, we agree with what
Mr. Zannier said, namely, that a language law should
unite, not divide, a people. We welcome the signals that
have been sent out by the new Ukrainian President.

As Russia highlighted human rights issues, Germany
would like to do the same. We would like to recall today
the treatment of minorities in occupied Crimea. The
Crimean media and organizations are banned. There
is a recent Human Rights Watch report that Crimean
Tatars are targeted, arrested and prosecuted without any
evidence. We would appeal to the Russian authorities
that they respect the fundamental rights, the freedoms
of opinion, expression and association and the religion
of minorities. The backdrop, of course - what is going
on in Crimea - is the blatant violation of Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity through Russia's
illegal occupation of Crimea.
Talking about human rights, and Russia mentioned
this, what is being done to compensate the families
of the victims of Flight MH-l7 - 298 men, women
and children, who lost their lives after having been
shot down by Russian weapons. A gesture by Russia
tomorrow on the fifth anniversary of the shooting down
would be very welcome. As the Security Council, we
recently visited Colombia and we all witnessed the
so-called truth commission. Why not have a truth
commission and find out what happened there so that
the family members of the Victims learn the truth about
the shooting down of Flight MH-17? What about the
victims of the ongoing violation of the ceasefire? When
Russia talks about the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, the first and most important paragraph of
the Minsk agreements was a ceasefire. There continues
to be a violation of the Minsk agreements. We see
that the heavy weapons have not been withdrawn. I
would also like to mention the unacceptable attack on
a Ukrainian medical vehicle on 1 July, in which there
were three casualties.

With regard to human rights, there are 24 detained
Ukrainian servicemen. Such detention violates
international law. For Germany, respect for international
law and international court rulings is fundamental in
an international rules-based order. I could add elements
but refer to what my French, Belgian, United Kingdom
and Polish colleagues said. There is a new President
in Ukraine. The President clearly said that he wanted
to overcome the stalemate. He has made gestures, one
of which the German delegation has raised at each and
every discussion in the Security Council, that is, with
regard to the bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. Right away
the President unilaterally withdrew. He is ready to
rebuild the bridge. We need such a gesture from Russia
to echo Ukraine's gestures and to alleviate the situation
for the citizens because it is the only connection
between the occupied area around Luhansk and the rest
of Ukraine.

Germany remains committed to the Normandy
format. There was a good meeting of the advisers. We
hope that the new spirit that has been brought about
by the new President in Ukraine prevails and that we
will now see progress on the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

