Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
for his briefing on the situation in that country. We
were pleased to see the completion of the transition
period in Somalia and the implementation of a number
of important political tasks, including the designation
of a Prime Minister. All of that lays the foundation for
strengthening stability and gives important impetus to
the political, social and economic development of the
country.

Progress on the implementation of the Somalia
end-of-transition road map affords a certain optimism
with respect to the prospects for further normalizing
the situation in Somalia and reaffirms the aspirations of
its people to put an end to years of internecine warfare
and disintegration. To maintain the momentum of the
peace process, the new authorities need to mobilize
political will and domestic resources. They need to
immediately complete the formation of the executive
branch, determine priorities for the development of
the country in the post-transition period, including the
implementation of the outstanding tasks under the road
map, and begin to implement them without delay. The
close cooperation of the signatories of the road map
and the strengthening of the engagement between the
international community and the Somali authorities are
critical conditions for achieving success.

There continues to be the daunting task of subduing
Al-Shabaab, without which stabilization in Somalia
will not be possible. In that regard, we welcome the
military successes of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the National Security Forces,
which could be seen specifically when they pushed the
extremists out of Kismayo. However, opponents of the
stabilization still maintain considerable firepower and,
in seeking to retain their influence on the ground, are
regrouping their forces and shifting to terrorist tactics
and guerilla warfare. Considerable areas still need to
be cleared of extremists, who have dug in, including to
the north of Kismayo and south of Mogadishu. Even in
Kismayo itself, restoring order will require considerable
effort, above all from the Somalis themselves. There
is a similar situation in other liberated areas, and
stabilization in those areas must be one of the priorities
of the country's leadership.

In that connection, it is also important to promptly
disarm and reintegrate the Al-Shabaab members there.

While the security situation continues to be far from
calm in Somalia, the African Union's Mission in Somalia
continues to be one of the key levers for normalizing
the situation. The process of providing United Nations
support for AMISOM. must be sustained and must take
into account the progress in stabilizing the country
and gains in terms of quelling Al-Shabaab. At the
same time, prospects for the peaceful development of
the country also require further strengthening of the
Somali Security Forces, who will ultimately have to
assume full responsibility for internal security once
AMISOM. departs.

We are concerned about the persistent flow of
illegal weapons into Somalia and financial support
for Al-Shabaab. It is therefore necessary that Member
States, especially those in the region, strictly comply
with their obligations under the sanctions regime with
respect to Somalia. In that light, it must be borne in mind
that one of the channels of that activity is smuggling
and the far-flung business activities of extremists in
Somalia itself.

For the first time in recent years, there is evidence
of a downturn in piracy activity along the country's
coast. That is a result of the well-coordinated actions
of the international community to put an end to the
pirate threat. However, the problem remains acute. The
pirates are shifting their focus to areas beyond the safe
corridor and waiting out this period unfavourable to
them.

Taking hostages for ransom has created a new
source of criminal income, including for refinancing
piracy operations. There have been increasing reports
of contacts between the pirates and Al-Shabaab.
Given that, the Somali authorities have increased
responsibility to implement efforts to eradicate piracy
within the framework of their road map obligations.
Specifically, we anticipate immediate steps to adopt a
range of anti-piracy laws and remove other obstacles to
prosecuting pirates.

One of the key components of a comprehensive
anti-piracy strategy remains the fight against impunity.
That problem will only be resolved by establishing at the
regional level an effective mechanism for the criminal
prosecution of pirates, with international participation.

There is serious concern over the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. The problems due to the many
years of civil war have been compounded by natural
disasters, including recent flooding in the central part
of the country. For our part, we intend to continue
to actively participate in strengthened efforts by the
international community to provide comprehensive
assistance to Somalia, including humanitarian
assistance.

