Mrs. Nufiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
118 States members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Movement considers the convening of this
open debate a step in the right direction, almost
15 years since the last one held by the Security Council
on its working methods. We sincerely hope that this
will be the first step towards regular and
comprehensive consideration by the Council of this
important issue, duly taking into account the views of
non-member States.

The Movement reiterates that the reform of the
Council should not be confined only to the question of
the equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council, but that it should
also address substantive issues relating to the Council's
agenda, working methods and decision-making
processes.

The note by the President of the Security Council
contained in document S/2006/507 describes some
measures aimed at enhancing the efficiency and
transparency of the Council's work and at promoting
interaction and dialogue with States not members of
this organ.

NAM. considers that some improvements have
been made in the working methods of the Council,
including in the implementation of some of the
measures described in the aforementioned note.
However, those are clearly not enough, leaving much
room for improvement.

Transparency, openness and consistency are key
elements that the Security Council should observe in
all its activities, approaches and procedures.
Regrettably, the Council has neglected those important
factors on numerous occasions.
Such instances include unscheduled open debates
with selective notification, reluctance in convening
open debates on some issues of high significance,
frequent restrictions on the participation in some of the
debates and discrimination between members and non-
members of the Council, particularly with regard to
sequencing and time limits of statements during the
open debates, failure to submit special reports to the
General Assembly, as required under Article 24 of the
Charter, the submission of annual reports still lacking
sufficient information and analytical content, and lack
of minimal parameters for the drawing up of the
monthly assessment by the Security Council
presidencies.

The Council must comply with the provisions of
Article 31 of the Charter, which allow any non-Council
member to participate in discussions on matters
affecting it. Rule 48 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council should be thoroughly
observed. Closed meetings and informal consultations
should be kept to a minimum and as the exception they
were meant to be.

The Movement also reiterates the need to reform
and democratize the decision-making processes of the
Council, including limiting and curtailing the use of
the veto, with a view to its eventual elimination.

NAM. requests the Security Council to take the
following immediate actions to improve its working
methods, many of which have so far not been
considered by the Council and are not included in
presidential note in document S/2006/507. It is
necessary to increase the number of public meetings, in
accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter, and
to ensure that those meetings provide real opportunities
to take into account the views and contributions of all
the Member States of the United Nations, particularly
the interests of non-Council members whose issues are
under discussion in the Council; to allow briefings by
the Special Envoys or Representatives of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Secretariat to take
place in public meetings, unless in exceptional
circumstances; and to enhance further its relationship
with the United Nations Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), including through
sustained, regular and timely interaction. Meetings
with TCCs should be held not only to draw up
mandates, but also in their implementation when
considering a change in, renewal of or termination of a
mission mandate, or when there is a rapid deterioration
of the situation on the ground. In that context, the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations should involve TCCs more frequently and
intensively in its deliberations, especially in the very
early stages of mission planning.

It is also essential to uphold the primacy of and
respect for the Charter of the United Nations in
connection with the Council's functions and powers.
NAM. stresses once again that the decision by the

Security Council to initiate formal or informal
discussions on the situation in any Member State of the
United Nations or any issue that does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security is contrary to
Article 24 of the Charter.

It is necessary to establish the Council's
subsidiary organs in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the United Nations Charter. Those organs
should function in a manner that would provide
adequate and timely information on their activities to
the general United Nations membership. In that
context, countries that are not members of the Council
should be given access to its subsidiary organs,
including the right to participate, as appropriate. Resort
to Chapter VII of the Charter as a mechanism to
address issues that do not necessarily pose a threat to
international peace and security should be avoided. The
provisions of other relevant Chapters, where
appropriate, including Chapters VI and VIII, should be
invoked before invoking Chapter VII, which should be
a measure of last resort, if necessary.

It is also essential to submit a more
comprehensive and analytical annual report to the
General Assembly, assessing the work of the Council,
including cases in which the Council has failed to act,
as well as the Views expressed by its members during
the consideration of the agenda items under its
consideration. Pursuant to Articles 15 (l) and 24 (3) of
the Charter of the United Nations, the Council should
submit special reports for the consideration of the
General Assembly and ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive, analytical and issued
in a timely fashion. The Council should also take into
account fully the recommendations of the General
Assembly on matters relating to international peace
and security, consistent with Article 11 (2) of the
Charter. The Council must involve more closely States
concerned in discussions on matters affecting them, in
accordance with article 31 of the Charter and ensure
that the views of Member States, obtained through
public debates on cross-cutting thematic issues, are
reflected in relevant resolutions and presidential
statements adopted thereafter, instead of the current
practice of adopting resolutions and presidential
statements without reference to such discussions.
Finally, the Council should formalize the rules of
procedure of the Council, which have remained
provisional for more than 60 years, in order to improve
the Council's transparency and accountability.

NAM. reiterates its concern over the increasing

and continuing encroachment by the Council on issues

that clearly fall within the functions and powers of

other main bodies of the United Nations and their

subsidiary bodies. The Security Council must fully

observe all the provisions of the Charter, as well as all

General Assembly resolutions, that clarify its

relationship with the latter organ and other principal
organs.

Close cooperation and coordination among all
principal organs are indispensable in order to enable
the United Nations to remain relevant and capable of
meeting the existing, new and emerging threats and
challenges. In that context, NAM. reiterates its call on
the Presidents of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to
meet periodically to discuss and to coordinate among
themselves regarding the issues on their agendas and
the programmes of work of the respective principal
organs they represent, in order to establish increased
coherence and complementarity among those organs in
a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of each
others' mandates, and with a view to generating a
mutual understanding among them.

