Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by congratulating
the delegation of the United States, led by Ambassador
DiCarIo, for their leadership of the Security Council
this month. I also want to thank the United States
and especially Secretary of State John Kerry for their
leadership and dedication to the peace process and for
their efforts to resume the peace talks.
Israel is committed to peace and welcomes the
opportunity to resume direct negotiations. Israel
faces many strategic challenges, but it is nonetheless
willing to take risks to bring about an end to the
conflict. Abraham Lincoln said, "You cannot escape
the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today". In
2013, one simply cannot say that one did not see, one
did not hear, or one did not know.

As we speak, the Middle East is in flames. Millions
of people have taken to the streets demanding better
lives, better economies and greater opportunities. The
facade of the so-called Arab Spring has fallen away.
In its place, there remains the bloodshed, repression,
chaos and instability that have long defined the region.
The Council must not be divided in denouncing those
nations, groups and individuals that distance us from
peace by amassing dangerous weapons, using terror to
further their ideology, or murdering innocent people.
The world is watching and waiting to see what the
Council will do. The decisions - or, as is sometimes
the case, indecisions - made in this Chamber will
shape the world that we pass on to our children and
grandchildren. The Council's responsibility is here and
now.

I want to take this opportunity to thank the Council
for extending the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another six months.
The United Nations troops deployed in the region have
faced daunting challenges. I also want to thank the

Secretary-General, Mr. Ladsous and the States that
have stepped forward to maintain the United Nations'
strategic presence.

The stories that have emerged from Syria have
shocked the world. At this very moment, men, women
and children are being tortured and murdered by the
brutal Al-Assad regime. Under that regime, iron-fisted
repression has been the rule of thumb for the Syrian
people. It is time to hold BasharAl-Al-Assad accountable
for his crimes. One hundred thousand people have been
slaughtered, and there is no end in sight.

The violence that has shaken Syria is sending
shock waves through our region. For two years, Israelis
have lived with a war that threatens to spill over into
their backyards. Mortar shells are raining down on our
communities, and Syrian tanks and armoured vehicles
have violated the buffer zone, in defiance of the 1974
Separation of Forces Agreement.

Israel has shown maximum restraint and has no
intention of interfering in the Syrian conflict, but we
will not allow our citizens to be the ongoing victims
of attacks. If provocations by the Syrian Government
continue, Israel will have no choice but to respond
accordingly.

The situation on Israel's northern border is
precarious. I have said it before, and I will say it again:
Al-Assad has chemical weapons, and he has proven
that he is willing to do anything to cling to power. The
situation is made all the more dangerous by the fact that
Al-Assad has received advanced weapons systems that
Israel simply cannot allow. We cannot allow weapons
of that nature to fall into the hands of terrorist groups
like Hizbullah.

Al-Assad's accomplice, Hizbullah leader Hassan
Nasrallah, has also literally been getting away with
murder in the Middle East. For years we have heard
members of the international community, including
members of this Council, argue that Hizbullah is a
stabilizing force in Lebanon. They have insisted that
Hizbullah is a political party representing the best
interests of the Lebanese people. And they accepted
the fact that Hizbullah has its own private army and is
using it to hold Lebanon hostage.

I suppose those same countries believe that
Nasrallah was simply thinking of the best interests of
the Lebanese people when he sent this army to kill his
Arab brothers and sisters in Syria. And I suppose that
the so-called stability that some States speak about
can be seen from the car bombs and rockets that are
exploding in the centre of Beirut. Nasrallah has been
clear about his intentions. Last month he said, "We will
bear any sacrifices and all the consequences" to keep
Al-Assad in power. These are the deliberate words of a
terrorist willing to drag Lebanon into the Sunni-Shiite
divide and the broader region into war.

Despite all that, some States continue to argue
that there is a difference between Hizbullah's political
and military wings. This is like trying to distinguish
between your right hand and your left hand. Surprise,
surprise - no matter how you look at it, they are both
attached to the same body.

Yesterday, the European Union (EU) agreed to label
the military wing of Hizbullah a terrorist organization.
The EU's decision is a welcome and important first step
in shutting down the European channels that Hizbullah
uses to launder money and fund its campaign of terror.
For decades, Hizbullah has murdered countless innocent
people from Africa to South America and from Asia to
Europe. At long last, having realized how dangerous
Hizbullah is and what it is capable of, the EU showed
up late to the party to condemn the "Party of God".
It was only after Hizbullah was found guilty of
murdering Europeans in Bulgaria and attempting to
do the same in Cyprus that the EU agreed to consider
branding the military wing a terror organization. That
semi-designation allows the EU to semi join the ranks
of countries like the United States, Canada, Australia
and the Netherlands, which long ago branded all of
Hizbullah a terrorist group.

Hizbullah is a terrorist industry working around
the clock to expand into new markets. It has a business
development arm devoted to money-laundering and
fundraising. There is a human resources division that
recruits new members. There is a marketing arm that
uses the Internet to spread fundamental beliefs. And of
course, there is an operations division that carries out
its bloody campaigns.

The organization is as sophisticated as it is
interconnected. Any attempt to distinguish between
Hizbullah's military wing and political wing, while
politically convenient, is entirely impractical. The
political wing raises the money to fund the military
wing's terror activities. Not even the great Houdini
could pull off the illusion that there is a difference
between those two groups.

Europe took a significant step in the right direction,
but it must go one step further and demonstrate its
unequivocal condemnation of terror. In doing so, it
will prevent more innocent people from dying, it will
bring justice to the victims of terror, and it will put a
murderous group completely out of business.

There are brave decisions that need to be made
but, as the saying goes, timing is everything. While the
United States has been working to bring the parties back
to the negotiation table, the EU prefers to table harmful
and divisive measures. Instead of setting a course
towards peace, the EU is steering the Palestinians in
the wrong direction. Direct negotiations and only direct
negotiations are the only way forward.

For years, the naysayers have said that the sanctions
imposed on Iran would have no effect. They said that
the sanctions were counterproductive and that they
would do nothing but foster anti-Western sentiment.
Surprise, surprise - after years of crippling sanctions,
when the people of Iran went to the polls last month
they wanted change. From the marketplaces of Tehran
to the mosques of Qom, millions of people demanded
the chance to have a better life.

Many in the international community had hoped
that the elections would bring about a new leader who
would draw Iran back from the brink of self-ruin. Yet,
for all the wishful thinking, the facts on the ground
tell a different story. Ayatollah Khamenei pre-screened
every presidential candidate and removed anyone that
he considered too anti-establishment, too free-thinking,
or too female. Mr. Rowhani may have been given a
starring role in the charade of Iranian democracy, but
Khamenei has remained its choreographer, director and
executive producer.

The international community must judge Rowhani
not by his words, but by his actions. And the reality on
the ground is that Rowhani plans to put thousands of
boots on the ground in Syria. And, I suppose, if one
considers that those troops may kill only a moderate
amount of people, then Rowhani could be considered
a moderate leader. If Rowhani has not changed Iran's
policy towards Syria, why would we delude ourselves
into thinking that he would change his policy on
Iran's nuclear weapons programme? Even with a
new conductor, Iran's nuclear weapons programme
continues to advance at the speed of an express train.
In contrast, the international community's efforts are
moving at the pace of a local train, pausing at every
stop for some nations to get off and some nations to
get on.

Iran's nuclear programme remains the single
greatest threat not just to the Middle East, but to
the entire world. The Council and every member of
the international community must take action. The
sanctions are working, but they are not enough. The
Council must increase pressure on Iran until it stops
all enrichment, removes all enriched material, closes
its illegal nuclear facility in Qom, and ends its support
for terrorism.

The Middle East debates, are opened each month,
as today's was, with a detailed report of all of Israel's
alleged infractions. Without fail, there are two distinct
features to these accounts - they are very long and
they are mostly wrong. Month after month, the reports
provide every nuance and every detail about every
balcony in Judea and Samaria. It is no coincidence
that they fail to address the thousands of attacks by
Palestinians on Israeli men, women and children.
Apparently, Israeli security concerns are of little
concern to some in this Chamber.

The report that we have heard this morning is
one-sided and short-sighted. Listening to some of
these reports, one would get the impression that the
Palestinians arrested by the Israel Defense Forces are
saints. Let me be clear. They are not Mamma Theresa.
The Israel security forces are critical to ensuring
security and stability in the region.
With respect to the rule oflaw that my colleaguejust
mentioned, the only thing that the Palestinians should
be commended on are their innovations in architecture.
They seem to have a patent on the world's first prison
with a revolving door. By divine intervention, everyone
they have arrested has escaped miraculously the next
day.

Why has the Council not heard that Palestinian
terror attacks doubled between 2011 and 2012? Why
has it not heard about the 34 attempted abductions
that were prevented by Israeli security forces in just
the first six months of the year 2013? We can imagine
the consequences if even one of the kidnappings had
been successful. Let me provide another number that
the Council has yet to hear in the Chamber: 2,736. Last
year, there were 2,736 attacks on Israelis, including
shootings, rockets, improvised explosive devices and
Molotov cocktails.

It does not take the investigative skills of Sherlock
Holmes to realize that those numbers are freely available
and easily accessible to anyone willing to look for them.
One would think that an open debate on the Middle East
would include sources that are open to the public. After
all, it is elementary; facts are stubborn things. But the
only thing more stubborn than the facts is the insistence
on presenting unbalanced reports every month. Instead
of receiving reports that cloud the situation, it is time
for the Council to hear reports that clarify the situation.
True friends of the Palestinians should remind them
that a Palestinian State will be built only through direct
negotiations and hard work.

Israel is committed to the peace process and looks
forward to resuming direct negotiations with the
Palestinian Authority. Our vision is of two States for
two peoples - one Arab and one Jewish - living side
by side in peace and security. Israel has made peace
with Egypt and we have made peace with Jordan.
Those treaties are evidence that, with honest effort
and committed leadership, peace is possible. But peace
requires leaders who will reject terror and embrace
partnership; leaders who oppose incitement and
promote tolerance; leaders who will raise their people
up, rather than tear Israel down.

As we speak, an earthquake is shaking the Middle
East to its core. It is rattling the political structures
and institutions that have held the region stagnant for
decades. The aftershocks of that earthquake are being
felt throughout the world. The tremors of truth have
penetrated this Chamber. Winston Churchill said,
"Men occasionally stumble over the truth, but most of
them pick themselves up and hurry off as if nothing had
happened."

We have seen the photographs, we have seen the
stories, and we have heard the millions of people who
are crying out for freedom, for opportunity and for the
chance to build a better life. It is the responsibility of
every member of the Council, of every nation and of
every leader to advance the cause of peace. There will
always be a reason to wait or to delay, but the time to
act is now. It is time to condemn terror, to denounce
tyranny, and to stand up for the millions of people
whose lives hang in the balance.

