The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs and European Affairs of Luxembourg.

I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing. I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Prime Minister
of Ukraine, to the Council and thank him for his
statement. His speech was very moving.

The situation in Ukraine is serious, in particular
in Crimea. We cannot remain indifferent given the
crisis the country is undergoing. Despite increasing
tensions, we would like to believe that there is still
time to avoid the worst - the annexation of Crimea
by force. We hope that this public meeting of the
Security Council - the body that, under the Charter
of the United Nations, has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and international
security - will help to strengthen the efforts of the
entire international community in favour of a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in your country.

Luxembourg is deeply concerned by the crisis.
During my trip to Kyiv on Monday as part of a working
visit with my colleagues, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium and the Netherlands, I came to a
personal realization of the courage and resilience the
Ukrainian people have shown over recent weeks. I
also had the opportunity to observe the restraint and
composure of Ukraine at a time when it is being faced
with the violation of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity in Crimea.

The decision taken on 1 March by the Council ofthe
Russian Federation to authorize the use of the Russian
armed forces on the territory okaraine and the actions
taken on the ground over the past two weeks constitute
flagrant violations of international law, especially the
Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act. They go against the commitments to Ukraine
undertaken by Russia under the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994 and under the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership between Russia and Ukraine, signed in
1997.

The main reason given by Russia for to justify
its actions, that is to say threats against the rights of
Russian speakers and Russian communities in Crimea,
has been proved to be baseless, as noted recently the
High Commissioner on National Minorities of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE). We regret that it was not possible for the
Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations for
Human Rights to visit Crimea to corroborate that claim
of the OSCE.

The holding on 16 March of a referendum on the
status of Crimea is in both form and substance in
violation of the Constitution of Ukraine. We call on
Russia to cease all actions of support to that referendum.
The great and powerful Russian Federation has no need
to either encourage or to take advantage of this Charade
of a referendum, whose ballot papers do not even offer
the option of voting against. If the referendum is held
anyway, the international community will in no way
recognize its outcome.

We are no longer in the era of Yalta or the time
of divvying up the European continent. It must be
possible to find a peaceful way out of this crisis that
takes the interests of all parties concerned - including,
of course, those of Russia - into account. The
destabilization of Ukraine serves the interests of no one
in the long term. We recognize Russia's historical ties
with Ukraine, including in the economic and cultural
areas. We welcome the spirit of openness of the Prime
Minister of Ukraine and his readiness to engage in
negotiations - yet further reason for Russia to take
the outstretched hand of Ukraine to establish a direct
dialogue to defuse the crisis.

A lasting political solution to the Ukrainian
crisis will also require inclusive political dialogue
within Ukraine itself. Such dialogue must include
all democratic political forces and all regions. It
must reflect the diversity of Ukrainian society, the
aspirations of all Ukrainians and the need to respect
the rights of all Ukrainians. We support the efforts
of the Government and the Parliament of Ukraine to
promote such dialogue, which could, in our View, lead
inter alia to a strengthening of the federal character
of the Ukrainian State. But it is up to the Ukrainians
alone to decide their destiny. Ukraine belongs only to
Ukrainians.

As I said at the outset, I want to believe that
it is still possible to avoid the worst and that there
is still time to find a peaceful solution in keeping
with the principles of our Organization and with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. Luxembourg encourages the continuation of
intensive diplomatic efforts to establish a multilateral
mechanism - a contact group bringing together key
stakeholders, including Russia. The mechanism should
allow us to initiate a military de-escalation, starting
with a withdrawal of Russian forces to their places
of permanent deployment. It should also permit the
launching of direct dialogue between the Russian and
Ukrainian authorities.

I welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Secretary-General, and encourage them
to pursue their mission of good offices. Luxembourg
supports the efforts of the OSCE, in close cooperation
with the United Nations and other international actors,
to deploy a special observer mission, above all in
Crimea and other regions of Ukraine, in agreement with
the host country. Such a mission would assess the facts
and respect for human rights, and promote dialogue on
the ground in order to ease tensions and normalize the
situation.

In conclusion, let me reiterate once again our call
on all parties concerned, in particular Russia, to give
priority to dialogue over violence and international
law over the law of the strongest. The time has come
to step up up diplomatic efforts to reach a solution to
the Ukrainian crisis that respects Ukraine's political
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity in the interests of peace, stability and
prosperity in Europe.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

