Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. Let
me also take this opportunity to commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for her work and we reiterate our strong
support for her mandate. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous, UNICEF's Ms.Yoka
Brandt and UNESCO Special Envoy Forest Whitaker
for their commitment, which, in our view, is crucial to
efforts to advance our cause.

Italy associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to deliver some remarks in its national capacity.

As a constant advocate of greater Security Council
action to address the scourge of children in armed
conflicts, Italy welcomes the progress made in recent
years towards strengthening the protection framework.
That trend is confirmed by resolution 2143 (2014), of
which Italy was a sponsor.

Italy also concurs with the Secretary-General's
assessments in his annual report (S/2014/339) regarding
the increase in deliberate attacks on schools, teachers
and students. Of the 23 conflicts profiled in the report,
17 involved targeted attacks on schools, students and/or
teachers, and even hospitals.

In too many parts of the world, violations against
children, including sexual violence, are carried out with
impunity, perpetuating what the Secretary-General's
report calls "the disproportionate effect armed conflicts
have on children".

Cooperation with national and international courts
is crucial. In cases involving serious crimes ofconcern,
when national judicial systems are unable or unwilling
to intervene, let us remind everyone that States parties
to the Rome Statute should consider referring such
cases to the International Criminal Court.

The commitment of the entire United Nations
system is critical to ensuring the implementation of
the architecture created since resolution 1621 (2005).
We therefore commend once again the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in cooperation
with the Office ofthe Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and non-governmental
organizations, to develop a comprehensive and
systematic training programme on child protection and
children's rights for all peacekeeping personnel. That
is an initiative that Italy has strongly supported since
its inception. Italy also hosts the Centre of Excellence
for Stability Police Units based in Vicenza as part of
its technical cooperation with any willing country and

party.

We have a solid protection framework to implement
and a decisive Children, Not Soldiers campaign to
support and consolidate. Any boy or girl whom we
save from the scourge of war represents hope for a
better future. As many speakers before me have said,
we need to maintain the pressure on the part of the
international community, but at the same time we
should acknowledge the progress made and commend
Governments that engage strongly, as in the case of
Chad, Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan, Afghanistan,
Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We hope that the trend will continue and that the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict
will soon be ratified by all countries. That will show
our strong determination to join forces to implement
all its provisions for the sake of each and every child
in the world.

