Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): 1 should like at the outset to thank the briefers for the information that they have shared with us. The Dominican Republic welcomes the progress made in preparations for the general elections scheduled for 27 December, and we hope that the tensions and mistrust regarding the electoral calendar can be overcome. Also, despite the fact that approval of several draft laws by the National Assembly, in particular the revised electoral code, represent a positive sign, we regret that the draft did not include provisions that would have allowed refugees from the Central African Republic in neighbouring countries to vote. We also believe that the inclusion of young people, women and refugees represents the basis for consolidating democracy in the Central African Republic. The upcoming elections represent a major opportunity to build peace, and that is why it is important to redouble efforts to create an environment conducive to the holding of peaceful, transparent, just and inclusive elections. We welcome the initiatives of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Development Programme and UN-Women to encourage the participation of women as both voters and candidates in the electoral process. We should like also to see young people be given opportunities for necessary representation in order for them to actively and equitable participate in the process. On the other hand, we deplore the fact that in spite of the efforts undertaken to improve strategic communication, disinformation campaigns in the media aimed at MINUSCA have continued. As we have stated on previous occasions, in order to consolidate peace in the country, it is important to continue monitoring and complying with the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. On this point, we commend the efforts of Special Representative Ndiaye, along with national stakeholders and international partners, to promote a constructive and inclusive political dialogue in order to preserve the agreement. We also commend the enactment of the four laws adopted by the National Assembly, in line with the commitments made by the Government in the framework of the Political Agreement, as well as the promulgation of the two-part decentralization law, which establishes the legal framework for the local elections scheduled for the end of 2021. We should like to express our concern at the security situation in the Central African Republic, where signatory armed groups continued to perpetrate acts of violence against civilians, humanitarian workers and peacekeeping personnel. Those responsible for such acts must be brought to justice, and civilians must be protected. The humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic is also a source of considerable concern. Currently more than half of the population requires humanitarian assistance, and humanitarian activities continue to be inadequately funded. It is necessary to support the Government of the Central African Republic by contributing to the humanitarian response plan in order to help the most vulnerable. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) _ has exacerbated the vulnerabilities caused by the existing crisis in the country. In that respect, I encourage donor countries to increase their official development assistance and support for financial and innovative debt-relief programmes for the countries most affected by the pandemic and its devastating consequences. Likewise, we should like to make an appeal so that a vaccine and other health technologies needed to tackle COVID-19 are made available in an equitable manner and that their global distribution is ensured. To that end, the role of the World Health Organization, donor countries and the private sector is vital and should be based on the principles of cooperation, solidarity and justice. To conclude, we should like to acknowledge the work done by MINUSCA, the international community and the guarantors of the peace and reconciliation agreement for their efforts in seeking a lasting and sustainable peace in the Central African Republic.
