Ms. Zainul Abidin (Malaysia): Let me first
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your delegation's
presidency of the Council. I align my delegation with
the statements by Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and by Kazakhstan, on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Here at the United Nations, we are used to
experiencing and marking milestones. The creation of
the United Nations itself marked the end of World War
II and the beginning of global peace - the first of its
many milestones. But some of those historic events are
sad marks in our civilization. Last month, we marked
another such occasion: the longest foreign military
occupation - for June 2011 marked the forty-fourth
year of occupation of the Palestinian territories by
Israel.

Forty-four years is a long time to languish under
the thumb of another, especially in this day and age.
Chunks of land that were once Palestine have now been
appropriated and their inhabitants squeezed out. The
construction and expansion of settlements and the
separation wall, the demolition of Palestinians" homes
and infrastructure, and the revocation of Palestinian
residency rights in East Jerusalem are all part of
Israel's illegitimate policies and practices designed to
supplant inhabitants and erase history. These actions
are not only illegal but also render the two-State
solution more elusive than ever.

Last month also marked the fourth year of the
inhumane blockade of Gaza by Israel. The living
conditions facing 1.6 million Gaza inhabitants continue
to be a matter of concern. Dependent on international
aid, Gaza residents are robbed by the blockade of their
right to live in dignity. On 31 May 2010, we also saw
nine deaths added to the more than 1,400 people who
were killed as a result of Israeli military aggression
since the end of 2008. Those nine were the
humanitarian activists killed in international waters,
messengers of relief efforts to alleviate the plight of the
people of Gaza. In this regard, we urge Israel to fully
implement resolution 1860 (2009) and to lift
completely the illegal blockade, which is a form of
collective punishment forbidden by international law.

It is now more than imperative that a just solution
be found on this issue. The parties concerned must step
up to their mark as honest parties to this peace process,
lest we continue to remain in the untenable state we are
in. On this note, the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine, on the basis of pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel in peace and security, in accordance with
the established parameters as defined by resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003),
1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of reference, including
the land-for-peace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map, is extremely crucial in addressing
the Palestinian question, which has been the crux of the
Arab-Israeli conflict for more than 60 years.

The Security Council is duty-bound, under its
mandate, to do whatever is necessary to ensure the
implementation of its own resolutions. We need to
ensure that all parties resume peace negotiations.
Anything less would make a mockery of the very
Organization we seek to uphold.

