The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, and
emphasizes the importance of the stability and
security of Iraq for its people, the region and the
international community.

"The Security Council commends the
important efforts made by the Government of Iraq
to strengthen democracy and the rule of law, to
improve security and public order and combat
terrorism and sectarian violence across the
country, and reiterates its support to the people
and the Government of Iraq in their efforts to
build a secure, stable, united and democratic
country, based on the rule of law and respect for
human rights.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission

for Iraq (UNAMI) in advising, supporting and
assisting the Iraqi people and Government to
strengthen democratic institutions, advance
inclusive political dialogue and national
reconciliation, facilitate regional dialogue, aid
vulnerable groups, strengthen gender equality,
promote the protection of human rights, including
through the work of the Independent High
Commission for Human Rights, and promote
judicial and legal reform.

"The Security Council encourages
UNAMI's continued work, in coordination with
the Government of Iraq, to help create conditions
conducive to voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of Iraqi refugees and internally
displaced persons, and welcomes further attention
to this issue by all concerned.

"The Security Council underscores UNAMI's
important role in supporting the Iraqi people and
Government to promote dialogue, ease tension, and
develop a just and fair solution for the nation's
disputed internal boundaries, and calls upon all the
relevant parties to participate in an inclusive
dialogue to this end.

"The Security Council emphasizes
UNAMI's efforts to assist the Iraqi Government
and the Independent High Electoral Commission
in the development of processes for holding
elections. The Security Council strongly endorses
UNAMI's continued assistance to the Iraqi people
and Government in preparation for the upcoming
elections.

"The Security Council congratulates departing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura on his strong leadership of
UNAMI, and expresses deep gratitude to all the
United Nations staff in Iraq for their courageous and
tireless efforts."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/ 17.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
