Ms. Meitzad (Israel): It was unfortunate to
hear today certain States making statements that are
completely detached from reality. Instead of calming
tensions, some abuse this platform to fuel the flames by
making inflammatory and false accusations.

Let me be clear. Israel is committed to upholding
the status quo concerning the Temple Mount. Israel
safeguards the freedom of religion and the right to
worship of Muslims, Christians and Jews, as well as
members of all other religions, at the historical sites.

Allow me to refer to some of the false accusations
that were made here today by certain Member States.

I was surprised to hear the representative of
Lebanon refer to her country as a beacon of democracy
and a champion of human rights. To the representative
of a Government in which a designated terrorist
organization, Hizbullah, holds several positions and
is considered a legitimate political party, I would
suggest a reality check. This is the same Hizbullah
that has been known to commit unspeakable atrocities
in Syria and is notorious for its destabilizing terrorist
activities throughout the Middle East. As for Lebanon
taking the floor to speak about human rights, I
would suggest reading the latest report on torture in
Lebanon by Lebanese authorities of Syrian nationals in
Lebanese custody.

The Iranian representative must have no shame to
be able to sit here today and speak in this Chamber as his
country continues to promote terrorism and destabilize
the Middle East. This is the representative of a regime
that is arming terrorist organizations across the region
and bolstering the murderous Al-Assad regime in Syria.
Iran does all this in violation of numerous Security
Council resolutions.

Iran is continuing to develop an offensive ballistic-
missile programme in direct violation ofresolution 2231
(2015), and, as stated in the report of the Secretary-
General on that resolution (S/2017/515), Iran continues
to export illicit weapons to various terrorist groups and
conflict zones.

Iran even went as far as to launch a ballistic missile
at a very specific and intentional target, the Star of
David. This is a direct and unacceptable threat by one
Member State against another.

When it comes to the credibility of the Syrian
representative who spoke here earlier today, I am
certain that I do not need to remind any representative
now sitting in this Chamber that this is the same
representative who keeps on saying and continues
to claim that his Government is not using chemical
weapons against its own people, this despite all the
concrete evidence to the contrary.

