Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Millions of people around the world are impacted directly or indirectly by the diversion of arms and illicit arms transfers. While small arms and light weapons have a legitimate role in ensuring defence and security, their diversion and misuse cost hundreds of thousands of lives every year, undermine security and sustainable development, and fuel conflict, crime and terrorism.The United Nations has an important role to play in supporting efforts to address illicit flows of small arms. There is no one-size-fits-all solution and, to achieve real progress in that area, it is crucial that we bring on board all stakeholders, including the full and active participation of women in the disarmament community. As the High Representative stated this morning, the United Nations is carrying out considerable work to tackle the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons. I would like to take this opportunity to commend the work of Office for Disarmament Affairs and join the High Representative in underlining the importance of the role of peacekeeping missions and special political missions in this area, in line with their mandates. In its work, the United Nations must take into account existing guidance. For example, the Modular Small-arms-control Implementation Compendium and the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines provide international best practice in physical security and stockpile management, and should be consulted consistently in United Nations field work. International cooperation in this area is vital. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the [licit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is a key forum for international action and policy coordination. We look forward to productive discussions at the seventh Biennial Meeting of States on the Programme of Action, to be held later this year. The United Kingdom is also proud to participate this year in the Group of Governmental Experts on problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus. We hope that the Group will achieve tangible results in addressing a long-neglected problem in conventional arms control. There is also important work to be done elsewhere. We reiterate our full support for the Arms Trade Treaty, a key multilateral tool for addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons through its object and purpose - to create a well-regulated legal trade in conventional arms. The universalization of the Treaty, coupled with the full implementation of its robust provisions, remains a priority for the United Kingdom. We continue to encourage all States that have not yet done so to make ratification and accession a national priority. We welcome the language of the Secretary- General's latest report (S/2019/1011) on arms embargoes, which are a crucial tool for tackling the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons to many of the conflicts on the Council's agenda. I would like to take this opportunity to underline the importance of respect for, and the implementation of, the arms embargoes that the Council has agreed. We welcome the emphasis in the Secretary-General's report on the need for flexibility and agree that arms embargoes should respond to changing contexts. However, the United Kingdom is concerned that arms embargoes are often lifted for political reasons without sufficient consideration being given to the efficient management of small arms and light weapons and associated ammunition and the harm caused by their mismanagement. The challenge of illicit small arms and light weapons is a global one that requires international cooperation on action, but we must also recognize that different regions face different challenges. The United Kingdom has been a consistent supporter of regional approaches in this area. The Western Balkans road map, which is currently being implemented, is an excellent plan of action for that region and has highlighted transferable lessons to be taken forward. The United Kingdom would also like to take this opportunity to commend the African Union's goal of silencing the guns by 2020. It is vital that we seek to translate that initiative into initiatives that will make a direct difference to the lives of ordinary people across Africa. Public buy-in and ownership of security sector reforms and policy will be crucial to that objective. In addition, success in silencing the guns will require strong and effective partnerships to maximize results, effective preventive diplomacy and _ mediation, strengthening the role of women and young people in conflict resolution and prevention and genuine and lasting security sector reform, on which the United Kingdom, in partnership with the African Union, has a renewed focus. The United Kingdom remains committed to supporting African efforts in that regard through cooperation on initiatives for disarmament, surplus destruction, the regulation of arms transfers, weapons marking, stockpile management and cooperation on law enforcement across the continents. That is a key strand of work for the British Army's Peace Support Team based in Nairobi. Through it, we provide technical advice and training on this issue to the African Union Commission, the African Union Mission in Somalia and its troop-contributing countries.The United Kingdom continues to prioritize support to work on small arms and has provided technical and financial support bilaterally and through regional and multilateral organizations. Through that support, we help countries to strengthen arms control frameworks through national legislation, to implement better stockpile management procedures and to tackle the grave challenges recognized in the Secretary-General's report, the drivers of terrorism, crime, poverty and exclusion, which fuel the demand for illicit weapons.
