My delegation would like to pay tribute to the tireless efforts of the co-penholders, as well as other members of the Security Council, to reach today's agreement. The extension of the cross-border humanitarian assistance mechanism in Syria is crucial for the ongoing, life-saving humanitarian response in that country. Viet Nam consistently advocates for the continuation of humanitarian assistance and, to that end, voted in favour of draft resolutions that would help renew the mechanism's mandate, including resolution 2533 (2020). The deteriorating humanitarian situation, coupled with the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and severe economic hardship, has been putting millions of people's lives at risk and making our task of tending to their needs more and more critical. We therefore call on the international community, including the Security Council, to continue to improve humanitarian support for Syria based on the needs of the people on the ground. It is also important to maintain and promote unity on this humanitarian matter. We urge the Syrian Government, which bears the primary responsibility for settling humanitarian issues in the country, to enhance its cooperation with all relevant parties, including the United Nations, in order to foster a humanitarian response in Syria, including through cross-line operations. It is also pivotal to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained access for the delivery of humanitarian relief to the most vulnerable populations in all parts of Syria. Humanitarian assistance may be the necessary condition for ending the suffering of Syrian people, but it still falls short. My delegation would like to reiterate the vital importance of achieving a durable solution to the humanitarian issues in Syria by working towards a comprehensive political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015), in full accordance with the fundamental principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
