Ms. Kuburovie (Serbia): I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to address it today on
behalf of the Republic of Serbia.

Since the establishment of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), in 1993,
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals after the ICTY completed its work, Serbia
has, for the last quarter century, been travelling on a
path of cooperation with the institution. Much has been
done in this time. Speaking in this very Chamber in
December 2017, I said that

"[f]ighting impunity for the most serious
international crimes and efficiently prosecuting war
crimes were the key reasons for the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia." (S/PV8120, p. 30)

Regrettably, the Tribunal has not realized the purpose
for which it was established, nor has it provided answers
to many important questions.

Serbia's cooperation with the Mechanism has
been successful, and my country has fulfilled all its
obligations. The results are also noticeable within
its national legislative system, and its cooperation
with the Mechanism has run unimpeded. The Office
of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism has been given
free access to all evidence, archives and witnesses.
Requests have been attended to, and responses are
being provided to the Office, Chambers and Secretariat
of the Mechanism, including those related to classified
Government and military documents. Witnesses have
been cleared of the obligation to keep Government,
official and/or military secrets.

As early as last June, a single Judge of the
Mechanism ruled that the contempt-of-court case
Prosecutor v. Petar Jojic and Vjert'ca Radeta be referred
to Serbia, and the decision on the appeal of the Amicus
Curiae Prosecutor is still pending. Ifthe case is referred
to the Serbian judiciary, it will be a step forward in my
country's relationship with the Mechanism. As a State
with an independent judiciary, Serbia can - and is
willing to - comply with the obligation to try the case
in accordance with the highest standards of judicial
independence and the rule of law. In this context, let
me point out that, during the case-referral process,
the Amicus Curiae made comments in its submissions
that were inappropriate and not founded on the legal
facts or evidence, which accounted for the delays in the
procedure. Considering that a small number of cases
are before the Mechanism, we might conclude that not
much work remains for the Mechanism to carry out.
However, the legacy of the ICTY includes important
questions that still should be addressed, lest they
remain unresolved.

Ten years ago, Serbia launched an initiative
to have its citizens who had been sentenced by the
Tribunal serve their sentences in Serbia. When the
initiative was launched, my country was motivated by
a firm commitment to assuming the responsibility for
enforcement of sentences. The purpose of punishment
includes, inter alia, the social reintegration of sentenced
persons. I believe that we can hardly expect this purpose
to be fulfilled if sentenced persons serve their sentences
in faraway countries where they do not understand the
language, where the possibility of enlisting the help of
a translator or receiving visits from and maintaining
contact with friends and relatives are limited, and
where medical treatment is inadequate. After all, nine
persons of Serbian nationality have died during trials or
while incarcerated.

Let me highlight the particularly difficult situation
of Serbian nationals Milan Martic' and Dragomir
Milosevic, who are serving their sentences in Estonia. I
have already spoken of them on a number of occasions
in this Chamber and with Judge Meron, President of
the Mechanism. The International Committee of the
Red Cross has also reported on their case. The position
taken by the Secretary-General in his report to the
Security Council on 3 May 1993, namely, that, given the
nature of the crimes in question and the international
character of the Tribunal, the enforcement of sentences
should take place outside the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, can hardly continue to be taken as valid. It
made some sense while the war went on in the country.
However, the situation today is altogether different, and
my country insists that the question be reconsidered.

During his Visit to Belgrade in November, President
Meron gave his assurances that there were no obstacles
to realizing this initiative. He advised that it be brought
to the attention of the Security Council, under whose
resolutions the Tribunal and the Mechanism have been
established. I therefore take this opportunity to call
on the Secretary-General to instruct the Mechanism
to assess the initiative and make it possible for the
Security Council to consider the current practice
relative to the enforcement of sentences and decide on
how to approach change.

Serbia is ready to accept strict international
monitoring and provide guarantees that sentenced
persons will not be released without a decision by
the Mechanism. We invite its representatives, as well as
representatives of other relevant institutions appointed
by the Secretary-General, to visit Serbia and tour its
prisons to assess the capacities and conditions of the
facilities themselves. Let me reiterate that my country
will continue to advance the initiative, all the more so
as the sentenced persons are advanced in age and the
majority of them are not in the best of health.

In February 2016, Serbia adopted a national
strategy for the prosecution of war crimes for the period
2016-2020, thereby demonstrating its commitment to
building up its national judiciary and supporting all
judicial and administrative investigative agencies, as
well as other independent monitoring and reporting
organizations. Since the decision of the Government to
establish a working body to monitor the implementation
of the strategy in August 2017, four reports have been
submitted on the progress made so far, the most recent
of which was submitted on 21 November.

The adoption of the Prosecutorial Strategy for
the Investigation and Prosecution of War Crimes in
the Republic of Serbia in the period 2018 to 2023, in
accordance with the Action Plan for Chapter 23 and the
National War Crimes Prosecution Strategy, accentuated
the importance of greater efficiency in processing
war crimes. The funds to enhance the capacities of
the Prosecutor's Office have been provided by the
Government, while the number of the employees
of the Office, in particular of Deputy Prosecutors,
has been increased. Five new Deputies have been
appointed since the last meeting of the Security
Council on this agenda item, in June (S/PV.8278). The
Prosecutorial Strategy has also been commended by the
Prosecutor's Office of the Mechanism. During the visit
of Prosecutor Brammertz in October, agreement was
reached on organizing a prosecutors' training course
in March 2019, in cooperation with the Belgrade's
Judicial Academy and as part of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism's support for Serbia. Mr. Brammertz will
be one of the lecturers.

The progress report of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism notes that regional judicial cooperation in
war crimes matters between the countries of the former
Yugoslavia is at its lowest level in years and faces
increasingly immense challenges. The report goes on to
say that decisive action is needed to reverse the current
negative trends and ensure that war criminals do not
find safe haven in neighbouring countries.

It is important to note that, ever since the Tribunal
was established, it adopted a selective, ethnically-
tainted approach when it came to the number of both
indictments in and case referrals to the judiciaries of
the successor States of the former Yugoslavia. It turns
out that, in the past, the Tribunal had the greatest
confidence in the judicial institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In more literary parlance, those courts
used to be ifavort'tt della regina. This conclusion is
borne out of the following data. The largest number
of cases have been referred to courts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for trial: 6 out of 10 persons indicted by
the ICTY. Most of them were Serbs. In contrast, Serbia
and Croatia have received one case each, and none of
those referrals concerns persons indicted for crimes
against Serbs. Does that mean that no crimes have
been committed against the Serbian population and
that no one is responsible for the killing, torture and
persecution of Serbs?

Notwithstanding the selective approach by the
Tribunal, we can hardly agree with the assessment
in the Mechanism's report that cooperation among
countries of the region has been inadequate and that
there has been equal refusal to cooperate. My country
has made every effort to cooperate with the Mechanism
and expects inter-State cooperation in the region to be
at an appropriate level. Serbia has concluded bilateral
agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia,
while cooperation among regional judiciaries is based
on the agreements concluded among the relevant
Offices of the countries of the region and the Office of
the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia.
We are fully committed to the full implementation of
the agreements and relevant protocols. Unfortunately,
not all of the countries in the region share this position.
Let me point out in this context that my country's
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
provision of legal assistance is at a very high level. It is
our hope that we will achieve this level of cooperation
with Croatia.
Last March, a meeting between the Ministers
of Justice of the Republic of Serbia and the Republic
of Croatia was held in Belgrade. As a result, two
commissions were established, one to exchange lists
of persons indicted or sentenced for war crimes, and
the other to draft a bilateral agreement relative to the
processing of war crimes. The first commission has
completed its task, while the second has been continually
working on its assignment; a meeting of the latter
commission's members is expected to be convened this
month. We firmly believe that this is an important step
forward in addressing outstanding bilateral issues, even
though Croatia continues to try Serbs in absentia and
without facts or sufficient evidence and, in the opinion
of many, passes judgments lightly, thereby deliberately
preventing Serbs expelled from Croatia from being able
to return home. Serbia does not try cases in absentia;
indeed, dozens of cases have simply been suspended.

From 1 January to 30 November, eight new
indictments were confirmed by the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia against 12
persons. Six of the indictments were transferred from
the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and one, against two persons, from the Prosecutor's
Office of the Republic of Croatia. In 24 cases, the
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic
of Serbia received no response from the Prosecutor's
Office of the Republic of Croatia on requests for
evidence and information, despite the terms of the
cooperation agreement.

Some 103 persons, most of them of Serbian
nationality, have been tried in 23 cases in the War
Crimes Department of the Higher Court in Belgrade;
judgments in two cases were handed down right before
the convening oftoday's meeting. That is eloquent proof
that Serbia is ready to try all war crimes, irrespective of
the citizenship of the perpetrator, which is not, I regret
to say, the practice in the other countries of the region.

Unlike in a number of previous years, bilateral

meetings of the Ministers of Justice of the Republic of
Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of
Croatia were held this year. I therefore see no reason
why the efforts of the countries of the region, aimed at
reconciliation, should not be given their due.

The progress report notes that judicial cooperation
between Serbia and the self-declared State of Kosovo
in war crimes matters had broken down. However, I
would like to point out that cooperation is taking place
through the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). UNMIK's competencies
in the judicial field were set forth in the joint document
signed by UNMIK and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in November 2001. All along, however,
the judicial authorities of Serbia have been prevented
from undertaking proceedings in cases of war crimes
committed in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija.
In addition to the refusal by Pristina to respond to
cooperation requests by the Office of the War Crimes
Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia, UNMIK now
makes INTERPOL notices related to Albanian terrorists
from Kosovo and Metohija invisible for no apparent
reason. UNMIK has not been mandated by the Security
Council to act in this way. Yet still more serious
consequences for the Serbian people in Kosovo and
Metohija could result from recent irrational decisions
taken by Pristina, and a humanitarian catastrophe of
unprecedented proportions is possible. I hope that the
international community will not remain silent and
tolerate these blatant Violations of basic human rights.

At the Western Balkans Summit in London on
10 July, the countries of the European Union and
summit participants from the Western Balkans signed a
joint declaration on missing persons, the key document
upholding the rights of all families of the missing
persons to truth, justice and compensation. The
declaration, which was signed by the Prime Ministers
of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, Austria,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Germany, Italy, Poland, Slovenia and
the United Kingdom, and the professed Prime Minister
of Kosovo, expresses support for the efforts to find
the 12,000 persons still listed as missing in conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia. Of particular significance in
the context of regional cooperation is the fact that, on
6 November, the Commission on Missing Persons of
the Republic of Serbia signed the Framework Plan to
Address the Issue of Persons Missing From Conflicts
on the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia, at the
headquarters of International Commission for Missing
Persons in The Hague.

It is particularly worrisome that the progress report
points to the publication of the memoirs of General
Pavkovic'. The publication of memoirs of one participant
in the war - and not the only participant - cannot by
itself be construed as a glorification of the position of
one side. Memoirs are personal views of the events, and,
under article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, everyone has the right to freely express his or
her opinions. It is not clear how the memoirs of Serbian
convicts are the only ones to have found their way
into the progress report of the Mechanism presented
to the United Nations, whereas the memoirs of others
of different nationalities have not. The progress report
states that a key tool for ensuring continued cooperation
with the Mechanism is the policy of conditionality
of the European Union, which links membership
progress to full cooperation with the Mechanism. The
Mechanism's position of asserting pressure on Serbia
as we undergo European Union accession negotiations
goes against the theme of cooperation with my country.
That position has always illustrated that the Mechanism
is of a political nature, not a legal one. That has been
the Mechanism's principal shortfall from the time it
was established.

In conclusion, let me point out that, notwithstanding
that shortfall, the cooperation between Serbia and
the Mechanism has been successful. There are no
outstanding issues in our cooperation, and I trust and
believe that the efforts invested by my country will be
acknowledged and presented in the coming reports.

