Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank your delegation for convening
this open debate.

Due to the shared responsibilities and interrelated
interests of their members, international organizations
are in a privileged position to respond to regional
challenges to international peace and security in an
expeditious manner and with better knowledge of the
local causes of conflicts. Those efforts must
complement those of the United Nations, especially in
areas where the given regional organization has
comparative advantage, and the mission should be
implemented with a high measure of cooperation with
the United Nations.

In our judgement, there are four situations where
the United Nations and regional organizations may
complement each other in conflict resolution: first, in
the deployment of joint missions; secondly, when the
United Nations can take responsibility for continuing a
peacekeeping operation initiated by a regional
organization; thirdly, when a regional organization can
take the responsibility of continuing a peacekeeping
operation initiated by the United Nations; and finally,
when the United Nations can delegate the deployment
of a peacekeeping operation to a regional organization
when it considers this more efficient.

In any event, as stipulated by the United Nations
Charter, in all the above cases the maintenance of
international peace and security is always the primary
responsibility of the Security Council, as Chapter VIII
of the Charter ensures that the Security Council has the
ability to authorize regional organizations to
implement coercive actions. At the same time, in all
these cases, complementing funds and corresponding
financing will always be required.

In its presidential statement of 28 March, 2007
(S/PRST/2007/7) on the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
recalled that cooperation between the United Nations
and the regional arrangements in matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security were
an integral part of collective security as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations and welcomed the
Declaration on enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.

In this context, we are pleased with the initiative
to give assistance to the African Union to increase its
peacekeeping capacity with the objective of
establishing a permanent African reserve force by
2010, as well as the initiatives of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States or the Southern
African Development Community to create reserve
brigades for peacekeeping in their respective
subregions.

In the American region, the case of Haiti deserves
mention as a model for cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of American States
(OAS). We can say that the OAS has established a
strategic association with the United Nations,
facilitating the fulfilment of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti through the
leadership and accumulated experience of the
organization.
The OAS has contributed its specific technical
knowledge and has actively collaborated in the
political dimension and, specifically, in the continuity
of the electoral process. That has been fundamental for
the organization of free and clean elections, from
which the current democratic Haitian Government has
sprung.

Cooperation under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations provides enormous possibilities to
optimize resources and stimulate the political will of
the international community to achieve peace and
security through an effective operational association
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. It is therefore desirable to
promote formal and informal consultation mechanisms
that will allow the United Nations and regional
organizations to mutually enrich that interaction. We
believe that when the universal Organization studies a
specific conflict, prior to taking action on the ground, it
should ideally have available to it the opinion and
advice of the relevant regional organization and give
that organization's point of view adequate
consideration.

In conclusion, we believe that greater
decentralization in, and delegation of, peacekeeping
operations to regional organizations, along with greater
cooperation and coordination among those
organizations and the Security Council, will not only
alleviate the actual burden on United Nations
peacekeeping, whose resources are at their limit, but,
in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, it
could also enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions authorized by the Security Council. We
therefore think it is important for there to be a balanced
distribution of capacity and resources for all regions of
the world, in order that the knowledge of regional
organizations with regard to conflict situations may
also be utilized.

Systematic cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations that includes a clear
distribution of functions and adequate capacities will
increase the effectiveness of the international
community to prevent conflicts. It would make
possible a speedier response when a conflict arises and
provide solutions for building lasting peace. Given the
existing link between security, peace and development,
we believe that the specialized knowledge of regional
organizations, whose original mandates were to foment
economic and commercial integration, may also be of
value in ensuring the success of strategies aimed at
economic growth and long-term stability.
