Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, I,
too, would like to commend the delegation of the
Russian Federation for having organized this debate,
which affords us the opportunity to highlight the
importance and review the performance of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In this regard, we are
grateful to the various officials and the representatives
of Sierra Leone and Burundi for their briefings and
statements.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of Jamaica on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We all clearly have a stake in the Peacebuilding
Commission, whose creation is but one important step
in the implementation of the institutional reforms
needed to enable the United Nations to respond to the
needs identified in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
for an institutional, systematic and seamless connection
between peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Only an effective Peacebuilding Commission can
ensure that the huge investments made by the
international community in peace and stability in those
volatile parts of the world will achieve the most
positive, sustainable and irreversible outcomes.

The success of the Commission will certainly
bring encouragement and hope to millions of people -
especially those in Africa 4 caught in the vicious
cycle of conflict and poverty. We are very pleased,
therefore, that the Organizational Committee held
meetings during which Burundi and Sierra Leone were
selected as pioneers in post-conflict peacebuilding
under the auspices of the Peacebuilding Commission.
They deserve all the support they can get in their
recovery efforts because, as pilot projects, their success
will impact on the future of the Commission.

The danger of relapse is all too real and ever-
present in societies that are still emerging from
conflict. In a climate of high expectations and lurking
distrust, the transition from peacekeeping to post-
conflict recovery poses enormous institutional
challenges that can easily overwhelm any Government.
Above all, we must understand that as long as the
underlying causes of conflict remain unaddressed, we
could be on shaky ground.

In our View, therefore, the most important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission will be to identify, to
prioritize and to target its limited resources with a view
to addressing those fundamental problems. In this way,
the Commission can be a worthy partner and help
national Governments to adopt the best practices in
governance that are so critical to long-term
reconciliation and stability and ensure a seamless
transition from conflict to the promotion of sustainable
peace and development.

As a member of the Organizational Committee,
Ghana recognizes that the Peacebuilding Commission,
like any new body or agency, will have teething
problems. However, we are of the considered view that
we need to agree early on our modus operandi. In this
regard, we should avoid creating unnecessary
bureaucratic layers and procedures and focus more on
the delivery or implementation of agreed national
strategies. As has been evident from some of the
statements made today - especially the passionate
appeal by the representative of Sierra Leone - we
should strive to reduce the time lag between approval
and disbursement of resources.

Previous speakers have rightly highlighted the
organic relationship that must exist between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
and, by extension, the other organs of the United
Nations, especially the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. It cannot be otherwise,
because of the inextricable link between peace,
security and development. Indeed, the Peacebuilding
Commission offers a unique opportunity to test the
efficacy of the growing preference for an integrated
approach to United Nations missions and, probably, to
point the way towards improved foreign aid
management.

Since the Peacebuilding Commission is not a
donor agency, we should all participate in decisions
relating to the disbursement of its resources.
Everything must be done to avoid the known pitfalls of
donor practices, which have been criticized for
duplication of effort, politicization and lack of local
ownership, as well as for high administrative costs.

The Commission is expected to take a broad
approach in its work and to bring together all relevant
actors in order to serve as a forum for dialogue and
cooperation between national actors and the
international community. It is therefore well placed to
blaze a new trail in international cooperation by
drawing on the knowledge, expertise and experience
accumulated by the United Nations, donor agencies,
international financial institutions, women, non-
governmental organizations and civil society over the
years so as to develop programmes that can effectively
address the often complex and interrelated problems
which are peculiar to each post-conflict situation.

It is precisely because each conflict is sui generis
that we think the Peacebuilding Commission should be
encouraged to have technical meetings in the countries
concerned with a view to better appreciating and
understanding the internal or local situation.

The Peacebuilding Commission, as it develops,
should also pay due attention to the regional and
subregional dimensions of peacebuilding, seeking to
reinforce regional organizations in their peacebuilding
efforts and to utilize their expertise.

It is also our candid view that, as a newly created
body, the Commission has an ideal opportunity to
incorporate a gender dimension into its mandate and its
work from the start. In consonance with resolution
1325 (2000), the Peacebuilding Commission should
seek to involve women in all aspects of the
peacebuilding process.

While we share the view that the Peacebuilding
Commission cannot be expected to assume the
responsibilities of an elected Government, we also
believe that the nature of its operations requires an
appreciable level of involvement in order to win the
confidence and trust of its clients. After all, it is
expected to play the role of a coordinating body that
leverages national and international resources. The
presence of the Commission must be felt throughout
the receiving State, as the traumatized population
needs to be assured that the international community
remains fully engaged in finding solutions to their
problems.

Needless to say, in order to meet the challenges
of effective peacebuilding, the Peacebuilding
Commission needs adequate resources. We doubt
whether the quantum of money so far pledged,
although commendable, is commensurate with the
tasks and urgent needs in post-conflict countries.

Finally, we recognize that the Peacebuilding
Commission can only facilitate peace; it cannot build
it. Although adequate financial resources are crucial to
successful peacebuilding, it is the will and
determination of the Governments and the peoples
concerned to preserve the peace and change the course
of their own history that ultimately constitute the most
decisive factor and the best guarantee of sustainable
peace and development.
