Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative Tanin for his presence
and briefing today. I would also like to thank First
Deputy Prime Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku
for their statements before the Council.

Poland watches the developments in Kosovo closely
and we are reassured that the situation on the ground is
calm, and while it may be far from perfect, it certainly
does not warrant a quarterly cycle of reporting. We
express a sentiment shared by other Council members
when we say that there is clearly no factual justification
for this frequency.

As concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Poland
would like to reiterate our call for a strategic review of
the Mission. We are happy to see that this initiative has
been taken up by other members of the Council. It has
been years since a strategic review was last conducted,
and it is apparent that circumstances have changed. A
fresh assessment of the Mission's comparative advantage
vis-a-vis other international presences in Kosovo is
obviously needed. The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has recently undergone
a substantial refocusing of its mandate, reflecting the
growing capacity of the host country to handle its own
affairs - and so, in our view, should UNMIK.

Having recognized Kosovo, I will stick to more
general remarks made from the point of view of an
interested observer. Looking at the overall picture in
Kosovo, we see work in progress. To be sure, much
work still remains to be done, but progress is equally
apparent. Whether problems may exist internally
or bilaterally, none of this is outside the competence
of a self-reliant independent State with functioning
institutions, supported by the true engagement of its
political elites.

We commend the effort of both leaders, from
Belgrade and Pristina, to continue the European
Union-facilitated dialogue and call on them to show
consistent commitment to reaching a legally binding
agreement on the comprehensive normalization of
relations. The enlargement perspective set out in the
strategy for the Western Balkans is feasible if enough
energy is invested in going forward, rather than
concentrating on the past.

Much work remains to be done in strengthening the
rule of law in Kosovo. Although a lot has already been
achieved, more needs to be done to combat corruption
and organized crime so that the basic trust of the
citizens in the State is restored and maintained.

Let me conclude with the same words that we used
to conclude our statement in this Chamber six months
ago (see S/PV.8254), as they remain valid. Poland
regards Kosovo as being capable of managing its own
future and realizing its potential within the shared
framework of European values. We are ready to extend
our assistance in that effort and share our experiences,
as we have done so far.

