Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks you,
Sir, for organizing this important debate. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for the information he provided
today, and in particular for his urgent efforts on behalf
of the United Nations in Gaza.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

I wish to express our deep concern over the military
action taken by the Government of Israel against the
Palestinian population living in Gaza. According
to a United Nations press report yesterday, Gaza
Palestinians endure waves of violence that aggravate
the extreme humanitarian crisis in which they already
find themselves. Along the same lines, we regret the
launching of rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israeli
civilian areas.

My delegation strongly rejects the air strikes by
the Israeli occupying forces that took place on 13 and
14 July. We echo the statement made by the Palestinian
representation in its letter of 17 July 2018, to the
effect that it was Israel's largest campaign of daytime
air strikes against the Palestinian inhabitants of that
territory since its aggression of 2014, which claimed the
lives of at least 2,200 Palestinians.

In a report published on 22 July, the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
warned that the fuel supplies with which it has been
precariously operating the health centres and hospitals
of Gaza are predicted to run dry in August, that is, in
just a few days. We welcome today's opening of the
Kerem Shalom crossing, which in addition to allowing
goods to cross the border, will allow 700,000 litres of
fuel to enter Gaza with a view to powering electric
equipment - such as incubators for premature babies
and others - on which the lives of 2,000 hospital
and health clinic patients depend. This opening will
certainly attenuate the humanitarian crisis of the
Palestinian people, who have lived for 11 years under
a regime of collective punishment imposed by Israel,
which denies them access to water and sanitation,
increasing the risk ofthe spread of diseases of all kinds,
and restricting their access to electricity with power
outages of up to 20 hours a day.

Moreover, we must express our deep concern for
the approval by the Knesset of the Jewish nation-State
law, which is a colonial and discriminatory measure
that could open the opportunity for that Government to
expel and replace the Palestinian population through the
imposition of ideological beliefs as official policies of
that State, to the detriment of the rights of Palestinians
to citizenship, property and land, language, culture
and other rights recognized by international human
rights law.

In that regard, we echo the statement made by the
General Secretariat of the League of Arab States, in
its communique of 20 July, that this law denies the
rights of the Palestinian people to live in their historic
land, may give rise to colonial and racist practices, and
constitutes an illegal instrument to annex the West
Bank and seize the occupied Palestinian territories. We
also associate ourselves with the statement concerning
the nationality law, issued on 20 July by the United
Nations Deputy Spokesman, Mr. Farham Haq, who
reaffirmed the respect of the United Nations for the
sovereignty of States so long as they adhere to the
universal principles of human rights, including the
protection of minority rights.

I express the firm commitment of the delegation of
Bolivia to all international efforts leading to a peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian occupation, and in this
regard we endorse such initiatives as the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and others that provide guarantees for a just and lasting
peace allowing both peoples to live within recognized
and secure borders.

I also express our appreciation to the
Government of Egypt for its efforts to promote
the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
The initiative was presented to the parties
on 19 July with the aim of returning them to
reconciliation talks as soon as possible and achieving
the consolidation of a Palestinian unity Government.
Bolivia is convinced that the only long-term alternative
to the occupation is the two-State solution, which will
finally consolidate a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 international
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

