Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Like my colleagues who
spoke before me, I would also like to welcome the
participation of the Minister for External Relations of
Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, in this very
important meeting of the Security Council.

The distinctive character of this meeting is certainly
predetermined by the content of the draft resolution
before the Council. Ukraine has been consistent in its
position that decreasing UNITA's ability to wage war by
strengthening the effectiveness of the measures imposed
by the Security Council against it is a fundamental
prerequisite to restoring peace in Angola. The report by
the Panel of Experts on the violation of Security Council
sanctions against UNITA, presented to the Council a
month ago, has in itself contributed tremendously to a
more serious and responsible attitude to those measures.
The decision that the Council is about to adopt will
produce a much more far-reaching effect.

The direction of this draft resolution is manifold. Its
main purpose consists in improving the implementation of
the existing measures imposed against UNITA. Certainly,
we can differentiate between groups of countries bearing
special responsibility for specific areas, which, for
example, could include Angola's neighboring countries,
or countries involved in arms manufacture or marketing,
or States closely involved with the diamond industry, as
well as others. It is indeed important that the Council is
attempting to make very distinct recommendations to
those States. At the same time, if we bring together all
those different groups, we will undoubtedly wind up
getting what is called the international community.

 

Therefore, it is incumbent on all of us to take an
action-oriented approach towards those recommendations.

Furthermore, by taking a decision on the establishment
of a monitoring mechanism to collect information and
investigate allegations of violations of the measures against
UNITA, the Council is making a bold step towards
strengthening its own capacities in relation to this particular
sanctions regime, as well as to its overall sanctions policy.
It is from this standpoint that my delegation attaches
particular importance to the close connection between the
monitoring mechanism and the sanctions Committee on
Angola. It is also from this perspective that we
acknowledge a correlative character between this meeting
and important events both inside and outside the Council
which took place yesterday.

Another specific element of the draft resolution which
my delegation would like to emphasize is a very clear
forewarning of the inevitable repercussions on States
proved to have violated the measures imposed against
UNITA. The relevant provisions of the draft resolution to
that effect provide strong evidence of the Council's
determination to end the culture of impunity with regard to
this sanctions regime.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my delegation's
appreciation and strong support for the efforts of
Ambassador Robert Fowler aimed at improving the
effectiveness of the sanctions against UNITA.

