Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): Allow me at the
outset, on behalf of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, and to the members
of the Security Council for convening this meeting, which
beyond any doubt is reflective of a deep international
concern over the heart-breaking situation in our homeland,
the root of which is embedded in foreign intervention.

Let me particularly thank the delegations of
Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan for requesting that this meeting be
convened.

For four consecutive years, our neighbour, Pakistan,
has been acting as an obstacle to the return of peace and
normalcy to our war-shattered homeland through a series
of conspiracies and schemes. It is because of this that our
nation is turning to this Council. Our nation is turning this
way because the Security Council is the highest source of
hope for peoples oppressed, occupied and invaded. The

 

Council is entrusted with the responsibility and the task of
preserving peace and security, regional and international.

It is natural for us to voice an objection, whenever we
want to discharge our responsibility as concerned members
of this global family, when we see peace and stability
endangered, in howsoever remote a corner of the globe, and
the life and prosperity of a nation jeopardized through a
multifaceted and multipolar conspiracy orchestrated by
military-industrial magnates from abroad. That is the case
of Afghanistan today.

What is expected of this Council is that it judge
events, as required by the United Nations Charter and
recognized principles of international law, and to take
appropriate measures. Its remaining silent towards open and
naked aggression, and its deviation from principles which
51 years ago earned the commitment of many nations,
would be a blow to the essence of the United Nations
ideals. I am confident that everyone here shares these
Views. Indifference towards these blatant encroachments
and violations of the human rights of the people of
Afghanistan would take us back to an era when the motto
"might is right" ruled, when the cry of oppressed nations
was not heeded and when the strongest and the richest
alone decided on the future of the planet.

Allow me once again to refer to the main cause of
continued conflict in Afghanistan, a cause which
unfortunately the United Nations could not effectively
challenge.

For the past three years, delegations of the Islamic
State of Afghanistan have complained to the United Nations
General Assembly and Security Council about the
continuation of foreign intervention in Afghanistan. Today,
we do so again. Unfortunately, the measures taken by the
United Nations have been limited to the adoption of
resolutions and the issuance of statements.

This situation has encouraged the aggressor to take
further measures for the realization of its objective to
recruit, train, equip and send mercenaries called the Taliban
into the territory of Afghanistan.

We raised our complaints and objections against
measures taken by Pakistani military intelligence in the
schemes crafted by Nasimllah Babar, the Pakistani Interior
Minister, who has been referred to as the commander of the
Taliban by Ijaz ul-Haq, member of the Pakistani Parliament
and also the son of late General Zia ul-Haq. Through a
number of statements and official letters, all published as

 

documents of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council, we have brought this to the attention of the
President of the Security Council.

In the meeting of the General Assembly on
19 December 1995, we introduced the names of some
Pakistani military personnel who were in the custody of
the Islamic State of Afghanistan. On 26 September 1996,
the pilot of a plane carrying Taliban members from Herat
to Peshawar landed in Bagram, the Government air base,
and stated how fed up he was with taking orders from
Pakistani officers. Among the 31 passengers aboard the
plane, including 26 Taliban members, five were Pakistani
officers.

Pakistani officials first dismissed the news. Later,
they claimed the five to be Pakistani religious scholars.

Just two days ago, on 14 October 1996, Monica
Whitlock, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
Central Asian correspondent, travelled to the north of
Kabul and saw captured Pakistani militia members and
officers. Some of their names are as follows: first,
Mohammad Jawaid, son of Mohammad Israr, 25 years
old, from Multan, Pakistan; second, Khalid, son of
Nasrullah, 23 years old, from Karachi, Pakistan; third,
Abdul Rahman, son of Shamsuddin, 23 years old, from
Kashmir; fourth, Obaidullah Shaheen, son of Allah Dena,
26 years old, from Multan, Pakistan; fifth, Karimullah,
son of Mohammad Rafique, 29 years old, from Punjab,
Pakistan; sixth, Obaidullah, son of Mohammad Zahir, 22
years old, from Punjab, Pakistan; seventh, Mohammad
Omar, Ahmad son of Ahmad, 32 years old, from Karachi,
Pakistan; and, eighth, Hassan, son of Abdullah, 30 years
old, from Punjab, Pakistan.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan will soon present
to the Security Council videotapes of these and many
other Pakistani captives in the custody of its authorities.

For those looking for independent witnesses of the
active participation of Pakistani fighters among the
Taliban, let me quote the news report dated 9 October
1996 by Laurant Hamida of Reuter news agency, who
says,

"warriors were scaling mountainsides at Qalatak in
Salang Valley. Speaking good English and saying
they were from the Pakistani city of Karachi, they
expelled reporters who had reached there. 'Get out
of here or we'll kill you!' yelled one of them."

 

The role of the Pakistani circles in sponsoring the
Taliban mercenaries, a role which was already an open
secret, became the subject of a confession when Her
Excellency Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto, the Prime Minister
of Pakistan, admitted the Pakistani involvement in the
Taliban during an interview with the BBC.

The extravagant statements of Nasirullah Babar about
the imminent fall of the Panjshir Valley proved to be
wishful thinking and clear evidence of official Pakistani
intervention in Afghan affairs. He has already shown that
he considers Kabul an annex to Pakistan by paying a visit
to Kabul on 15 October 1996 - just yesterday - in the
middle of consecutive Taliban defeats due to popular
uprisings.

Despite all that, officials of the United Nations did not
take needed steps against these Pakistani military
intelligence circles. Later, during the successive Taliban
defeats in areas south and east of Kabul, foreign militias
joined the ranks of the Taliban. We captured some militia
members red-handed, fighting in the front line. As we
mentioned last year, 23 of these militia members were
taken by His Highness Prince Turki Al-Faisal Al-Saud, the
Saudi Arabian Security Minister, to Pakistan as a gesture of
goodwill on the part of Afghanistan. When the issue of
foreign intervention was raised again, high authorities of the
United Nations repeated the familiar line of "no hard-core
evidence". We presented a list of the militias through the
General Assembly; once again it was not to the satisfaction
of United Nations officials. The Security Council did not
condemn the aggressor. At times, some United Nations
authorities, having turned a blind eye to the true identity of
the Taliban, their legacy and massive human rights
Violations, labelled the Taliban a "positive element for
peace in Afghanistan".

On 5 September 1995, the city of Herat, under the
administration of Commander Ismail Khan, once referred to
as the best model of a sound administration by Mahmoud
Mestiri, was overrun by the Taliban through the direct
assistance and involvement of Pakistani militias. Let us
refer to document s/ 1995/767 and the meeting of the
Security Council at which we presented good reasons for
accusing Pakistani military intelligence circles in that
onslaught. For many weeks, following the fall of Herat, all
heavy weapons, depots and supplies belonging to
Afghanistan were being shipped to Quetta, Pakistan. We
asked the Security Council to put an end to the unlawful
State-sponsored shipment of Afghan property by Pakistan.
Unfortunately, our request to have a United Nations fact-
finding mission sent to Herat remained unanswered. News

 

of our plight went unheard, and the Pakistani circles were
encouraged. Then, the eastern city of Jalalabad,
headquarters of United Nations and other international
organizations, centre of intra-Afghan dialogue and an
impartial city in the conflict, became the target of
Pakistani military intelligence on 11 September 1996; the
Taliban turned peace and security there into terror and
instability. The United Nations Secretariat looked at the
latest development through a tinted lens and once again
disregarded foreign intervention. The United Nations
considered it an internal development and watched the
Taliban move on Kabul.

In our statement before the Security Council on 9
April 1996, we suggested the establishment of a United
Nations monitoring post along the southern border point
of Speen-Boldak between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Pakistani assistance in terms of military personnel and
armaments would not have easily reached the Taliban,
had the Council paid adequate attention to our suggestion.

On 27 September Taliban, accompanied by Pakistani
military officers and militia forces, invaded the capital.
Much blood was shed. In the invasion of Kabul, the
Taliban were found to have even used chemical or some
other type of internationally prohibited weapons, as we
brought to the attention of the Security Council in
document S/l996/842 of 10 October 1996. And in three
weeks since the takeover of Kabul, the Taliban, once
termed a "positive element for peace" by United Nations
officials, committed acts which earned the condemnation
of Amnesty International, women's rights organizations,
the international press and countries near and far.

Under Taliban rule, schools were closed to girls.
Women, making up half the labour force, including
25,000 widows, were forced to stay home and not attend
work. They were further told not to go out shopping.
Those who did faced public chain-lashing and physical
beatings.

One Afghan woman voiced her complaint to a New
York Times correspondent by saying,

"In the United States, women are being launched
into space, but here in Afghanistan, women are
being told that they have no place but in the home."

The mass exodus to the north due to the Taliban
welcome involved as many as 250,000 people. Many
people were driven out of their homes and their properties
confiscated. One eight-year-old girl's finger was cut

 

because she had put nail polish on it. So far, over 280
people are reported to have had either a leg or an arm
amputated without consideration of the real precepts of
Islamic jurisprudence. The list of brutal punishments goes
on and on. Suffice it to recall that Amnesty International
has termed the situation in Kabul a "reign of terror".

The latest reports by the international news media
indicate that mass arrests, abductions and house-to-house
searches after nightfall in Kabul continue. According to
Amnesty International, as many as 1,000 civilians in Kabul
have been rushed to the front-line minefields to clear the
mines by walking over them.

Photographic laboratories in Kabul have been closed.
Kabul's citizens have been given a 10-day grace period in
which to smash their television sets. Non-compliance with
this rule would result in their being subjected to severe
punishment. Employees have been ordered to grow beards
in six weeks or face dismissal. Video tapes and audio
cassettes have been banned. On 10 October 1996, Reuters
reported that cinemas had been shut down and many
archival, historical and cultural motion pictures and
documentaries set on fire in public.

Irreplaceable ancient artifacts, statues and paintings in
the Kabul museum and at other historical sites have been
either set ablaze or crushed. Sports have been outlawed.
Reporters and journalists have been beaten up. On 13
October 1996, Reuters reported that

"At least two reporters have been beaten just north of
Kabul and one who had his camera smashed
complained to the Taliban authorities in Kabul. He
said he was told he deserved the beating."

While they were being pushed back, the Taliban took
hostage scores of young men and elderly people in the
areas around Charikar, Qarabagh and Jabal-us-Siraj in the
north. Phil Goodwin of the BBC reported that at least five
of them were slain on 10 October 1996.

Conscription by the desperate Taliban has even
extended to the mosques in Kabul, where the Taliban have
set each mosque a quota of 100 young civilian worshippers
who will be forced to fight. These "forced-to-fight"
teenagers, selected to go to front-line minefields, are so
cherished that, as they leave, they are given these words of
farewell:

 

"Guys, cheer up. You are lucky - we are deploying
you for martyrdom".

The flow of assistance to the Taliban through the
border points of Torkham and Spin-Boldak is increasing.
That is why, in a letter dated 9 October 1996 addressed
to the President of the Security Council, in document
S/1996/842, we requested that the Office of the
Secretary-General in Afghanistan take appropriate
measures to supervise those border crossing points.

Last year, through a memorandum, the Islamic State
of Afghanistan asked the Security Council to verify
different aspects of the intervention aimed at clearing
obstacles to peace in Afghanistan by dispatching a
fact-finding mission to Afghanistan. No attention was paid
to this request. During the speech delivered on 9 April
1996 here in the Security Council, we requested the
dispatch of a fact-finding mission aimed at assessing the
degree and level of foreign intervention, Taliban
violations of human rights and Taliban mass engagement
in the cultivation, processing and trafficking of drugs.

Comprehensive reports have been compiled and
submitted to the Governments of the United States, the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Saudi Arabia and to
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
and other bodies about the Taliban drug trade. However,
the national drug control strategy for 1996, published by
the White House, estimates the worldwide potential net
production of opium from Afghanistan between 1992 and
1995 as having doubled from 640 tonnes to 1,250 tonnes.

On 1 October 1996, The Independent stated that

"drug enforcement experts claim that last year
Afghanistan flooded the European, US and Eastern
markets with over $75 bn of heroin."

The most recent information from the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme says that, with
regard to Afghanistan's opium production in 1996, the
Taliban control some 95 per cent of the poppy-growing
areas in Afghanistan.

Once again, we are asking and urging the United
Nations to send a fact-finding mission to Afghanistan,
where the authorities of the Islamic State of Afghanistan
will put at its disposal all the hard evidence relating to
different aspects of the continued conflict there. The
mission would also look into the issue of chemical
weapons used against Afghan Government troops in

 

battles just east of Kabul in Lata-band, Band-i-Ghazi and
Pul-i-Charkhi, on 25 and 26 September 1996.

In addressing the Council from this table, I sometimes
wonder to myself, as I did when I addressed the General
Assembly last week, whether this international body needs
fundamental and structural reforms; whether there are faults
and shortcomings in our commitments; or whether this
institution has become the instrument of power politics for
the rich and powerful at the expense of the poor, the
oppressed and the weak.

I wish to address another crucial subject raised by
some countries: the arms embargo on Afghanistan. We
believe that the embargo should be applied against the
Government that sends these officers and mercenaries to
Afghanistan, thereby blatantly violating the Charter and the
recognized principles of international law. N 0 Article of the
Charter stipulates that such a measure should be imposed
against the Government of a Member State that is itself the
Victim of foreign intervention and conspiracies and which
is defending its sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.

An idea is being floated that international monitoring
teams are to be assigned to report on the import of arms,
ammunition and spare parts by the Afghan Government. It
is quite clear that such a proposal will only act as an
invitation to the armed groups fighting the Government to
broaden their armed aggression simply because no practical
monitoring is feasible along the porous boundaries adjacent
to the territories that they occupy.

As an independent, indivisible, unitary State,
Afghanistan enjoys national sovereignty. The Afghan
Government has the duty to take necessary measures to
defend its territorial integrity and national unity. In
accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter,
Afghanistan has the inherent right to self-defence. Any
attempt to prevent Afghanistan from strengthening its
national defences as a sovereign State would therefore be
against the Charter and particularly against the interests of
peace, stability and security in the region.

If the Government of Afghanistan were convinced that
not importing arms, ammunition and spare parts would
effectively serve to secure peace in Afghanistan, it would
voluntarily decide not to exercise that right, which is
recognized by international law.

As for the implementation of the arms embargo
against the armed groups fighting the Government, these

 

groups are not legally subject to international law. Their
accountability and their observance of any resolution in
this respect are neither legally nor practically credible.
The only effective legal instrument would be the
implementation of a curb on the illicit transfer of arms to
such groups from abroad.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan agrees with the
majority of Member States that the Security Council
should not adopt any resolution the implementation of
which would be exhaustively burdensome and ultimately
unattainable. More than 1,250 kilometres of frontier in the
south-east and south of Afghanistan are unguarded. The
requirements of implementing an arms embargo
practically on such a basis are not workable and the costs
would be exorbitant. The parties involved would continue
to fight by using the arms at their disposal, even if a
quasi-possible arms embargo were announced.

Those recommending the formation of a Security
Council committee to consider any information brought to
its attention by States concerning the violations of the
embargo have to answer to the following question: how
about the violation by such military intelligence services
as Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI)? These violations have
always been considered official secrets of military
intelligence services and, by definition, cannot be the
object of an investigation by civilian or international
authorities. Such a proposal would have one equivalent:
the delegation of the country responsible for 99 per cent
of interventions in Afghanistan proposing in a draft it has
circulated that all States refrain from interfering in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan.

Let me now consider a solution to the present crisis
in Afghanistan. All present may be aware that forces of
the Islamic State of Afghanistan have been able to
recapture most areas recently seized by the Taliban.
Currently our forces are at the gates of Kabul, the capital.
The most important factors in these successes have been
the popular uprisings of the peoples of Parwan and
Kapisa Provinces. The men and women proved wrong the
propaganda chanted by the sponsors of the Taliban that
people welcomed the Taliban wherever they went.

On the other hand, major power shifts have occurred
in the positions of forces inside Afghanistan. The
Pakistani-backed invasion of Kabul has brought together
forces that for the past four years stood against one
another. This shows that when facing crises jeopardizing
national unity and sovereignty and territorial integrity,

 

despite a past of enmity and bitter experiences, Afghans
will unite against foreign conspiracies.

The agreement reached on 10 October 1996 in
Mazar-i-Sharif and on 11 October 1996 in Khinjan reminds
us about the aspirations of national unity which the Afghans
have exhibited throughout history, including against foreign
invaders, among them the British Empire and the Red
Army. The latest agreement considers two major points:
first, the establishment of the supreme council of
transitional State, headed by Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani,
which is to be broadened and includes General Abdul
Rashid Dostum, Commander Ahmad Shah Massood, Mr.
Karim Khalili and General Ismail Khan; and, secondly, the
Supreme Military Council for the Defence of Afghanistan,
which so far includes the following personalities:
Commander Ahmad Shah Massood, General Abdul Rashid
Dostum, Pir Sayed Ahmad Gailany, Mr. Karim Khalili and
General Ismail Khan, of course under the chairmanship of
President Rabbani.

The Supreme Military Council for the Defence of
Afghanistan, while having the ability to enter and liberate
the capital city of Kabul, is avoiding entering the city in
order to prevent civilian casualties and further destruction
of the capital, and declares the following.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan would observe an
immediate ceasefire under the following conditions: first,
the Taliban armed forces must evacuate the capital
immediately; secondly, their heavy weapons must be
withdrawn to a distance beyond the range of their heavy
artillery; thirdly, Kabul must be recognized as a
demilitarized zone; fourthly, a police force should be
formed under the supervision of the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to ensure the
security of Kabul; and, fifthly, the negotiations should start
in order to pave the way for the formation of an interim
government of national unity in the capital city of Kabul.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan, while presenting this
proposal, demands that the Security Council exert the
necessary international pressure on the Taliban to accept
and agree on this proposal.

If the Taliban continue to insist that they are the only
force, one which usurped power, endangered life in Kabul
and tortured and oppressed civilians, the armed forces of
the Islamic State of Afghanistan will resort to action to end
this catastrophic situation in Kabul, should there be no
other alternative.

 

We are moving closer to the end of the twentieth
century. The Afghan nation, against the background of
what it has experienced, is increasingly bound to ask itself
some of the deepest, most fundamental and far-reaching
questions ever. What is the meaning of life and of all the
sacrifices it has offered and the grievances it has endured?
Where will it be going? How can the community of
nations manage this wonderfully rich, life-teeming planet
in peace, justice and happiness for all, if Afghans are part
of all this?
May all present be inspired by the image of a soldier
painted as a symbol on the mural in the Security Council
Chamber just in front of us: a soldier depositing his arms,
taking off his helmet and wanting to walk straight into the
Security Council. Yes, the artist, like Mahatma Gandhi,
Franklin Roosevelt, Simon Bolivar and Olof Palme had
the right view and knew the right path: the road to peace
goes through security. The Afghan nation thirsts to follow
the path to peace. We come to this Council and pledge
our resoluteness to forget what happened in the past and
to work together for building our shattered common
house, if the Council pledges to give voice to the anxiety
of our suffering people and halt the outside interference
and intervention.

