Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the People's
Republic of China for taking the initiative to convene
this debate and for circulating the concept note to guide
our interventions (S/2018/1004, annex). We also thank
the Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union for their briefings.

Argentina reaffirms its firm commitment to
peacekeeping operations, initiated 60 years ago, in
line with our resolute support for the development of a
transparent and effective peacekeeping system within
the framework of the United Nations. We believe that
peacekeeping operations must be part of a holistic
strategy that includes conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and sustainable peacebuilding that integrates the
perspective of sustainable development and human
rights and addresses the root causes of conflicts.

Against that backdrop, Argentina has been
participating in peacekeeping operations in Africa for
58 years and is currently present in the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic.

We believe that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations should be tailored to specific contexts. We
also see a growing tendency to require peacekeeping
operations to perform better in performing a greater
number of tasks in increasingly risky and complex
operational environments. In that context, there is a
need for more effective and flexible missions, based on
clear mandates and benchmarks for both staff and host
States, with adequate advance planning and resources.

Argentina has supported from the outset the
conception of peacekeeping operations as policy tools
to be designed and implemented as part of a broader
strategy in support of viable political processes and
the peaceful resolution of disputes. That is why we
are convinced of the value of regional and subregional
bodies for the maintenance of international peace
and security, as well as for peacebuilding and the
building of sustainable peace. The development of
multilateralism at the regional level and cooperation
with the peacekeeping operations has proved to
be highly effective for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts, through the promotion of political dialogue
and mediation.

Argentina agrees on the need for all stakeholders
to renew our commitment to peacekeeping operations.
That is why we support the reform of the peace and
security pillar presented by the Secretary-General and
have adhered to the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, launched
within the framework of the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Through the Declaration,
we reaffirm the primacy of politics in conflict
resolution and the supportive role of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, with regard to the prevention
of conflicts and the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, it is essential to highlight the role of regional
and subregional bodies in promoting political solutions
based on dialogue through their mediation efforts,
as well as the action of African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Council under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, by endorsing the Declaration, we
committed ourselves to support the African Union in
strengthening and implementing its policies, procedures
and capacities, through international cooperation
and support measures, with the aim of improving the
strategic partnership between the two organizations,
in order to improve the planning, deployment and
management of peacekeeping operations in Africa.
The security of peacekeeping operations staff
continues to be a major concern, as missions increasingly
deploy in highly unstable scenarios and where there is
no peace to keep. In that regard, we condemn in the
strongest terms all attacks and acts of violence against
peacekeeping personnel, and we call for all the necessary
measures to be taken to bring those responsible to
justice and ensure adequate accountabililty.

Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing my
sincere appreciation for the courageous personnel of
field missions and to pay tribute to the personnel who
have lost their lives over the past year in the discharge
of their duty in maintaining peace and in pursuit of the
ideal ofa more just and peaceful world.

