Mr. Kellenberger: I thank you, Mr. President, for
your invitation, which attests to the recognition of the role
played by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in an area at the core of its concerns: the protection
of civilian populations in armed conflict. It gives me
particular pleasure to take the floor under your presidency,
Sir, as you are a convincing promoter of the concept of
human security - a concept close to my heart.

The importance of taking the humanitarian dimension
into account in maintaining international peace and security
is now generally acknowledged. The open debate that took
place in March at the initiative of the Bangladesh
presidency is evidence of firm commitment to pursuing that
course. That commitment should be translated into even
more tangible measures.

The ICRC's action is rooted in international
humanitarian law. As guardian of that body of law, the
ICRC endeavours to ensure that it is respected by all parties
involved in conflict, be they Governments or non-state
entities. Through its presence in more than 80 countries, the
ICRC establishes a dialogue with all actors in conflicts with
a view to creating a relationship of trust, thereby securing
the practical implementation of humanitarian law and
making sure that we have access to all victims of armed
conflicts in order to protect and assist them.

The protection of civilians is at the centre of that law.
I would, however, like to point out in passing that
humanitarian law also protects combatants, in particular
those placed hors de combat: prisoners of war and sick or
wounded members of the armed forces. For this
protection to be effective, all States must ratify the
humanitarian law instruments, such as the 1977 Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions. Furthermore, it is
crucial that States adopt national implementation measures
and give instruction in the law, especially to their armed
forces. These various aspects of legal protection are vital
and we are glad to see that they are mentioned in the
Secretary-General' s report.

Despite all the horrors that we witness and are often
powerless to remedy, and despite the obvious limits to
what is known as legal protection, we are convinced that
humanitarian law is as relevant as ever. This was one of
the conclusions of a major survey, entitled "People on
War", carried out by the ICRC last year among the
population of several countries, most of which had been
affected by war. The survey strongly reaffirmed the
importance of maintaining the distinction between
civilians and combatants, the cardinal principle of
humanitarian law.

In practice, however, that distinction is tending to
become blurred. Indeed, civilians have become the
primary victims and often the very object of war. Various
reasons, mainly ethnic, religious, economic and social, are
put forward to explain this phenomenon. Those causes are
compounded by other factors, such as the emergence of
paramilitary groups, whose members may have had no
proper training and whose actions may be unpredictable,
sometimes committing atrocities and becoming easy
targets themselves. An equally worrying fact is that
members of regular armed forces, if they are without
resources because they have not received their pay, may
resort to all sorts of excesses in order to survive.

The aim of humanitarian law is to protect the
civilian population as a whole against attack, whether
targeted or indiscriminate, and against acts of violence
and abuse of all kinds. Humanitarian law also provides
specific protection for certain categories of victims, such
as women, children, internally displaced persons, refugees
and persons reported missing. The work of the ICRC,
therefore, cannot be limited to certain categories; it
encompasses all victims, while taking into account their
particular vulnerability.

Violations of humanitarian law perpetrated against
civilians cause mass population movements. Millions of
people are terrorized and forced to flee for their lives, or

 

are driven from their homes and sometimes resettled against
their will in camps or villages.

Today the ICRC affords protection and assistance -
often the two cannot be separated - to some five million
displaced persons. Africa is particularly severely affected.
In Angola, the new upsurge in fighting has caused a mass
exodus from rural areas into towns. The ICRC is providing
aid in the form of food, medical assistance and agricultural
rehabilitation for some 330,000 displaced persons and
residents in the Huambo and Kuito areas.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the ICRC
is supplying about 200,000 vulnerable people with food and
other relief, not to mention the support given to the medical
infrastructure, the ICRC's efforts to gain access to persons
deprived of their freedom, and the distribution of safe water
to hundreds of thousands of people.

In Colombia, where it has been working since 1969,
the ICRC has set up, in cooperation with the Colombian
Red Cross, an aid programme for displaced victims of the
internal conflict. In 1999 the ICRC alone gave emergency
assistance to some 170,000 displaced people.

To take one last example - and I am mentioning only
some of the most striking examples - in Afghanistan,
where it has 70 expatriate staff and over 1,000 national
employees, the ICRC is assisting thousands of displaced
families and families who have returned to their places of
origin, and 23,000 more in Kabul where the head of the
family is widowed or disabled. In addition, over 150,000
people receive medical care thanks to the programme of
support for hospitals. Altogether, the ICRC provides full or
partial support for more than 30 surgical units and runs five
limb-fitting centres.

These needs are so enormous that they could never be
covered by a single organization. The ICRC, concerned to
achieve maximum efficiency, takes part in the examination
and formulation of strategies designed to strengthen
consultation and cooperation with other humanitarian actors,
in particular the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations
specialized agencies and others, so as to ensure
complementary action and avoid duplication of work. This
cooperation and coordination takes place laterally and on
the operational level in the field.

The ICRC endeavours to promote harmonization of the
approaches of the various humanitarian agencies. Since
1996 it has held four workshops on the protection of
victims of armed conflict to help enhance the
effectiveness of humanitarian and human rights
organizations. The main thrust of this initiative is to
clarify the concept of protection as understood by
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law. In
regard to displaced persons, the ICRC has drawn attention
to the untoward consequences that can result from the
simple transposition of long-term solutions appropriate for
refugees onto persons displaced within their own country.
That being said, I remain convinced that cooperation and
coordination between the different humanitarian actors
can and must be improved. In this effort, the ICRC can
be counted on to act in the interest of the victims without
compromising its independence, neutrality or impartiality.
These three principles have no merits on their own but
are designed to allow us to do our job in the field as
effectively as possible and also to have, through that
presence, an adequate early warning capacity.

I should like now to say a few words about
particularly vulnerable categories of persons.

As concerns women in war, the Geneva Conventions
and their additional Protocols afford women, as civilians,
the same general protection as men. However, these
instruments recognize the necessity of offering women
specific protection because of their special needs. Despite
these rules, women continue to suffer and, all too often,
to be the targets of violence in armed conflicts. The
parties to conflict are obliged to ensure the protection of,
and respect for, women. It is high time for that protection
to become a reality. Improving the protection of women
and girls in times of armed conflict is a priority for the
ICRC.

Indeed, this resolve has taken shape in a project
entitled "Women affected by armed conflict". The ICRC
is currently drawing up guidelines for its operational
activities relating to protection and assistance for women
in times of armed conflict. This commitment takes the
form of a four-year programme covering, among other
things, the dissemination of the rules of humanitarian law
protecting women and the issue of sexual violence. The
ICRC has also undertaken to make sure that all its
activities take account of the needs of women and girls,
on the basis of a study which is nearing completion. An
intensive awareness-raising campaign is under way in the
media. Before Beijing + 5, a film produced jointly with
the BBC, a radio programme and a new brochure on
women in war will be prepared and ready.

 

It is impossible to broach this matter without recalling
Canada's special commitment to the issue and the role
played by the Canadian Government and Red Cross Society
during the twenty-seventh International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent. The plight of children in
times of armed conflict has been a source of concern for
the ICRC for many years. The Geneva Conventions and
their additional Protocols afford children general protection
as members of the civilian population. There are also a
large number of provisions affording them specific
protection. All of our field operations comprise activities
aimed at protecting children and at ensuring their health and
safety. Examples of these activities are the identification
and registration of unaccompanied children and follow-up
of their cases, representations to secure the release of
children held in detention, physical or psychosocial
rehabilitation, and the restoration of family links.

The ICRC cooperates, and intends to continue to
cooperate, in an effective manner with other agencies in the
field and with Governments. The ICRC and the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement will
carry on working to improve the situation of children in
times of conflict, in accordance with the Plan of Action
adopted at the twenty-seventh International Conference.

I should now like to refer to missing persons. For
families, one of the most tragic consequences of war is not
knowing what has happened to loved ones. Apart from the
mental suffering caused by this uncertainty, there can also
be serious legal and economic implications. Tracing missing
persons has always been at the heart of the ICRC's
mandate, and in the aftermath of fighting, it is one of its
priorities.

One practical way of ascertaining the fate of persons
reported missing is to negotiate access to places of
detention with the authorities concerned and to hand them
lists drawn up on the basis of statements of the missing
persons' families. In this task the ICRC is often aided by
the national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, which
are invaluable partners both within the country concerned
and abroad.

Humanitarian law bears witness to the importance that
States attach to the issue of missing persons, but the
relevant rules have yet to be properly applied in all conflict
situations. The ICRC commends the efforts made by the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
Kosovo and after the Gulf War, but urges it to heed the
plight of families in other contexts which may attract less
attention from the media. Indeed, the ICRC suggests that
the issue of persons unaccounted for, and its own role in
that regard, be systematically included in peace accords.
The ICRC is convinced that the incorporation of
humanitarian issues, such as missing persons, prisoners of
war and detainees, can strengthen post-conflict
peace-consolidation efforts.

I shall now speak about the role of the Security
Council. When you, Mr. President, invited me to speak
before the Security Council today, you asked me to
outline the ICRC's views on the progress made in the
Council since its debate on the protection of civilians that
took place last year. I will do so with modesty, which is
advisable in general, but particularly so for a greenhorn.
But I will do so gladly. I would like, first of all, to stress
how much we appreciate the growing importance that the
Security Council attaches to the protection of civilians in
times of armed conflict. The mobilization of the
international community on this issue inevitably hinges on
the Security Council's awareness of its urgency.

The Secretary-General's excellent report and the
numerous recommendations it contains also go to the
heart of the matter and raise very pertinent questions.
Furthermore, it is most encouraging that the Council is
disposed to establish a monitoring mechanism and that the
major humanitarian agencies are associated with this
initiative, which guarantee that the debate will not remain
a virtual one. Security Council resolutions contribute to
creating a culture conducive to the prevention of
violations and the cessation of impunity for the culprits.
We cannot but welcome this trend. However, these
appeals will rapidly become empty words unless they are
accompanied by practical and concrete measures intended
to improve protection of the physical integrity of
individuals.

In his report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, issued last
September, the Secretary-General drew a clear distinction
between recommended measures to strengthen physical
protection and recommended measures to strengthen legal
protection. I find this distinction useful and necessary, for
we are all too aware of the limitations of legal protection
alone. Speaking for a humanitarian organization that is
present and active on a permanent basis in practically all
situations of armed conflict, I would like to add in all
modesty that this active presence and the will - the
strong will - to maintain dialogue and contact with all
parties to the conflict constitute an essential factor for
protection in themselves.

 

The Secretary-General's recommendation that the
Security Council consider the imposition of appropriate
enforcement action in the face of massive and ongoing
abuse was made in the context of a debate which became
acutely pertinent following the action of North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) forces in the Balkans. Here I
would like to share with the members of the Council a
concern of the ICRC which has to do very much with the
weight of words. The term "humanitarian" has often been
misused. We have heard talk of a "humanitarian war" or
even of "coercive humanitarian countermeasures", to cite
only a few of the expressions that create dangerous
confusion as to the respective roles and responsibilities of
political actors on the one hand and humanitarian
organizations on the other.

The question here is not the validity of coercive action
in extreme circumstances. Such action is often a last resort,
necessary to protect the civilian population. Indeed, it may
be essential in situations where there are large-scale and
systematic violations of human rights and humanitarian law.
The States parties to the 1949 Geneva Conventions have
undertaken not only to respect, but also to ensure respect
for, the rules set out in those Conventions.

Coercive measures, however, should be envisaged only
in extreme cases. The Security Council has numerous other
means at its disposal for enhancing the security of
populations, ranging from preventive deployment to the
dispatch of peacekeeping or peace-consolidation forces. The
Council is to be commended for making provision, in the
mandate of certain missions, for measures designed to
protect civilians who are in immediate danger of physical
violence. These innovative developments demonstrate the
will to take concrete action.

In the ICRC's view, the important thing is to
distinguish between political and military action aimed at
addressing the causes of conflict and humanitarian action
aimed at addressing its effects. The law governing the right
to use force, or jus ad bellum, must therefore remain clearly
distinct from humanitarian law automatically applicable in
the event of military operations, or jus in bello. The
legitimacy of the cause being defended can in no
circumstances exempt a military operation from the
obligations laid down in international humanitarian law.

We have noted, however, that peacekeeping operations
are taking on an increasing number of humanitarian aspects.
This trend entails certain dangers. In situations where peace
is still fragile, United Nations troops may have to use force,
which can create the impression that they are party to the
conflict. This can cause them to be denied access to
certain regions and thus to some of the victims. In
general, the ICRC believes that coercive action, apart
from affording protection for civilians, should create
conditions that allow humanitarian agencies to operate,
but without being associated with such action in any way.
Being associated with coercive action would jeopardize
the work of humanitarian organizations by undermining
their credibility and their acceptance by the parties to the
conflict. So it is the confusion between different modes of
action that is causing us concern and appears dangerous.
To each his own: the use of force is the domain of the
military, and relief activities the domain of humanitarian
agencies.

I would not like to conclude without saying a few
words about the sanctions which have been at the centre
of the Council's debates this week. The ICRC has always
been concerned by the humanitarian consequences for the
civilian population; therefore, it cannot but express its
appreciation for the decision to establish a working group
on that topic, notably with a View to fully taking into
account humanitarian consequences.
It is essential to strengthen all aspects of
complementary action if we are to bring about tangible
improvement in the protection of civilians. In this regard,
I feel that firm resolve on the part of the Security Council
to take bold political decisions and create the conditions
necessary for the humanitarian organizations to preserve
their indispensable independence will guarantee effective
implementation of our shared objectives.

