Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to join
others in welcoming Foreign Minister Portas and
Foreign Minister Da Costa, both very important
presences with us today, as well as Special
Representative Ameerah Haq, whose contribution,
together with that of her team from the United Nations
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), has remained
instrumental. I would also like to thank Portugal for
inviting non-Council members to participate. Australia
and Portugal have actually developed a closer
relationship through our joint cooperation in Timor-
Leste.

Timor-Leste has experienced an extended and
increasingly confident period of stability over the past
three and a half years, allowing the Government to turn

its attention to the vital tasks of strengthening State
institutions, improving service delivery to its people,
building infrastructure and boosting the economy. Into
the future, growing Government budgets will provide
scope for greater public investment in health, education
and rural development. Agriculture requires particular
attention, and so of course do the employment needs of
youth.

Australia welcomed the Timorese Government's
decision to take a longer view of its development,
which culminated in the Strategic Development Plan
released in July - an appropriately ambitious vision.
Australia will support the Plan's objectives through
targeted assistance programmes in health, education,
infrastructure, rural development and other areas.

It is widely understood, of course, that next
year's national elections will test the strength of Timor-
Leste's institutions, in particular the country's political
parties, security institutions and electoral authorities.
We have confidence in Timor-Leste's ability to run fair
and transparent effective elections. We know that the
Timorese people hold their democratic institutions to
high account. We are impressed by the commitment of
political leaders to peaceful elections and to the
education of voters about their rights and
responsibilities with respect to strengthening Timor-
Leste's young democracy. The Maubisse dialogues,
which bring Timor-Leste's political leadership,
including opposition members, together, continue to
reinforce to leaders of all parties that continued peace
is in everybody's interests.

The election period will test the capacity of
security services, in particular the police. We have to
say that we have been concerned by the sporadic
outbreaks of violence perpetrated by martial arts gangs.
However, having said that, we are very encouraged that
the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) was able to
contain recent incidents, such as the violence in
Zumalai in August. I note very carefully Foreign
Minister Da Costa's reassuring comments on all that
earlier this morning. The resumption of full policing
responsibility by the PNTL in March coincided with a
concentrated period of mentoring and consolidation,
including focused capacity-building ahead of the
election period.

My own country has provided some of the
specialist trainers within the United Nations police and
will continue to support the development of the PNTL
through a separate capacity-building programme.
Looking ahead, adequate levels of Government
budgetary support for the PNTL, as well as continuing
a sustained programme of capacity-building, will be
needed to ensure that it develops into a professional,
resilient police force that is responsive to the
community it serves. The international security forces
also stands ready to provide support to Timor-Leste's
security institutions and to United Nations police
during the elections, if that should in fact be necessary.

As many have already said today, the
performance of Timor-Leste's democratic institutions
during next year's elections will indicate critical
benchmarks for determining the timing of UNMIT's
transition. For that and other reasons, it is important
that UNMIT's mandate be extended until at least the
end of 2012 to support the consolidation of a new
Government.

Australia is optimistic about the conduct of next
year's elections and the future development of Timor-
Leste. We encourage the conditions-based approach,
clearly outlined in the joint transition plan, as an
ongoing guide for the approach of the Council. We
acknowledge the work that the Government of Timor-
Leste and UNMIT have put into the joint transition
plan, and look forward to continued dialogue with the
Government of Timor-Leste and United Nations
agencies on its implementation. It will, of course, as
people have said, be an evolving plan, but its
innovativeness and deliberation is commendable.
While the joint transition plan should prompt some
preliminary discussions on a post-UNMIT United
Nations presence, we agree that the nature of that
presence should be guided by the views of the next
Government in Timor-Leste itself. We have taken
careful note of the views of political leaders that the
United Nations should have an ongoing role in
strengthening the foundations of Timor-Leste's
democracy.
To conclude, 2012 will be a historic, landmark
year for Timor-Leste. Beyond the national elections
and the expected withdrawal of UNMIT, Timor-Leste
will celebrate the tenth anniversary of its
independence. Important challenges of course remain;
we all know that. But the people of Timor-Leste have
much to look forward to and are moving very much in
the right direction. My own country will continue to
work with Timor-Leste's Government, other partners
and the United Nations to assist in this crucial
transition phase and beyond.

Lastly, I would also like to commend Brazil for
its work over the past two years as chair of the core
group on Timor-Leste, and to welcome Vice-Minister
Crivano Machado's presence today. We are very
grateful to Brazil for its leadership during this period.

