Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by thanking Spain for having
convened this meeting on the working methods of the
Council at a moment of fundamental importance for the
United Nations as we debate Security Council reform,
the new dynamic for selecting the Secretary-General
and the changing relationship between the various
organs and bodies. In that contect, Panama believes that
the time has come for this debate to be revitalized in
the light of two interrelated aspects: transparency in the
acts of the Organization and ethics as the indisputable
guiding principle of the decision-making process of all
bodies of the United Nations without exception.

Although the world has been subject to the most
diverse changes since 1946, the structures and internal
dynamics of the Organization have not necessarily
responded to these new realities as required and
demanded by the international agenda. The process of
Security Council reform today is a matter of growing
interest to 97.4 per cent of this community and
represents no less than the need for States to ensure
that their membership is representative of current
geopolitical and regional realities.

The efforts of the 51 Member States, including
Panama, that founded the Organization in 1945 are
noteworthy and have fulfilled many of their objectives,
but the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, must respond to another historic moment,
and the current membership must be open not only
to sustaining debate but to encouraging it so as to
strengthen a decision-making organ that speaks for the
Member States, which now number 193.

After 70 years, the essential functions assigned
by the Charter of the United Nations to the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security continue and will continue to be relevantm, but
it is beyond doubt that this organ needs to be revitalized
so that it will be not only more representative but also
more effective, transparent, open and accountable to
the international community. That need underlines
the importance of the various initiatives aimed at
overcoming the right of veto in the Security Council,
which in various cases limits the immediate action and
efficiency of the United Nations in specific situations
or where there is a risk of crimes or violations.

We have expressed our support of the initiative
promoted by Liechtenstein and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group with regard to a
code of conduct that would promote the idea of a more
democratic Security Council. We also support the
initiative of France and Mexico and are following it
particularly closely because it reflects the first time that
a permanent member of the Security Council has taken
leadership in the discussion on revising and updating
its own privilege.

Panama has previously stated that diverse
participation within the Security Council, particularly
on the part of developing countries, would provide
greater transparency in decision-making and the
implementation of decisions. Likewise, we believe
that the veto in the Security Council played its historic
role in previous decades following the conflict of the
Second World War. Today, however, even the smallest
of countries demand that they be treated equally as we
are all subject to international law.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that it is
important that we consider the recommendations of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, which, since its establishment,
in 1993, has been working on those issues in order to
improve and rationalize the modalities and methods
used by the Security Council. We acknowledge the
opportunity afforded to us by this open debate to
consider the question ofthe Council's working methods.
We are encouraged that we are moving in the right
direction to come up with the comprehensive reforms
that the Organization so urgently requires.

