Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Faced
with the tragic developments in the Gaza Strip since
December, which have caused destruction, distress and
many deaths, in particular among the civilian
population, the Security Council, being charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
has an obligation to act and to contribute to an end to
hostilities and to re-establishing calm in the region. It
is finally doing so tonight.

Over the past three days, the Security Council,
with the vital assistance of Arab countries and their
ministers, who are represented here, has undertaken
substantial efforts to achieve the best possible
agreement in order to bring about an immediate,
durable and fully respected ceasefire, humanitarian
access to the area and the optimum conditions for a
return to the peace process.

Mexico has emphatically stressed the need for the
action of the Security Council to be expressed in the
most united fashion possible. Mexico therefore decided
to support the adoption of, resolution 1860 (2009),
which was negotiated through intensive consultations
in the expectation that its provisions would be applied
immediately on the ground.

The resolution that has been adopted has its
merits. It promotes, in a balanced manner, the
conditions for a durable ceasefire, allows for
unrestricted humanitarian access through the
establishment of corridors for the delivery of assistance
and seeks the resumption of negotiations as the only
possible way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
It is a question not of going back to the immediate past,
but of building the best possible foundation for the
future.

However, my delegation would have preferred the
resolution that we have just adopted to incorporate an
explicit reference to the importance of respecting the
provisions of international humanitarian law. Likewise,
we should have liked to see a direct reference in the
text to the establishment of an international mechanism

for monitoring all measures to be agreed upon in the
context of the diplomatic negotiations under way.

The United Nations through the Security Council,
needs to endorse that process and continue to promote
its further development and ensure its rigorous
implementation. By adopting this resolution with a
view to the future, the Security Council has fully
shouldered its responsibilities and manifested its
support for the need to resume the peace process so as
to bring about the establishment of a Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace, within secure
and recognized borders, in accordance with resolution
1850 (2008).

