Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 1769
(2007). The establishment of the African Union/United
Nations hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is a
decisive step in the international community's action to
put an end to the suffering of the people of Darfur and
to restore lasting stability in that region of the Sudan. It
generates great hope for Darfur; it is now up to us to
translate that hope into reality.

The decision was the outcome of a process of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union that was exemplary in many respects.
That cooperation led to the high-level Addis Ababa
Agreement of 16 November. In that respect, my
delegation welcomes the personal commitment of the
Secretary-General, whom I welcome to this meeting,
and the decisive action of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in this endeavour. The
decision was also the fruit of a collective effort of the
international community, among which the principal
actors on Darfur mobilized to provide a strong and
decisive response to the political, security and
humanitarian challenges posed by the crisis.

France took full part in that effort by bringing
together in Paris on 25 June the participants of the
expanded Contact Group for Darfur; by preparing,
jointly with the United Kingdom, the text of today's
resolution; and by working actively, in close

cooperation with all our partners in the Security
Council, to ensure the timely adoption of the text, as
the President of France and the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom vowed to do on 20 July.

Throughout the process, my delegation and that
of the United Kingdom were also inspired by the
concern to involve the Sudan, whose Government has a
critical responsibility for the implementation of the
resolution. We intend to continue to work with the
Khartoum authorities to ensure the speediest possible
deployment of the African Union/United Nations
hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and to create
the conditions necessary for it to be effective. We
appeal to the Sudanese Government and to all parties
to the conflict to cooperate fully to attain those goals.
To that end, everyone must fully respect the ceasefire.

We are all aware that we face the particularly
heavy challenge of completing the deployment of
UNAMID so that it can make a real difference on the
ground. Given its exceptional size, its unprecedented
hybrid nature and joint leadership by two
organizations, and the difficulty of the terrain and the
situation there, UNAMID will require special
commitment and ongoing mobilization on the part of
the international community, relying on the United
Nations and the African Union, which have a special
responsibility. France will stand with them.

During the forthcoming transition in the field, we
will also have a special responsibility to continue to
support the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS)
before it hands over to the hybrid force. It is crucial in
particular that the deployment of the heavy support
package be concluded as soon as possible. We owe that
to the soldiers of AMIS, to whom my delegation pays
tribute. As the first mission to be deployed, AMIS has
done an outstanding job in especially difficult
conditions.

In addition to the establishment of UNAMID, we
will have resolutely to pursue our collective work in
various areas. First, we have the humanitarian task of
helping the people of Darfur. In that regard, France
pays tribute to the 13,000 humanitarian workers
involved there. Their work must be fully supported and
facilitated by the parties, in particular the Sudanese
Government, pursuant to the communique issued
jointly by that Government and the United Nations.
The unacceptable attacks on the population absolutely
must stop.

Secondly, we must work for a political settlement
in full support for the United Nations and African
Union mediators, Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed
Salim. France welcomes the decisions taken in Tripoli
on the peace negotiations. Negotiations must begin
immediately between the Sudanese Government and
the rebel movements, including those that have not
joined the peace process. We call on them to join the
process as soon as possible.

Finally, we must act to mitigate the grave
repercussions of the Darfur crisis in the region,
particularly in eastern Chad and the north-east of the
Central African Republic. Along with its European
Union partners, France is ready to act to win support
for the international police force in the field and to
provide security for displaced persons and refugees in
those two countries. We intend to pursue our aim of
taking the speedy decisions whose urgency is dictated
by the gravity of the situation of the populations
involved.

In the longer term, my delegation hopes that the
rapid establishment of secure conditions and progress
in the political dialogue will allow us to move towards
long-term reconstruction through concrete projects that
will improve the daily lives of the inhabitants. We must
prepare for that as well.

Our Council has today sent a very strong signal
of its unanimous commitment to restoring peace and
security to Darfur. The international community has
come together to attain that goal. The coming months
will be critical to responding to the high expectations
elicited by today's decision and to ensuring that Darfur
is no longer, as it is today, a synonym for despair,
distress and Violence. Let us live up to the challenge by
remaining united and by contributing to and
cooperating jointly in this long-term effort. France is
more than ever resolved to do so.

