Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation took the initiative of
calling for this emergency meeting of the Security
Council because of the alarming situation in South
Ossetia, which has been brought about by the blatant
and aggressive actions of the Georgian armed forces
against that republic, which is an internationally
recognized party to the conflict.
During the night of 8 August 2008 local time,
literally just a few hours after reaching an agreement
on holding negotiations to resolve the escalation in the
South Ossetian conflict, Georgian military divisions
began a treacherous and massive attack against
Tskhinvali. The military option was used by the
Georgian authorities despite all the diplomatic efforts
that had been undertaken in contacts between Moscow,
Tbilisi, Tskhinvali, Washington and other interested
capitals.

The Russian Federation has recently and
repeatedly warned members of the Council of a likely
escalation in the situation. We warned Council
members that the Georgian authorities had augmented
their offensive forces. Indeed, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe warned of growing
militarization in Georgia, as seen in the alarming build-
up of the Georgian armed forces. Our warnings were
ignored, and the Council is obliged today not only to
deal with a resurgence in the conflict but to discuss a
situation that represents a threat to regional security
and peace.

Because of Georgia's actions, the situation in the
conflict zone has now reached a critical phase. Massive
artillery fire is being directed against a peaceful
civilian population, including old people and children,
using Grad multiple launch systems and large-calibre
rocket launchers. Shooting is taking place in the centre
of the capital of South Ossetia, where dozens of houses
are engulfed in flames. According to available
information, at 3 a.m. local time, Georgian tanks and
infantry began to attack the southern parts of
Tskhinvali.

Such policies of the Georgian authorities
dramatically contravene the hopes that Tbilisi was
promoting. We can already say with certainty that the
aggressive acts ordered by the Georgian authorities
have done great damage to the peace process and to the
prospects of achieving a political or diplomatic
settlement. Tbilisi is trying to create a smokescreen
around its acts by both blaming the Russian Federation,
including Russian television channels, for everything,
and talking about peace, in sharp contrast with its
actual conduct.

The Georgian military are being more frank about
events. A few hours ago, General Mamuka Kurashvili,
commander of the peacekeeping contingent of the
Georgian armed forces in Georgia, announced in front
08-45458
of the television cameras that the decision had been
taken in Tbilisi to restore constitutional order in South
Ossetia - that is, to resolve a long-standing conflict
by military means. Even Georgian politicians have let
the cat out of the bag: Temur Yakobashvili, State
Minister for Reintegration, has said that the goal of his
leaders was to put an end to the regime in Tskhinvali.

As a result of all those actions, Tbilisi has totally
destroyed the credibility of the Georgian leadership as
a responsible party to the negotiating process and, in
general, as a member of the international community
guided by the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

It is now quite understandable why Tbilisi has,
for a long period of time and using many pretexts,
stubbornly refused to reach an agreement with South
Ossetia and Abkhazia on the non-use of force.
Members of the Security Council will recall that that
has been the principal element in many Council
resolutions. The Russian Federation has insisted on
that and will continue to do so. Since the current flare-
up of the conflict began, the Russian Federation has
done everything possible to de-escalate it. We have
sent a special representative of our Minister for
Foreign Affairs to the region, and we are using all
available leverage to exert positive pressure.

The Security Council must now play its role. We
are convinced that the Council must immediately call
for an end to the hostilities and for a rejection of the
use of force. The Council and the international
community as a whole cannot remain on the sidelines
at this difficult moment, when the fate of the hundreds
of thousands of people living in the region is being
decided. Together, we must put an end to the violence,
which has serious implications for regional and
international security.

There is still time to avoid further casualties,
including among the civilian population. The Georgian
leadership must reflect and must return to civilized
means of resolving difficult issues related to a political
settlement. The Russian Federation will continue its
efforts to prevent any further bloodshed and to put the
situation in South Ossetia back on a peaceful track.

