Mr. Fedotov: Allow me to begin by commending
the presidency of Egypt for holding a meeting on this
very important and timely topic.

As the Security Council has recognized on several
occasions, preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons, including conventional arms as well as
weapons of mass destruction, is essential to countering
terrorism. Terrorists obtain weapons by many means,
in all parts of the world, facilitated by access to poorly
secured stockpiles; weak border management; the use
of online platforms, including hidden marketplaces;
and diversion linked to poor transfer controls. Illicit
weapons trafficking is often associated with other
forms of organized crime.

Furthermore, the Security Council has highlighted
the growing threat to international peace and security
posed by the nexus of organized crime and terrorism,
with terrorist groups benefiting from crime and from
links with organized criminal networks. Preventing
weapons from falling into the hands of terrorists thus
presents complex challenges requiring integrated,
multifaceted criminal-justice responses.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) is entrusted with promoting the
implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, including
its Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition. UNODC also supports the
implementation of the international instruments against
terrorism, the conventions on corruption and drugs,
and United Nations standards and norms on crime
prevention and criminal justice.

Seven of the nineteen international legal instruments
related to counter-terrorism address the criminalization
of conducts by non-State actors regarding chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons, as well as nuclear and
other radioactive material. UNODC also works closely
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts to prevent the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors.

We support the implementation of the Firearms
Protocol to prevent and combat the illicit manufacturing
and diversion of and trafficking in firearms and
ammunition, and to enhance States' capacities to go
after criminal organizations engaged in the illicit
firearms business and related forms of transnational
organized crime. This includes enhancing national
policies and legislation as well as firearms management
and collection and destruction activities; technical
assistance tools and capacity-building; and promoting
and facilitating international cooperation and
information exchange.

Through our Global Firearms Programme, UNODC
is working in key parts of the world, including the
Maghreb and the Sahel as well as the Western Balkans,
to strengthen the fight against illicit trafficking in
firearms and its links to terrorism. The Office also took
part in a briefing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on this topic in May, and we are in discussions with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
explore synergies for joint action.

However, many challenges remain in preventing,
detecting, investigating and successfully prosecuting
illicit trafficking in weapons, including inadequate
regulatory environments and data collection; lack
of specialized skills and equipment; and lack of
coordination within and among countries and regions.
Looking ahead, we need to further strengthen cross-
border partnerships and operational responses, promote
the involvement of diverse stakeholders, including the
private sector, and step up tailored assistance to address
gaps in capacity.

UNODC remains fully engaged in providing
comprehensive support through our integrated country,
regional and global programmes and network of field
offices, in coordination with our United Nations
partners and other partners, including INTERPOL. Our
Global Container Control Programme with the World
Customs Organization in particular is helping to detect
and stop illicit trade within the global supply chain at
sea and air ports.

We are supporting Governments in their efforts
to curb corruption and money-laundering as well as
combat cybercrime and the exploitation of the Internet
for terrorist purposes, all of which represent critical
elements of an integrated response aimed at preventing
and disrupting terrorism and organized crime.

We look forward to working closely with the new
Office for Counter-Terrorism, recently established by
the Secretary-General, to ensure that our work is as
efficient and effective as possible and better coordinated
through the United Nations system.

UNODC welcomes the draft resolution to be
adopted today by the Council (S/2017/659) and will take
it as important guidance to further advance our efforts
to respond to this threat.

