Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Since October 1993, the political situation in
Burundi has been turbulent and unstable, the security and
humanitarian situations have further worsened and there has
been an increasing outflow of refugees. This is not only
detrimental to economic recovery and reconstruction, but
also poses a threat to peace and stability in the region. The
Chinese Government is deeply concerned.

The international community, particularly the United
Nations and the relevant regional organizations, have made
untiring efforts to achieve an early settlement of the
question of Burundi. The Secretary-General and his Special
Representative have themselves been to Bujumbura for
talks with the parties concerned. The Security Council has
dispatched to Burundi two fact-finding missions, which
have provided firsthand material to give us a thorough
understanding of the situation in Burundi.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has also
offered its good offices and mediation, and taken a number
of political and diplomatic initiatives. At the thirty-first
ordinary session of the OAU Assembly, Heads of State and
Government held special discussions and decided to take a
number of measures to do with the question of Burundi.
The former President of Tanzania, Mr. Nyerere, has also
been to Burundi, by invitation, as a mediator and to offer
his good offices with a view to finding a political solution
to the Burundi question. We appreciate and support these
efforts.
Despite the efforts made by the international
community, the situation in the Great Lakes region remains
precarious. The outflow of refugees from Burundi to its
neighbouring countries is still going on. Therefore, the
international community, including the United Nations, has
the responsibility to continue to do its utmost to help the
parties in Burundi conduct extensive dialogue, so as to
build mutual trust and achieve national reconciliation.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council demonstrates the concern of the international
community over the situation in Burundi. It is also a
component of international efforts to bring about stability
in Burundi. We hope that the adoption of this draft
resolution will truly promote dialogue among the parties
in Burundi so that their hatred and differences will be
removed and the foundation for national reconciliation
will thus be laid. Therefore, we will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

The Chinese Government and people have all along
followed closely the developments in Burundi and have
deeply sympathized with the people of Burundi in their
sufferings. We have taken an active part in the United
Nations efforts on the question of Burundi and, within our
capacity, have provided material assistance to Burundi
through bilateral channels.

In our view, the final settlement of the question of
Burundi must depend on the Burundi people themselves.
We therefore urge the parties in the country to take into
account State and national interests, start a broad-based
dialogue as soon as possible and implement in earnest the
relevant resolutions of the Council so as to create
conditions for national reconciliation at an early date. We
also hope that the Secretary-General will solicit a wide
range of opinions, including those of the Burundi
Government, when making relevant recommendations.

We welcome further efforts to be made by the
neighbours of Burundi and regional organizations to help
the people of Burundi achieve national reconciliation at
an early date and bring about peace and stability in the
region.

