Mr. Kobler: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the United States of America on presiding
over the Security Council this month.

Members of the Council have received the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (S/2017/283). However, in my
remarks, I would like to concentrate on some strategic
lines and to provide recommendations for consideration
by the Council.

Today, it is more important than ever to forge
unity within Libya. Prior to the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement in Skhirat in 2015, Libya was a
deeply divided country. The broad endorsement of the
Libyan Political Agreement by Libyan stakeholders,
signed with hope and confidence on 17 December 2015,
continues today. The international community also
continues to strongly support the Agreement and its
institutions, and recognizes the Presidency Council as
the sole national executive authority. The statements of
the P-5 ambassadors to Libya and the political support
and engagement of neighbouring countries, as well as
the formation of a quartet comprised of the African
Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union
and the United Nations, are tangible reflections of
international cohesion and commitment. We all share
the same vision. We all share the same road map.

Libyans and the international community alike
support the Agreement. Yes, it can be amended, but
there is no alternative. There is no plan B. Moreover,
there is no need for one. Ifthe parties do not uphold their
responsibilities under the Libyan Political Agreement,
there is no reason to think that they will have any
greater commitment to an alternative agreement.

There are positive signs elsewhere, too. The fight
against terrorism is largely successful in Sirte and
Benghazi. Da'esh no longer controls territory in Libya.
That is a significant achievement as we move towards
the end of the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant in Libya. The security situation in Tripoli
is at least contained. Looking at the economy, oil
production has increased and has potential for further
growth. The National Oil Corporation has achieved
much and demonstrates the need to maintain the unity
of sovereign institutions. Budgetary resources have
been released by the Central Bank of Libya, including
salaries in all parts of the country.

Despite what I have said, we should be honest and
see that the optimism and confidence of Skhirat has
faded. Instead, I see frustration, disappointment and
sometimes anger. Often they are justified. The sharp
horizon established by the Libyan Political Agreement
has blurred, and the path forward is no longer clear
for many. Today, uncertainty has contributed to
fragmentation and dissent, contributing to a dangerous
political power vacuum. Violent clashes, social unrest
and increasing criminality remain common in too many
parts of Libya.

The institutions of the Libyan Political Agreement
must deliver, if they are to maintain credibility and
legitimacy. The divisions in many of the institutions
have impacted their ability to govern. Instead of
functioning for the good of the nation, many have begun
to perceive the power-sharing agreements through the
interests of one group over the other.

The results of those divisions are setting Libya
down a worrying path. Public services, including
access to electricity, health, education and water, are
failing many. The economy continues to decline. The
gross domestic product has lost over half of its value
since 2012. The lack of liquidity prevents Libyans from
accessing their salaries. The dinar is losing value. The
shadow economy and rampant corruption are growing.

Political divisions also threaten the cohesiveness
of sovereign financial institutions, such as the Central
Bank, the National Oil Corporation and the Libyan
Investment Authority. It is difficult to produce a
realistic common budget for the whole of Libya. The
political vacuum complicates efforts to create a united
security force and has encouraged some to advocate for
a military solution to the Libyan crisis. History does
not tolerate a power vacuum. Armed groups are gaining
power, and Libya is Witnessing new and heightened
violence. The gains made against terrorist groups,
including in Benghazi and Sirte, will ultimately be
lost, if some actors continue to strive for power at the
expense of institutions and civil society.

The competition for the control of national resources
will trigger renewed violence if the root causes are not
addressed. The use of violence to obtain short-term
objectives must end. It is time to get back to politics. It
is time to address the core issues, and it is time to get
back to the spirit of Skhirat. Having worked on Libya
since the signature of the Libyan Political Agreement,
I am convinced that Libya will not solve its problems
alone. It needs the strong, united, consistent, robust and
concrete support of the international community; action
and commitment, not merely papers and meetings and
workshops; partnership, not interference; antibiotics,
not aspirin. Please allow me to suggest seven briefpoints
on the way forward for the Council's consideration.

First,theLibyanPoliticalAgreementmustremainthe
framework for a negotiated settlement. I am encouraged
that all important stakeholders and the overwhelming
majority of the Libyan population share that opinion.
Let us build on that consensus. The Prime Minister and
the President of the House of Representatives have both
confirmed their commitment, as has the Commander of
the Libyan National Army, Field Marshal Haftar, during
our meeting last Thursday in Benghazi. The Head of
the State Council has expressed his agreement, as have
almost all representatives of significant institutions and
constituencies. The Agreement is not perfect. There
is a consensus that amendments are needed and that

those amendments can only be done by the Libyans
themselves. We are working to create a consensus on
the mechanisms to enable the amendment. That process
must be inclusive, and those deciding must have the
capacity and commitment to implement their decisions.
Secondly, all security actors must refrain from
any action that might trigger violence and escalation.
The temperature in Libya must be lowered, if
political discussions are to resume. Efforts to expand
control through violence are short-sighted and
counterproductive. I am particularly concerned about
the developments in southern Libya, both military and
humanitarian. The much neglected south just cannot
take more. There will be no unity through violence. The
parties need to step back and talk.

Thirdly, the security track aimed at stabilizing
the situation and creating conditions for the formation
of a unified security apparatus must be urgently
reinvigorated. While progress on security is most
effective when combined with advances on the
political track, confidence-building steps must be
taken immediately. The formation of a committee in
Tripoli to supervise the ceasefire is a good basis on
which to move forward with more structured security
arrangements for the city and a means to strengthen the
authority of the Presidency Council.

Fourthly, the economy and financial situation of the
country needs to be stabilized. Agreement on a budget
framework for 2017 was a significant step forward.
However, budgetary and public-finance mechanisms
must be improved in order to ensure unified and
equitable financing of services and the economy, with
funds distributed fairly and transparently to all regions
of Libya. In that regard, I encourage a more constructive
cooperation between Libya's financial and economic
institutions and the Presidency Council.

Fifthly, national reconciliation must be integrated
decisively at all levels. The ability of Libyan leaders
to mediate local ceasefires is a great asset and has
prevented many sparks from creating fires. Libyans
will soon start a comprehensive bottom-up national
reconciliation initiative supported by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).

Sixthly, public services, security and governance
must start improving at the local levels. In a country with
a legacy of weak national institutions, local authorities
remain among the most respected and effective actors.
We must support them. Democratically elected mayors

must be given authority, funds and responsibility. In
that context, it is important that international partners
be prepared to support the Presidency Council, if
requested, and to deploy expertise, not only outside
Libya, but also in Libya on the ground.

My seventh and last point is particularly important.
It is my wish that the international community move
beyond containment. The focus on the fight against
terrorism and migration alone is not enough. Migration
and terrorism are symptoms, not root causes.

I am grateful for the many initiatives and efforts
of, in particular, neighbouring countries and regional
organizations over the past weeks and months to bring
political and military stakeholders closer together. Now,
I believe it is time for the United Nations to take the lead
again. The United Nations is uniquely placed in Libya.
However, we need the united support of the Security
Council and the wider international community. The
women and men of Libya, its wise elders and its vibrant
youth deserve a better life, and they deserve it now.

I would like, once again, to thank the Security
Council for its unwavering support for my colleagues
and myself. I thank Ambassador Skoog and the
Council presidency, as well as all of the stakeholders
all over Libya, for the cooperation they have extended
throughout the country. I thank them for their support
for the Libyan Political Agreement and for the
opportunity and confidence that they have given all of
us at UNSMIL to serve the people of Libya.

