Mr. Mandela: We are both honoured and saddened by
this occasion: honoured that the leaders of the Great Lakes
region found it fit to call upon us to step into the shoes of
that great son of Africa and the world, Mwalimu Julius
Nyerere, to continue the facilitation of the Burundi peace
process and that we may now in that capacity address the
Security Council of our world body; saddened that the
world, and in this case our beloved continent of Africa,
continues to be haunted by such a self-inflicted human
tragedy as that in Burundi and that there is the need for the
facilitation and process upon which we shall report to the
Security Council this morning.

We cannot commence speaking of this process without
first paying homage to Mwalimu Nyerere. We are inspired
by the energy, patience and wisdom he invested in the
peace process over several years. We are humbled by the
stature of the man whom we are asked to succeed and
heavily under the impression of the obligation that places
upon us.

We need to thank the United Nations for convening
this special meeting of the Security Council to apply its
mind to and remain seized of the matter concerning
Burundi. Where even one single human being, one group
of people, one nation or one part of the world labours
under preventable suffering, it is the concern of all of us
as a world drawn closer together than ever before in our
history.

The misery of the Burundian people affects us all
and diminishes the humanity of all of us. The
international community turns its attention and its energy
to this matter not as a favour to that country or continent.
The failure of those responsible to provide conditions of
security and social development to the people of Burundi
does not represent some errant occurrence on the
periphery. It hits at the heart of our common human
obligation to make of this century one where all human
beings will at last share in the security and prosperity that
our planet is capable of providing.

In spite of the grave difficulties we still face in
Burundi - issues to which I shall return in the course of
this report - it is gratifying to be able to state that a lot
of progress has already been made since the start of the
negotiations. In the past 18 months the Arusha process
has seen the establishment of four committees, each
targeting particular aspects of the negotiations. These
committees have achieved significant progress, and two
of them - the one dealing with the nature of the conflict
and the issue of genocide and the other dealing with
reconstruction and development - have nearly completed
their work. The major outstanding issues for those two
committees are, respectively, the appropriate mechanism
for dealing with the past; and agreement on the question
of the recovery of property by returning refugees. Also,
the question of amnesty remains as particularly
problematic and complex given the history of Burundi; by
the same token, it is one of the crucial matters to be
tackled if permanent peace is to be established.

The other two committees are those dealing with, on
the one hand, democracy and good governance and, on
the other, peace and security for all. These committees
too have made significant progress but continue to
confront some major issues on which the Burundians
must agree. Most of the parties are agreed on the
principle of universal franchise, but differences remain on
whether the parliament should be balanced in ethnic,
gender or other terms.

 

The real challenge facing Burundi, and hence facing
the facilitation, is that of creating a form of democracy that
provides for accountable and responsive government and
that ensures security for those who for reasons of
demography feel vulnerable within such a system.

With regard to peace and security for all, the parties
have agreed on principles for the organization of the
defence and security forces, and on the missions of the
army, the police and the intelligence services. So far,
however, they have failed to agree on a programme of
reform of the present security forces or on the issue of the
integration of armed groups into the security forces. These
are amongst the most sensitive issues in the negotiations
and will have to be faced squarely if the process is to lead
to a durable peace in Burundi.

We paid a visit to Arusha on Sunday, 16 January
2000, to acquaint ourselves with the facilitation team, the
international agencies and representatives involved in the
process and, most important, the heads of delegations from
the Burundian political parties and role-players. We came
away from that meeting impressed by the potential and
quality of leadership present in Burundi. We met and
interacted with people of outstanding intelligence and
education.

There are political processes and sets of dynamics
under way which, if harnessed and directed onto
constructive routes, could form the basis for a lasting
political settlement in that hitherto troubled country. But it
is time for Burundians to get down to business. No one can
reach an agreement on their behalf. The responsibility rests
squarely with their leaders now to find the necessary
arrangements by which Burundians can live together.

As one becomes acquainted with the history of the
negotiations and the nature of the conflict in Burundi, it
becomes evident that Burundians have much more in
common with each other than that which divides them.
What divides them is their unfortunate history and the
perceptions that are the legacy of that history. As it is
perceptions of differences that divide, it is also perceptions
properly adjusted that can serve as the foundation for
uniting Burundi as a nation. To that task the leadership of
Burundi now stands called.

One of the most important issues impacting upon the
Burundian situation and the negotiation process is that of
violence. When the negotiations started in June 1998 it was
hoped that they would take place in an atmosphere free
from violence and bloodshed. Unfortunately, this has not
been the case. Indeed, over the past year, and in the last
few months in particular, there has been an intensification
of violence, including attacks on the civilian population.

Killings, whether ethnically targeted or
indiscriminate ambushes on civilians, the burning of
houses and the forcible removal of people from their
homes have become all too common occurrences in
Burundian life. The population of Burundi has become
hostage to violence from all sides in the conflict. As a
result, new waves of refugees are fleeing the country, and
people are increasingly becoming internally displaced in
their own country.

Burundians face the task of demilitarizing their
society in the medium term and of embarking on the
formidable task of development and reconstruction. An
end to the senseless violence through which various
forces in Burundi seek to assert themselves is a first step
in that longer-term process. In this regard we shall seek
to send a clear message to the Burundi Government that
in spite of the manner in which they came to power, they
and, through them, the Burundi army have a particular
responsibility to defend and protect the civilian
population, and not just a given part of it.

We regard it similarly as of crucial importance to
issue a clear call to those armed groups that are not in the
process. We shall make renewed efforts to engage those
groups with the purpose of making them aware of the
nature of the exchanges in the process and to gather some
indication of their attitudes towards the shape of a
possible consensus.

We have no doubt that the Burundian peace talks
represent the only way in which Burundi can achieve
peace and embark on the task of reconstruction and
development. For this process to be successful, it must be
inclusive, and to the extent that players are not
represented at Arusha, we shall regard it as our task to
make the process as inclusive as possible.

We shall continue to emphasize to the parties
already at the negotiating table that there is no alternative
to meaningful engagement within the political mainstream
of the process. To those outside the process, the message
will be sent to start formulating their political aspirations
in coherent terms and to demonstrate the capability to
come to the negotiating table in good faith and in full
respect of the guiding principles of the process.

 

There is also the need for a stronger link between the
peace process and the reality of political life in Burundi.
Common sense tells us that if an agreement signed in
Arusha were not acceptable to public opinion in Burundi,
it could not be successfully implemented. The responsibility
for ensuring that link lies solely with the leadership of the
parties conducting the negotiations. This means that the
political leaders need to do groundwork at the grass-roots
level in order to persuade their constituencies that the price
of agreement and lasting peace will be concession and
compromise on certain major issues. To this end, among
others, we have already indicated to the Burundian political
leaders that we are willing to accept their invitation to visit
Burundi as part of our facilitation task.

The Burundian peace process needs the support of the
international community to sustain the actual negotiations
and the ongoing efforts to achieve peace. At the same time,
we must express our deep appreciation for the support it
has already received up until now. A further investment in
the process can only help finally achieve those objectives
to which the international community has already given so
generously. The international community can also help
alleviate the suffering of the Burundian people through the
provision of humanitarian aid, insofar as security conditions
allow. In that regard, we appeal to all the belligerents to
respect the international humanitarian efforts in Burundi
and, in particular, to safeguard the security of those
involved in humanitarian assistance.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
agencies to resume fully their activities in the field. We
would, however, like to restate that the primary
responsibility for ending the humanitarian crisis in Burundi
lies with the leaders of the Burundi people. It is they who,
by an effort of politics, must create the conditions enabling
their people to return to their homes and resume normal
economic life. We intend to follow up our recent first visit
to Arusha with a more extended one in February, by which
time much more work will have been done at the
committee level and in other consultative processes.

We particularly wish to invite to that meeting other
heads of State from different parts of the world. Apart from
providing financial and humanitarian assistance, the
international community has a part to play politically. The
effectiveness of the messages we have delivered to the
various protagonists in Burundi can only be reinforced by
the participation of other heads of State and countries. The
problems of Burundi are the concern of all of us, as are the
problems in any other part of the world.

We are under no illusions about the political
problems we face in Burundi or about the utmost fragility
of the security situation in that country. Neither can we
underestimate the impact of regional developments in the
Great Lakes region on developments in Burundi. We
conclude, however, by restating our confidence that there
is sufficient capacity among the leaders of Burundi to
reach compromises and agreements that can at last lead
to peace and stability in that country. If Burundians can
reach an agreement on a way to live together, they will
be setting an example to neighbouring countries, to Africa
and to the world.

It is not possible to establish regional peace unless
the component parts of a region establish domestic
foundations for a stable democratic order. Peace in
Burundi will give hope for the Democratic Republic of
Congo and other countries in the region, and it will prove
an effective example of African intervention in an African
problem.

We thank our world body and the international
community for their attention to this matter.

