Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Allow me also to join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Rucker for his
briefing today. On behalf of my delegation, I would
also like to thank Madam Raskovic-Ivic, President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija for her statement. We too
welcome the presence at the meeting of the Prime
Minister of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo, Mr. Ceku, as a member of the
delegation of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UN MIK).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be delivered later this afternoon by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. That is why I will limit myself to the following
comments.

In general, we share the positive evaluation of the
developments in Kosovo since the launch of the status
process, as presented in the latest report of Secretary-
General (S/2006/906). We would like to join the
Secretary-General's call to the majority of the
population in Kosovo and to Kosovo's official
representatives to sustain this strength and to
demonstrate political responsibility, maturity and a
firm dedication to the non-use of violence in achieving
political change in Kosovo and in defining its status.
We call on the Kosovo authorities to take all
appropriate measures to guarantee security for all
citizens and to address the issue of impunity.

Without thorough investigation of crimes and
bringing perpetrators to justice, peaceful coexistence
and reconciliation among communities in Kosovo, in
our view, cannot be possible. We believe that is a
matter of critical importance - especially when the
UNMIK transition period is most likely ahead - that
the authority of an international presence, whether it be
the present or possibly a future one, is not undermined
by any unreasonable actions or provocations.

The role of UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and other
international bodies and organizations in Kosovo is
still vital for and instrumental in the peace and stability
of the region and the outcome of the status process and
its implementation. We believe that the international
presence will also have to be sustained in Kosovo after
status determination.

We agree with Mr. Riicker that the
implementation of standards must remain an important
priority. We note with satisfaction the generally
positive trends and the commitment of the Government
led by Mr. Ceku to continue its efforts in that direction.
It is of crucial importance to ensure that these efforts
are maintained and remain sustainable, with special
focus on the 13 priorities identified by the Contact
Group.

I would like to reiterate that standards
implementation is equally essential for securing the
multi-ethnic and democratic nature of Kosovo as well
as for its European perspective. The European Union is
expected to play a more visible and decisive role in the
next stage of the status process, so the more standards
Kosovo can meet today, the further it can go in the
future in terms of the integration processes, regardless
of the dynamic of the status process.

Multi-ethnicity in practice means that Kosovo is
also a homeland for Serbs. In this regard, we agree
with the Secretary-General that progress will be
achieved by demonstrating through actions, not words,
that everyone has a future in Kosovo. In our view, it is
the ultimate responsibility of the Kosovo Albanian
majority to demonstrate through the adoption of
adequate measures that it is ready to accept
responsibility for the future well-being and security of
Serbs and other ethnic minorities in Kosovo. The
Serbian community in Kosovo should feel that it is an
integral and welcome part of society as a whole and
that its social and economic status will be
acknowledged and honoured once the status
implementation process is under way.

On the other hand, we believe that the issue of
the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the Provisional
Institutions should be separated from the status
process. In this connection, we would also like to
reiterate the call on Belgrade and Pristina to allow and
encourage Kosovo Serbs to exercise their rights fully
through their participation in the Institutions. We
believe that will also positively contribute to the status
negotiation process.

In conclusion, we reiterate that we support the
process led by Mr. Ahtisaari and continue to believe it
is necessary to find a lasting and balanced settlement
as its outcome. It should be the highest priority and
imperative to seek a balanced settlement and
compromise from both sides through interactive talks
that would, at the end of the day, reflect the objective
concerns of all parties involved and strengthen regional
security and stability.

Finally, we would like to stress that, in any
outcome of the status definition process, Kosovars and
Serbs will have to live together, side by side. It is in
their vital interest to find the best and most sustainable
form of peaceful coexistence and cooperation that
reflects their rightful ambitions and concerns.

