Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Today,
Sir, was the last day of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), and it is the last day of your presidency of
the Security Council for the month of July. I wish on
this occasion to extend to you my gratitude, Mr.
President, for the wise and excellent manner in which
you have guided the work of the Security Council
throughout this extremely busy month, during which
we have witnessed many developments. It is a manner,
Sir, that reflects your diplomatic wisdom and high
professionalism, as well as the greatness of your
country and its historical contributions, which inspire
all our peoples.

I would also like to extend my thanks and
gratitude for the valuable efforts undertaken by
Ambassador Sawers, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
which sponsored the resolution. We commend the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its strenuous
efforts in that respect.

My country is very gratified that the Security
Council has adopted the special resolution on the
renewal of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
Mission's mandate, as defined in resolution 1769
(2007), opened the way towards cooperation and
partnership among the Sudan, the African Union and
the United Nations. Since our adoption of that
resolution on this day last year, many positive
developments have occurred with respect to the hybrid
operation, which we hope will attain 80 per cent
deployment by the end of this year, as indicated by the
Secretary-General.

I would like to emphasize before this Council that
the Sudan continues to be fully committed to its
pledges concerning the hybrid operation and will
continue to be so. The Security Council should provide
similar cooperation; give highest priority to the peace
process; and allay all threats to the process, such as the
measure undertaken by the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC); take decisive
measures against the rebel movements that are trying
to impede the peace process, to the point that some
have even invaded our capital, Khartoum; and stop
sending conflicting messages to those rebel groups.

The resolution that has been adopted today
clearly emphasizes the fact that we should support the
Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassole. The Council
should also match those words with deeds, and the
efforts of Mr. Bassole should be supported in a manner
that would allow us to maintain lasting peace in Darfur
and to bolster our country's national efforts to promote
the peace process; as clearly demonstrated by the
historic visit of the President of the Republic of the
Sudan to the three Darfur provinces over the past few
days.

In emphasizing our interest in supporting the
paths of peace, the maintenance of peace and
humanitarian assistance, and the rehabilitation of
Darfur, we offer our respect and gratitude for the great
and historic role undertaken by the African Union. The
African Union is a principal partner, even before the
United Nations, in the maintenance of peace in Darfur
and in the ongoing peace process there. The African
Union is not a foreign element; in fact, it is an inherent
partner in all matters related to Darfur.

In commending the role of the African Union, the
principal partner in all issues concerning peace and
stability of Darfur, we also commend the very
important adoption by the African Union, at the
emergency ministerial meeting of its Peace and
Security Council at Addis Ababa, of a resolution that
seeks to rise above the impediments and complexities
created by the unfortunate and tragic action taken by
the Chief Prosecutor of the ICC against one of the
greatest leaders of the African continent, who has put
an end to the longest-running conflict there and
brought about peace between the South and the North
of the Sudan.

At a time when the use of double standards is rife
used and real crimes are being covered up in many
parts of the world, Africa, which is burdened by its
own problems, hopes that its efforts and initiatives will
be respected by this Organization, as its principal
partner. We should move beyond the measure taken by
the Chief Prosecutor, which is a recipe for destruction
and ruin and poses a catastrophic danger to the
stability, security and unity of the Sudan, the region as
a whole and even the entire African continent.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
more our appreciation to you, Sir, and to the members
of the Council for your wonderful efforts. I reiterate
our welcome to the renewal of the mandate of the
UNAMID. We also wish to stress that no one is more
impacted by and concerned with the problems of
Darfur than the Government and the people of the
Sudan. We are pleased to see the international
community's respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Sudan bolstered by the
tangible measure of the resolution adopted by this
Council.

