Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Minister Okada,
for convening this meeting to discuss the topic of
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. I am confident
that our deliberations today will significantly
contribute to one of the most important items on the
Security Council's agenda. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as my
colleagues, Foreign Ministers, for being here today,
and we all anticipate valuable contributions. It is my
honour to speak on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a country that has travelled the painful and difficult
road from recipient of to active participant in United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.

We recognize the importance of peacebuilding
operations as a means of strengthening peace and
security in the host country, thus contributing to
creating conditions conducive to achieving sustainable
and irreversible peace. In order to realize this goal,
peacebuilding operations should be based on an
integrated, coordinated and comprehensive approach to
include the establishment of good governance, the rule
of law, the promotion of human rights, institution-
building, security sector reform, economic
reconstruction and development. The right to return to
pre-conflict homes and the full reintegration of
refugees and internally displaced persons through
sustainable returns programmes must be an integral
part of each and every peacebuilding strategy.

Peacebuilding activities require active interaction
among all stakeholders, including the host country,
donor countries, troop- and police-contributing
countries, international financial institutions and the
private sector. Furthermore, although we are of the
view that all relevant national and international actors
should be involved in the process of peacebuilding, we
consider the political will of the host country and
national ownership to be sine qua non conditions for
the success of peacebuilding operations, given that the
peacebuilding process is primarily the challenge and
national responsibility of post-conflict countries.
10-31721
In that regard, we believe that it is of the utmost
importance to promote dialogue between the parties to
a conflict, particularly among decision-makers and
civil society organizations, in order to move the
peacebuilding process forward and away from
recurring conflict. Such a dialogue is critical to
national institutions and capacity-building, as well as
to confidence-building and the reconciliation process.
Holding accountable all those who have committed
crimes during a conflict and bringing them to justice is
of equal importance to confidence-building and the
reconciliation process, and hence could contribute
significantly to the success of the social aspect of
peacebuilding operations.

Organizing free, fair and transparent elections
could be an important part of the process of creating
political stability and establishing a democratic system,
the main preconditions for reconciliation and
reintegration processes, as well as for achieving
sustainable and irreversible peace. Therefore, the
utmost attention ought to be paid to their thorough
preparation, including by facilitating the registration
and full participation of voters, particularly internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Bosnia and Herzegovina stresses that
restructuring the security sector requires balance
between international support and national ownership.
Sustainable security involves strengthening institutions
and processes, while a well-governed security sector is
vital to overall peacebuilding and reconstruction
efforts, as well as to development. Building a well-
managed security sector that is sustainable requires not
only police and military reform, but also impartial and
accessible judicial and law enforcement sectors that
must rely on transparency, equality, civilian protection,
democratic norms and respect for human rights.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of former combatants are
indispensable elements of all peacebuilding operations.
The availability of arms and alienated and dissatisfied
former combatants represent a permanent risk of
recurrence of conflict. Hence, DDR programmes
should be a broader part of planning for development
and reconstruction. Furthermore, in a situation where
an early peace dividend is evident and generally
accepted, the security sector is well managed and
democratic norms are in place, there is also a window
of opportunity for development in the true sense. Job
creation measures, vocational education and retraining

programmes for such vulnerable sectors such as
returnees, youth, national minorities or demobilized
combatants, as well as activities aimed at empowering
women, should be in place. The role of women and
their involvement in peacebuilding efforts should be
strengthened in post-conflict societies.

Bosnia and Herzegovina emphasizes that
peacebuilding strategies should be defined and owned
by national stakeholders, with a clear implementation
plan and benchmarks. In this context, the role of
various agencies, funds and programmes should be
defined and coordinated and best practices established.
It is of key importance that external actors do not
prescribe but advise, and this can be done only through
a transparent and open process, with the assistance of
the international community.

Political stability and security together, with
social stability, will reduce the risk of recurring
conflict only if it is integrated into a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy. Bosnia and Herzegovina
welcomes the strengthened regional and international
cooperation in addressing issues of drug-trafficking,
organized crime, terrorism and trafficking in human
beings. A coherent and integrated approach is essential
not only in terms of combating these threats to peace
and security, but also with regard to building
reconciliation, coexistence, trust and stability at the
regional level.

Finally, the road from an initial peace agreement
to sustainable peace is long and winding. Travelling it
requires an integrated and comprehensive approach,
country-specific planning and strategy, as well as
coherent implementation and the strong and steadfast
commitment of both the host country and the
international community. The peacebuilding initiatives
that worked in Bosnia and Herzegovina were marked
by synergy among multiple actors and, most important,
between civilian and military endeavours.

I should like to conclude by saying that, in our
work, we should focus more on preventive diplomacy
and lessons learned in order to prevent conflicts, rather
than dealing with post-conflict situations, which are
always more costly in terms of human life and physical
and economic destruction. On behalf of my country, I
would like to reiterate our readiness to share the
knowledge, experience and lessons learned regarding
post-conflict peacebuilding in every situation where
17
our country's first-hand experience can be seen as
relevant, reliable and useful.

