Mr. Eliasson: My statement today will briefly
focus on the continuing efforts of the United Nations
with regard to the crisis in Ukraine and the latest
developments on Ukraine since the briefing to the
Council by Under-Secretary-General Feltman on
13 March (see S/PV.7134).

The Secretary-General is today on his way to
Moscow and Kyiv as part of his ongoing and intensified
good offices efforts. He will pursue discussions in
both capitals on political and diplomatic solutions to
the crisis. Ahead of his trip, this morning he spoke to
Ukrainian Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.

Since the most recent briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7134), the Secretary-General has
continued to engage with key actors with the aim of
de-escalating the situation. He has unfailingly urged
dialogue and promoted adherence to the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter in relation to
Ukraine, such as respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity and ensuring the fulfilment of the human
rights of all, with particular attention to minorities.

During my recent mission to Ukraine, I stressed the
importance of an inclusive Government and the need to
preserve a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multilingual

Ukraine with all my interlocutors. As the Council has
seen from his public statements, the Secretary-General
has repeatedly counselled against hasty actions that
could increase tensions and lead to miscalculations and
unintended consequences.

My mission to Ukraine was followed by that of
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan
Simonovic'. At the request of the Secretary-General,
given the volatility of the situation on the ground,
Mr. Simonovic' extended his visit to Ukraine until
yesterday, 18 March.

In the meantime, a United Nations human rights
monitoring mission is being deployed in Ukraine in
order to provide an objective assessment as to what
is happening on the ground. Mr. Simonovie will take
the floor after me to brief the Council on his visit to
Ukraine and provide further information on the work
of the monitoring mission. I can add that the United
Nations has closely coordinated our efforts with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), in view of OSCE plans to also deploy monitors
to Ukraine.

I wish to recall that, during my mission to Ukraine,
I briefed the Council on 4 March from Kyiv. I reported
encountering a country grappling with a series of fast-
moving and serious political, security and economic
challenges.

Since that mission, the crisis appears only to have
deepened. Instead of de-escalation, tensions in Crimea
and in eastern Ukraine continue to rise. The Crimean
authorities decided to hold a referendum on Crimea's
status on 16 March, after which they announced
that close to 97 per cent of those who voted did so
in favour of Crimea's secession from Ukraine. The
Secretary-General expressed his deep disappointment
and concern over the hasty decision to proceed with a
referendum with regard to an issue of such far-reaching
consequences for Ukraine, the region and beyond.
Subsequently, Crimea declared its independence, which
in turn was recognized by the Russian Federation.

On 17 March, the European Union and the United
States proceeded to apply targeted sanctions against
Russian and Crimean officials. On 18 March, President
Putin signed a treaty, which the Parliament of the
Russian Federation is expected to begin ratifying, in
order to make Crimea part of the Russian Federation.
At the same time, the Government in Kyiv has
committed to never accepting Crimea's independence
or annexation, stating that Crimea is an integral part
of Ukraine.

Yesterday, Ukraine's Prime Minister expressed
concern that the conflict in the Crimean peninsula
was "shifting from a political to a military stage".
That followed reports that a Ukrainian officer haad
been killed in front of a Ukrainian military base on the
outskirts of Simferopol.

Following that incident, the Ukrainian Deputy
Prime Minister and Defence Minister made plans to
travel to Crimea today. In turn, the Crimean leadership
has allegedly stated that Ukraine's officials would be
turned back. That underscores the dire need for the
immediate opening of direct dialogue between Moscow
and Kyiv.

Today, reports are emerging that two Ukrainian
naval bases in Crimea have been taken over by
pro-Russian forces or unidentified groups. While
initial reports suggest that the seizure of bases has so
far occurred without bloodshed, such developments
obviously carry grave risks. The Secretary-General
has constantly underlined the importance of avoiding
further provocative actions and of refraining from
incitement.

Those latest events have heightened tensions and
added new layers of complexity to an already precarious
situation. We are now faced with risks of a dangerous
further escalation that could have ramifications for
international peace and security and have serious
significance for the Council and for the United Nations.

In a broader perspective, we should recall that the
Russian Federation and Ukraine remain neighbours,
with close and often complex historic, cultural,
economic and political ties. It is our View that it is
in the interests of us all that those two nations have
positive ties with each other and with the broader
region. However, the first step in that direction has to
be based on an immediate de-escalation and restraint in
the present crisis.

I would like to conclude by quoting some of the
Secretary-General's key messages recently:

"It is clear that we are at a crossroads. If positions
continue to harden and rhetoric continues to sharpen,
there is great risk of a dangerous downward spiral;

"The focus must be to engage in direct dialogue
between Moscow and Kyiv, aimed at agreeing on
specific measures that will pave the way towards a
diplomatic solution;

"Although it has so far proved elusive, the path
towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis is still
open."

It is in that spirit and in the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations that he now embarks on his mission to
Moscow and Kyiv.

I wish only to add that our primary diplomatic
tool is constructive dialogue on the basis of Chapter
VI of the Charter on the pacific settlement of disputes.
The United Nations will continue to play its role of
promoting dialogue for a peaceful and joint resolution
of the crisis, which now has become more serious than
ever.

