Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing. I also thank him and his team for
their efforts over the past year to facilitate the dialogue
among the Libyan parties and the establishment of a
Government of national accord that represents all
Libyans and places the interests of the country above
all other considerations. There is no doubt that, thanks
to those efforts, we are considerably closer to that goal,
in spite of the exceedingly difficult conditions under
which they have had to work. As his mandate comes to
an end, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
him for all his efforts to re-establish stability in Libya
and safeguard the unity and sovereignty of my country.
I wish him every success in future.

We have taken note of media reports that the
Secretary-General has appointed a new Special
Representative to replace Mr. Leon. We hope that the
way he has been named will not pose an obstacle to
his work. We also hope that he will be accepted by
the Libyan parties and that he will be able to continue
the work begun by his predecessor in order to move
forward towards concluding the mission.

On 30 September, Mr. Agila Saleh Essa Gwaider,
President of the General National Council, stated before
the General Assembly:

"the vast majority [of the Libyan people are] seeking
any possible means to put an end to the unjustified
fighting among brothers, and restore the security
and stability of the country. Nevertheless, they are
hostage to the armed groups, and thus unable to
express their views."

He also stated that

"[h]undreds of thousands of Libyans have
become internally displaced persons or refugees
aspiring to return to their homes as soon as possible.
That could be fulfilled only through an agreement
on a strong Government that enjoys the confidence
of all Libyans, controls all of the Libyan territory

and is supported by the international community."
(A/70/PV20, pp. 18-19)

In that way, the President candidly expressed the
feelings of the Libyan people, who can no longer stand
the noise of bullets and shells, can no longer bear the
smell of gunpowder and blood - and who can no
longer bear foreign interference. Will the Security
Council help them? Some Libyans doubt it, given their
experience in the dialogue and because of the many
steps backward. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the
Libyan political dialogue is reaching an end and that
the establishment of a Government of national accord is
imminent, perhaps before the end of this month.

In spite of all that, however, neither the Council nor
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has expressed a clear position to say that those who
oppose the agreement and who support terrorism will
have neither a place in the Government of national
accord nor in the State institutions that emerge from
the political agreement. Nor have we heard any serious
positions with regard to ensuring a secure environment
to allow the Government to begin its work from its
institutions based in Tripoli.

Unfortunately, it seems that some in the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya still think they can
benefit from the support of militias to protect the
Government, seemingly unaware ofthe fact that militias
have blackmailed every single Government of the past
four years. The Libyan people reject the idea of having
these militias play any role whatsoever in the area of
security, except for those of their members who agree
to join the army or the police, following the required
medical examinations and appropriate training.

Protecting Government and State institutions that
are accepted by all must be done through the creation
of a neutral special force composed of officers and
elements of the army and the police - professional
elements who have proved that they have not been
involved in any illegal activities. They could then in
future be deployed to Tripoli to carry out a disarmament
programme. In addition, bonuses must no longer be
paid to any members of the militia who have not laid
down their arms.

The Security Council must once and for all
disabuse itself of the notion, which a number of States
within the Council are attempting to foster, that groups
such as Ansar Al-Sharia, Al-Qaida and those who
call themselves the revolutionary councils of Darna,
Benghazi and Ajdabiya are going to fight against
Daesh. The Council must bring pressure to bear on
all parties to the dialogue to ensure that they clearly
state their opposition to the terrorist groups. An end
must be put to their financing by the Central Bank of
Libya through what is called the Ministry of Defence
of Tripoli. The flow of weapons and foreign fighters
towards the militias must also come to an end.

Genuine stability in Libya cannot be achieved
through foreign interference on Libyan territory.
That will come about only as a result of support for
the rehabilitation and deployment of police forces
through the cantonment of elements of the army and its
restructuring, rehabilitation and arming, so as to enable
it to combat terrorism and uphold security, including on
the borders.

Any attempt to hamper any of these efforts can be
due only to a determination to sow the seeds of despair
among Libyans, with a view to badgering them into
accepting foreign military intervention, which will
have as its inevitable result the occupation and division
of Libya.

By way of conclusion, I wish to state that the power
vacuum resulting from the fall of the dictatorship can
be remedied only through the holding of presidential
elections at the earliest possible time. This can happen
only if the international community devotes the
necessary attention to the work of the constitutional
drafting committee and if it helps it to overcome the
minor obstacles - I repeat, the minor obstacles - on
its path to submitting a draft constitution as soon as
possible.

