Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also congratulate
Ambassador Messone and the Gabonese delegation on
their stewardship of the Council during the month of
June.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2011/381), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan De Mistura for his
informative briefing this morning and Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.

As other speakers have done, I extend the United
Kingdom's condolences over the shocking deaths, in
Mazar-e-Sharif in April, of staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It is
vital that dedicated United Nations staff can carry out
their work in a safe and secure environment, with the
full support of the Afghan Government and the
international community. I would also like to pay
tribute to all other international personnel for the
sacrifices they have made in this campaign.

The British Prime Minister, David Cameron, has
just returned from a visit to Afghanistan, where he saw
at first hand the progress that the Afghan Government
and the international community have made in
preparing for the transition to Afghan-led security
responsibility across the country. It is encouraging that
the first areas are on track to begin the transition
process on 20 July. The Afghan National Security
Forces will continue to grow in size and capability as
they prepare to take the security lead in all provinces
by the end of 2014. The United States surge has helped
to prepare for transition and, as Ambassador Rice has
confirmed, will be drawn down as originally planned.
Other international forces will also begin to withdraw
as conditions allow. My Prime Minister announced
earlier today that United Kingdom force levels will be
reduced by a further 500, from 9,500 to 9,000, by the
end of 2012. These are signs of progress, improved
security and the growing strength of Afghan forces.
But it does not signal the end of international support
for Afghanistan.

The United Kingdom deeply regrets all civilian
casualties that result from the actions of international
and Afghan Government forces. When such casualties
occur, it is despite the strong preventive measures that
have been put in place. As the Secretary-General notes
in his report, the vast majority of casualties are caused
by the insurgents, who deliberately use violent tactics
designed to intimidate the population. In the past
quarter, the insurgency has continued to assassinate
Government employees and to deliberately attack
civilian targets, including hospitals, markets and the
Intercontinental Hotel. Insurgent-related civilian
casualties outnumber Afghan and international forces
casualties by a ratio of approximately eight to one. We
condemn such attacks in the strongest possible terms.

An Afghan-led political process is needed to
underpin the military progress. To be durable, any
political settlement must be inclusive and must respect
the interests and rights of all Afghan citizens. The
death of Osama bin Laden gives the Taliban an
opportunity to make a decisive break with Al-Qaida.
The British Foreign Secretary has called for the Taliban
to make that break and participate in a political
process. We urge the international community to call
for the same outcome.
Fundamental to any political settlement and
crucial to the future stability of Afghanistan is the
safeguarding of democratic principles, including free
and credible elections. The United Kingdom remains
fully committed to working with the Afghan
Government, Parliament and people to strengthen
Afghan democracy and representative institutions. We
are therefore deeply concerned that the dispute
between the Special Court and Parliament remains
unresolved. We call upon all parties involved to work
together to find a solution in line with Afghan law and
to respect the separation of powers that is guaranteed
by the Constitution.

The current situation illustrates the need for
further progress on electoral reform. We continue to
support the role of the United Nations in assisting the
Afghan Government, institutions and people as they
take forward commitments made at the London and
Kabul Conferences last year. This continues to form a
vital part of the mandate of UNAMA.

Irreversible transition and progress on the
political track must be supported by governance and
development progress. Putting in place the necessary
measures to allow an International Monetary Fund
(IMF) programme will be crucial if we are to make
progress on these issues. Following the incident of the
Kabul Bank, we call for a rapid resolution to
negotiations on a new IMF programme, and for those
who have broken the law to be brought to justice. The
Afghan people deserve no less.

Since the Secretary-General issued his quarterly
report, important progress has been made preparing for
the Afghan-led Bonn conference. Members of the
International Contact Group had a constructive
dialogue in Kabul. We now need to focus on translating
these discussions into tangible outcomes, particularly
on regional cooperation. We welcome the work led by
Turkey in this area and look forward to the Istanbul
Conference in November.

Finally, despite the challenges, significant
progress has been made on the road to a secure and
viable Afghanistan. As Afghanistan moves from being
a post-conflict country to one with more traditional
development needs, UNAMA and the wider United
Nations family will play an increasingly important
role. We therefore welcome the forthcoming review of
United Nations activities. We hope that the Secretary-
General will include an assessment of the delivery of
UNAMA against its current mandate, its role in the
post-transition landscape, and how the United Nations
can support the Afghan Government in bringing about
the emergence of a strong, durable and self-sustainable
Afghan State.

