The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States of America.

I would first like to thank Mr. Ging and Mr. De
Mistura for giving us the latest information about the
dire situation in Idlib. I also want to welcome the
statement of grave concern about Idlib that the Security
Council's 10 elected members delivered yesterday.

The Al-Assad regime and its enablers, Russia and
Iran, have a playbook for this war. First, they surround
a civilian area. Next, they make the preposterous claim
that everyone in the area is a terrorist, so that every
man, woman and child becomes a target. Then comes
the so-called starve-and-surrender campaign, where
they keep attacking until the people no longer have
food, clean water or shelter. It is a playbook of death.
The regime has spent the last seven years refining it
with Russia and Iran's help. It has happened so many
times before. In July, it was Dara'a and south-western
Syria where the regime trapped and besieged civilians.
In February, it was eastern Ghouta. The year before,
it was eastern Aleppo, and before that, places like
Madaya and Hamah. In the process, the regime has left
behind a country of rubble. The atrocities committed
by Al-Assad will be a permanent stain on history and a
black mark for the Council, which Russia has blocked
over and over again from taking action to help.

Now an offensive against Idlib is starting. Despite
the clear warnings of the President of the United States
and other world leaders, air strikes by Russia and the
regime have already begun against civilian areas. The
United States has been very clear with Russia and the
broader international community. We consider any
assault on Idlib to be a dangerous escalation of the
conflict in Syria. IfAl-Assad, Russia and Iran continue,
the consequences will be dire. We heard earlier that
3 million people are at risk in Idlib, 99 per cent ofthem
innocent civilians. To put that in perspective, that is
7.5 times the number of the people whom the Al-Assad
regime besieged in eastern Ghouta. It is nearly 11
times the number of people whom the Al-Assad regime
trapped in eastern Aleppo. At the time, we said that
the level of civilian suffering was unbearable. If the
Council can even imagine it, Idlib would be even
worse. The Al-Assad regime must halt its offensive.
Russia and Iran, as countries with influence over the
regime, must stop the catastrophe. It is in their power
to do so. Our Russian colleagues claim that they are
seeking a political solution to the Syrian conflict, but
they do nothing to help us get there. If they support an
offensive in Idlib, the world will know where Russia
really stands when it comes to supporting peace talks.

The United States is deeply concerned about the
presence of terrorists in Idlib. There are many ways
to target those groups effectively without causing a
humanitarian catastrophe. But when Russia and the
Al-Assad regime say they want to counter terrorism,
they actually mean that they want to bomb schools,
hospitals and homes. They want to punish the civilians
who had the courage to rise up against Al-Assad. When
the regime calls the brave White Helmets terrorists, we
know that they are not serious about fighting terrorism.
The United States will not cooperate with Russia in the
Al-Assad regime's slaughter of innocent civilians.

Russia also wants the United States and the
international community to provide money to rebuild
Syria. To translate that, they want us to clean up all
the roads, bridges and homes that Russian jets, Iranian-
backed militias and Syrian shells have destroyed.
The United States will not consider such requests for
reconstruction aid until we see concrete results from a
genuine political process that ends the war and offers
freedom to the Syrian people. No one else should either.
That would be absurd. The United States taxpayer is
certainly not going to subsidize Al-Assad's campaign
of destruction.

There is time still to pursue an alternative. The
United States wants to see such a political solution
emerge in Syria, one that is based on the road map
set out in resolution 2254 (2015). That calls for a real
dialogue among Syrians and the drafting of a new
constitution, leading to genuine free and fair elections.

But for Russia, continuing to support that murderous
dictator and isolating itself from the international
community is the wrong choice. An offensive in Idlib
will only leave Syria weaker and more broken and
create generations of Syrians who will never forget the
heinous and senseless brutality of the Al-Assad regime
and its allies.

We urge Russia to consider its options carefully,
stop Al-Assad's assault on Idlib and work with us - with
the United Nations and international partners i to find
peace at last for Syria. The Secretary-General and the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Council
have made their position very clear: Russia needs to live
up to its responsibility and put an end to the fighting.
There are no other options for the people of Syria. They
have suffered enough.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I again give the floor to Mr. De Mistura for any
additional comments that he may wish to make.

