Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
Rwanda warmly welcomes the presidency of China for
this month. We express our sincere satisfaction at
seeing you, Sir, preside over the Council and at the
outstanding manner in which you have guided its
debates.

We followed with great attention and interest the
briefing on the situation in the Great Lakes region. We
thank Ambassador Kamel Morjane for his work as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. He
has fought the good fight, as Saint Paul would say, and
has now completed his assignment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. His successor will assume the
reins on a firmer basis, although one that remains to be
consolidated. Ambassador Morjane is an extremely
talented individual. His experience and wisdom will
always shine among us and his advice will always be
most welcome.

In preparation for this important meeting, on 13
July the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo wrote a letter to the President of
the Security Council. My letter of 19 July, contained in
document S/2001/716 of 20 July 2001, was a response
to that letter. I would ask you, Sir, to absolve me of
having to respond orally to that letter at this public
meeting today or even tomorrow, for I would not wish
to engage in polemics here. Indeed, Ambassador
Morjane, here beside me, has strongly urged me not to
do so. As the accredited Permanent Representative and
Ambassador of Rwanda to the United Nations, I would
not wish to say anything in my statement to the
Council that might impede or undermine the current
efforts of the Secretary-General to settle the Congolese
conflict in the Great Lakes region of Africa.

At their meeting in the margins of the special
session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, the
Secretary-General and the President of the Republic of
Rwanda resolved to work together, as Africans, to find
a solution to the Congolese crisis. At the summit of the
Organization of African Unity at Lusaka, the Secretary-
General brought together Presidents Paul Kagame of
Rwanda and Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As I speak here today, I know that the
Secretary-General is pursuing his efforts. If they are
successful, they will mark above all our shared success,
and especially that of Rwanda, as a State Member of
the United Nations directly concerned by the conflict in
our region. I therefore do not wish to dwell at length on
these issues.

Rwanda still relies on the assistance of the
Security Council, an organ of the United Nations, to
continue to ensure that all the signatories to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement respect their commitment to its
full implementation. Since the negative forces that
planned and carried out the genocide in Rwanda and
their sponsors still threaten peace in the region, we feel
that the Security Council absolutely must address this
very particular case and continue to seek to help the
region in order to ensure that the forces of evil - those
who planned and carried out the genocide in
Rwanda - are prevented from doing any further harm.
Those negative forces, as we have heard throughout
this meeting, are deeply hurting our region.

Rwanda once again reaffirms its full cooperation
with the Secretary-General and the Security Council in
order to establish a lasting peace in the Congo and the
Great Lakes region.

The meeting was suspended at 1.10pm.
