Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time I personally take the floor this month, I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
your new role. I would like to join my Peruvian
colleague in thanking the Governments of Myanmar
and of Bangladesh, but also our Kuwaiti colleague,
for all the excellent arrangements for our trip. Without
them, we would not have been able to cover so much.
And like my Kuwaiti and Peruvian colleagues, we
really did appreciate everything we saw through the
United Nations teams on the ground and from the help
we had from the Secretariat. IfI can speak for the whole
Security Council, I think all members found it a very
productive and interesting, if difficult, Visit.

I will speak about what we did on the third day,
with our field visit to northern Rakhine. We had a
briefing by the Chief Minister of Rakhine state, and we
took a helicopter trip over northern Rakhine. We were
accompanied by the Union Minister for International
Cooperation, U Kyaw Tin, and the Chief Coordinator
of the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine, Mr. Aung
Tun Thet. The members of the Security Council flew
over an area that showed widespread devastation of land
and villages. It was clear that they had been burned out.

We saw physical arrangements for return being
prepared by the Government of Myanmar, including
a reception centre and a transit centre at Hla Phoe
Khaung, which was intended to accommodate up to
30,000 people. We met members of local communities
in northern Rakhine. We had a town hall meeting with
Rakhine Muslim and Hindu groups. We met community
members who had seen their families become Victims
of attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA). We also met a Rohingya community whose
homes are being rebuilt by the authorities. We were also
able to hold a meeting with members of civil society
at Sittwe airport, although, unfortunately, our time
was brief.

As my colleagues just did, I would now like to offer
the Council some reflections on what we saw.

First, we saw the sheer scale of the devastation.
I have only ever seen one camp like it before in my
professional life. I was very struck by the magnitude
of what the refugees face, as well as the Government
and the United Nations as they try to return the people
home. We saw widespread devastation from the air,
and that was, obviously, one reason for the scale of the
refugee camps in Bangladesh.
Secondly, the Burmese authorities need to increase
the scale of their response and allow the United Nations
in with unconditional access to assist them. Only the
United Nations has the technical expertise and know-
how to deal with an event of that magnitude. Myanmar
has two reception centres. Together they can receive,
at best, 300 people a day. There are approximately
900,000 refugees. The scale is nowhere near what
would be required to bring so many refugees home. As
I said, the United Nations needs to be involved because
it is the only institution in the world that has the ability
to provide assistance at the scale required.

Thirdly, we did not receive enough information
about the prospect for long-term solutions. Council
members heard that refugees would be housed only
temporarily in the transit centre, but there was no
convincing explanation about how they would actually
return to their villages and in what time frame. We
noted that the camps for internally displaced persons
in Sittwe had been there since 2012, and I think the
Council was struck by that fact.

Fourthly, there must be emphasis on the physical
arrangements and development, as opposed to
the underlying political issues. Council members
heard about the plans for the Union Enterprise
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine, which are privately financed,
and about the physical arrangements for repatriation.
I would like to make two points to that end though,
ifI may. There are risks to private financing, and
anything delivered without Rohingya participation
risks reinforcing displacement, not resolving it. I think
that we accept that the Myanmar authorities are deeply
concerned about development issues in Rakhine state
as a whole, and the Council believes that it is one aspect
that will need to be addressed. But it is not the foremost
aspect in getting the Rohingya to start going back to
their homes in safety and security. I was particularly
struck again by the contrast between what is being
offered on the ground in Myanmar and the scale of
the problem.

There was little progress on tackling the political
issues, as my two colleagues noted in the meetings they
described. Many of those political issues were raised
in the Annan Commission recommendations. They
centre around community reconciliation, regularizing
citizenship status of the Rohingya, human rights - such
as freedom of movement and access to education and
livelihoods - and holding the perpetrators of violence
to account.

Again, we heard from some of the other villagers
and officials about attacks on them by ARSA. Speaking
in my national capacity, it is clear to me that there
needs to be an accountability mechanism for all alleged
violations and abuses of human rights committed in
northern Rakhine. But again, I start from the point that
it is the Rohingya that the Council went to examine, and
they are overwhelmingly the largest part of the problem.

In recent days we have been very concerned by
reports that Myanmar security forces threatened
Rohingya villages not to talk openly with the Security
Council delegation, and tolde them that the people who
did so were now being looked for by security forces.
It is obviously unacceptable that anyone should feel
intimidated to speak to the Security Council, which,
after all, undertakes these missions on behalf of the
international community. I would be most grateful if
the Myanmar authorities could clarify that as a matter
of urgency.

I would like to make one last point in conclusion,
ifI may. I was very struck by the unity of the Council
throughout the trip, and I think that my colleagues were
as well. We would all like to find a way to preserve
that unity as we go forward under your direction,
Madam President.

