The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.
My country has now assumed the presidency
of the Security Council for the ninth time, but in an
unprecedented regional context. There are 14 Foreign
Ministers in the Council today, 12 of whom are from
the Latin America region. The representative of Cuba
spoke on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC), while the representative
of Peru took the floor on behalf of the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR). Argentina is a founding
member of both of those regional and subregional
entities. However, the most important consideration is
that both bodies have had to deal with serious conflict
situations in the region to which they were able to
respond. That is essentially what the Security Council
must also do in the face of the various conflicts that
arise in different parts of the world, which make peace
and security very vulnerable values in today's world.

One of the situations that we had to resolve when
we were not yet even CELAC, but rather the Rio Group,
which preceded CELAC, was the difficult situation
between Ecuador and Colombia, which almost ended
in an armed conflict. As a result of the intervention by
the Rio Group, which was at that time in the Dominican
Republic, the conflict was able to be successfully
resolved. Later on, UNASUR also successfully dealt
with different situations, including domestic situations
in various countries, which jeopardized democratic
stability - for example, the so-called Pando crisis,
which concerned the Government of Evo Morales
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and gave rise to
the Moneda Declaration, agreed in Santiago under
President Bachelet, in her capacity as President pro
tempore of UNASUR. We also adopted the Buenos
Aires Declaration, which addressed the problem
concerning the removal of President Rafael Correa of
Ecuador and whereby we were able to halt the crisis and
ensure the perpetuation of the democratic system - an
issue that, for our region, is no minor concern. Rather,
it is something that has affected our potential for
economic growth and for that to take place essentially
in an environment of peace and security.

I therefore think that the lesson that we have
learned in terms of this debate with regard to how
regional and subregional organizations can cooperate
with the Security Council and the United Nations in
finding solutions has to do with some of the issues that
other representatives have outlined.

I cannot ignore the statement by the representative
of the League of the Arab States, who talked about
something that I think is at the crux ofresolving conflicts
and - I underscore this aspect - the effectiveness
of the Security Council in resolving serious matters.
What did the representative of the League of Arab
States actually say? He said that all States Members
of the United Nations must implement United Nations
resolutions. It seems to almost go without saying, but
actually it is not at all obvious. The distinctive feature
here is that frequently, those that sit in this Chamber as
permanent members with the right to the veto make use
of that right, enshrined under the Charter of the United
Nations and under the rules of procedure of the Security
Council. However, they are the ones that obstruct real
conflict resolution.

I would like to compare that with what I would
term the South America doctrine. How do we adopt
resolutions in CELAC and UNASUR? In those
organizations, resolutions are adopted on the basis
of unanimity when there is a conflict. That is the
distinction we must make. Normally, all our States
and national institutions have what we call the right
of veto - something that is inherent to all executive
powers. But running a Government is one thing; dealing
with conflict is another. When managing conflict
includes the right of the veto, the situation becomes
much more difficult and, at times, even impossible.

We therefore believe that it is necessary to review
the operation of United Nations institutions in general,
specifically with regard to the Security Council, which
respond to a different rationale, one that was in place
when the Organization was established. During the
Cold War, faced with the danger of a nuclear holocaust,
the right of the veto was almost a safeguard to prevent
such a conflagration. Following the Cold War, all those
involved in it sit today around this table and are no
longer involved in major conflicts. We need to rethink
how the Organization's bodies function, for this is a new
world, a new reality and new problems that cannot be
addressed with old instruments and old methods: they
will not provide us with answers. That is what we mean
when we talk about the need to reach consensus, not on
the basis of the particular interests of each country with
the right to the veto, but rather to genuinely guarantee
peace and stability.

In that connection, we can say that today South
America and Latin America are regions of peace.
My country is a leader in nuclear energy, but also a
leader in nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. The representative of the League
of Arab States talked about the conflict that is now
impacting the Middle East in terms of the refusal to
accept a Palestinian State, which has an effect not only
on Arab countries, but on so many other countries of
the world, including mine.

In our own region, as the representative of CELAC
mentioned, there is conflict owing to the failure to
respect a resolution of the United Nations concerning the
need for my country and the United Kingdom to begin
talks and negotiations in the context of what the United
Nations decided in resolution 2065 (XX), adopted in
1965, concerning sovereignty over the Malvinas. This
is not a capricious position, nor is it about again saying
"We are right". We are simply saying that we want the
United Nations resolution to be implemented and that
both countries should sit down and discuss this litigious
and controversial matter. I believe that there is a way to
begin to unblock such conflicts.

It has been pointed out that there are differing
opinions. One can have such opinions on matters that
have not been resolved by the United Nations. However,
when the Organization, to which all of us have signed
on and whose resolutions we have all committed
to respecting, adopts a resolution in the General
Assembly - the highest organ ofthe Organization - it
is no longer a matter of differing opinions; it is about a
United Nations resolution and about whether or not we
are ready to comply with our obligations as Members.

I mention that just by way of example, for I do not
want to start a controversy here. But I do so because
I think that the issues that the world is experiencing
are so numerous and so serious that peace and security
becomes notjust a military concept, but also essentially
an economic one. The 2008 crisis, which continues
today and has further compounded existing conflicts,
requires all of us to adopt a different attitude, rethink
how we function within our organizations and consider
how to change rules and conceive of and design new
instruments that allow us to be effective. For I think
that, at the end of the day, we will win the respect of
global society when we are able to show that we are
effective in the way we operate. Being effective in how
things are managed means mediating, and it means
achieving a solution from that mediation, especially
when the mediation is the subject of a resolution of the
highest organ. That is how it is in each of our States
when a parliament takes a decision and the executive
branch respects it. We must understand that similarity
if we want to deal with global governance.

Much has also been said here about human rights.
I am proud to say that my country is an example
when it comes to full respect for human rights,
having in the 1970s suffered from one of the most
terrible dictatorships, which led to the disappearance
not only of Argentine citizens but also of citizens of
other nationalities. We are also leaders in this area.
Along with other countries, we established the Human
Rights Council and welcomed the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance, along with France and other
co-authoring countries.

Those are the thoughts that I wanted to share, which
I do not purport bear the arrogance of holding some
revealed or absolute truth. I simply wanted to Show
how we in Latin America have overcome very serious
situations in the region by using a formula by which no
one could leave the table until an issue were resolved
by consensus.

Finally, as I did with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon when he kindly received me once again
in a private meeting, I wanted to express the need
to establish global rules to ensure the sovereignty of
States and citizens' privacy around the world, in the
light of the recent well-known events. I think many
things have occurred since the fall of the Berlin Wall.
One of the clearest reasons for the fall of the Wall was
that, first of all, the citizens on the other side wanted to
live in freedom and without being watched. Yesterday,
I recalled an excellent movie, which I am sure we all
know won an Academy Award here in the United States,
"The Lives of Others", in which citizens felt they were
being spied on and controlled. I think this shows the
values that served to forge the ideal of democracy,
the ideal that we can live and coexist in plurality and
diversity, with different ideas, but without our different
ideas leading us to become enemies of either the State
or other fellow citizens. Those values should be taken
up again, because those are the concepts that underpin
the Charter adopted in San Francisco and many
conventions that we have adhered to. I truly believe
that, at heart - granted, in some cases more at heart
than others - we all believe the same thing. It is notjust
a question of sensitivity or intellectual generosity. It is a
way, perhaps the most intelligent one, of ensuring that
democracy is viewed by as many of the world's citizens
as possible as the best way to live. I believe that peace
and security, economic growth, inclusiveness, respect
for human rights and individual privacy are inalienable
rights that nobody is ready to give up.

That is why we wanted to hold this debate today on
how regional and subregional organizations cooperate
with our mother Organization, the United Nations, to
ensure that we have a world with more peace and more
security. We must also state that peace and security is
not a military concept. There are those who say that
peace and security is to be achieved only by arms, but
there are plenty of examples over thousands of years
of human history that show us clearly that what really
builds societies and ensures stability are the values and
ideals for which a given society, as well as millions of
individuals around the world, are ready to give their
lives. We have seen this in the emancipating revolutions
ofthe nineteenth century, in particular in the Americas,
and in Africa in the twentieth century. Today's global
village requires a different type of emancipation and
independence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are still 30 speakers on the list of speakers.
Given the lateness of the hour, I intend to suspend the
meeting until 3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15 pm.
