Ms. Haress: I speak today as a professional Afghan
woman who has worked for decades to advance human
rights, economic empowerment and democracy in
my country. I am also a member of the Independent
Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of the
Constitution. I am here to brief the Security Council
on the recent political developments in Afghanistan.
My statement will address the recent and upcoming
elections, the role of women and youth in the peace
talks and the crucial importance of adhering to
the constitutional framework in the current peace
negotiations in order to protect the civil liberties
of Afghan citizens and put my country on the road
to democracy.

Afghan citizens defied threats of violence to
participate in the long-overdue parliamentary elections
of 20 October. Four million Afghans - women and
men, young and old, urban and rural - came out to
vote. Women, who went to the polling centres to fulfil
their civic duty at great personal risk, constituted
34 per cent of voters. The participation ofAfghan youth
was also noteworthy - young women and men ran for
office across the country, promising a more educated
Parliament that would be less paralysed by corruption.

In a country scarred by ongoing conflict, the strong
participation ofcitizens in this election was a significant
achievement and an assurance that democratic
institutions would be established, in accordance
with the Constitution. However, the elections were
also marred by significant challenges that must be
addressed before the presidential elections in April
2019. The risk of violence before and on election day
led to many polling centres remaining closed. At other
centres across the country, voters were killed or injured
by militant attacks, roadside bombs or suicide bombers.

In addition to those grave security threats, there was
widespread disappointment at the underperformance
of the Independent Election Commission. Voters
complained about technical and organizational
problems, including the late opening of polling
centres, the absence of electoral staff and materials
and technical difficulties with the use of biometrics
machines, which were intended to prevent fraud.
Thousands of complaints have been registered with the
Electoral Complaints Commission and other related
monitoring institutions, which reflect the inability of
those bodies to fulfil their obligations. It is vital that
those challenges be addressed prior to the upcoming
presidential elections.

Afghanistan has suffered from war throughout
most of its recent history. Conflict has killed thousands
of Afghans, destroyed villages and infrastructure and
forced many to flee their homes. Peacebuilding is
therefore an urgent priority. Positive developments,
such as recent political agreements with the Taliban,
have given many Afghans hope. However, those
negotiations have also raised serious concerns regarding
the meaningful participation of women and youth in the
ensuing peace process.

Article 22 of the Constitution of Afghanistan
guarantees the equality of women and men before
the law. Women have seen major advances in recent
years, including in basic access to education, health
and work, and have significantly contributed to the
development of post-Taliban Afghanistan.

However, despite the important role that women
have played in bringing about social change in the
country, gender inequality and numerous barriers to
their meaningful participation persist. Afghan women
suffer from violence, insecurity and lack of access
to justice.

Given the history of the Taliban in Afghanistan,
building sustainable peace while preventing the
re-establishment of extremist rule depends on the
meaningful inclusion of women. To ensure sustainable
peace, those affected by the conflict must be an
important part ofthe peace process, both in negotiations
and in envisioning solutions. It is therefore vital that the
Government engage civil society and ordinary Afghans
from all walks of life so that they have a say in the
future of their country and feel ownership over the
decisions that will determine it.
The Government must ensure that any continuing
obstacles to the participation of women in all spheres
of public and political life are eliminated and that their
inclusion is a non-negotiable priority. Women must have
formal, substantive and specific roles at every level of
the peace process. In addition, youth, the generation
that will bear the consequences of the current peace
process, must also be consulted, have direct access
to the negotiating table and be included in the peace
agreements. The Government of Afghanistan must also
ensure transparency and keep citizens informed of any
developments in the peace process.

The establishment of the Constitution in 2004
marked a significant break from Afghanistan's decades
of war and lawlessness. Despite the years of conflict
following the adoption of the Constitution, Afghanistan
has made modest progress with regard to the rule of law,
democratic governance and human rights, particularly
women's rights. However, this progress has been placed
in serious jeopardy by repeated suggestions that the
Constitution be amended to accommodate the demands
of the Taliban. Such suggestions raise concerns over
preserving democratic governance, the protection of
human rights and the separation ofpowers as enshrined
in the Afghan Constitution.

Afghanistan's Constitution allows amendments to
fundamental rights only if the objective is to improve
them. On election day, the Taliban attempted to
intimidate people into staying home and deemed the
democratic process a sham. It is therefore clear that
the Taliban's intent to make amendments would not
improve the Constitution but instead result in bartering
away the rights and freedoms for which we have fought
for 17 years. Making changes to the Constitution in
order to negotiate peace is a red line we must not cross.

I therefore urge the Security Council to ensure that
all peace negotiations or talks adhere to the framework
of the current Constitution. Any compromise
concerning citizens' rights and liberties would erase the
hard-won gains of nearly two decades. The cost would
be borne not only by the international community, but
also by ordinary Afghans, as the hope they felt in the
recent elections for a democratic Afghanistan would be
cruelly snatched from them.

