Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate and for Argentina's
and your own commitment to improving the Council's
working methods as a very diligent and insightful
Chair of the Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. I would also like to
thank Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost for her insight
and candour, and Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for
her perseverance in a difficult role, which is vitally
complementary to what we do in the Council.

At a time when the number of crises requiring
urgent Council attention is at historic levels and the
number of people displaced around the world at its
highest since Second World War, an open debate on
working methods might be dismissed as an exercise
in Council introspection. But that is certainly not true.
The number of speakers listed for today - almost
60 - attests to that fact. The way in which this Council
works - our procedures and the way in which we engage
with Member States, regional organizations, civil
society and non-governmental organizations - shapes
our understanding of those crises and our ability to
respond effectively.

The breadth and depth of advice the Council
considers has a direct bearing on the quality and
timeliness of our decisions and our actions. We welcome
the fact that the Council is increasingly hearing from
a diverse range of briefers. Critical to our work is
information about human rights and protection-of-
civilian challenges, which are often, as we know, an
indicator of emerging conflicts and escalating crises. So
it has been important that the Council has been briefed
a number of times this year by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
and a wide range of other United Nations agency heads.

But we must also bring more of these voices from
the front lines into the Chamber, particularly those
of civil society and non-governmental organizations,
such as the young woman Sandra from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who addressed the children and
armed conflict debate last month (see S/PV.7259), and
Jackson Niamah of Medecins Sans Frontieres, who told
us about the terrible impact of Ebola on the ground in
Liberia (see S/PV.7268).

We must also use all of the forums and tools at
our disposal to do so. In the past year, the Council
has made use of the wide range of formats available
to it. Arria Formula meetings have brought significant
human rights information to the Council and enabled
civil society voices to be heard. Australia has convened
such meetings on the human rights situations in Syria
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea; jointly
with Chile, on the protection needs of internally
displaced persons; and on the lessons from the field in
strengthening the implementation of mission mandates
with respect to women, peace and security. Those issues
must also be considered regularly in the Council's
formal discussions.
The Council's effectiveness depends on its
legitimacy, as has just been observed by our colleague
from the Republic of Korea, and its legitimacy is
directly impacted by the Council's willingness to be
informed by and engaged with the broader membership.
It is in that spirit that Australia advanced the proposal
referenced in the concept note (S/2014/725, annex)
to reinforce the Council's dialogue with Member
States, which led to Note by the President contained
in document S/2013/515. Regular open debates and an
expansive approach to rule 37 have also assisted. The
holding of wrap-up sessions in public is an important
advance. The shifting of format of a number of country
situations, including the monthly Syria humanitarian
discussion, to ensure a briefing in the open Chamber has
been welcome. But we must have more and meaningful
dialogue with troop- and police-contributing countries
in particular.

There is no procedural issue of greater substantive
import to the Council's effectiveness and credibility
than the constraints around the use of the veto.
Australia welcomes France's initiative on restraint in
the use of the veto in situations of mass atrocity. This
deserves very close attention and ambitious follow-
up. Also deserving of the Council's attention is the
application of Article 27 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides that a Council member must
refrain from voting on a matter in which it is a party to
a dispute.

While the Council's rhetoric on the importance
of holding those responsible for serious international
crimes to account is strong, as everybody knows our
words are not always followed by action. The Council
has failed to extend its full support to the International
Criminal Court, the efforts of which vitally complement
those of the Council and can have a multiplying effect.
That is true not only in respect of the two situations
referred by the Council, but also in respect of other
situations, such as those in Mali, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Cote d'Ivoire. While the formal briefings by the
Prosecutor are obviously valuable, the Council needs
to do much more to support justice and to ensure
that impunity does not fuel future conflicts. The
establishment of a permanent forum within the Council
enabling formal and informal discussions about support
for the Court is essential.

It is important that the Council also discuss
the working methods of its subsidiary bodies. My
country has worked to improve the transparency of the
Council's sanctions-related activities, including in the
three Committees we chair on Al-Qaida, the Taliban
and Iran. We have seen significant improvements in
working methods and transparency; more Committee
meetings with key stakeholders, including regional
and affected States; more Committee press releases;
more briefings by Committee Chairs in open Council
meetings; more open briefings to United Nations
Member States on the work of the Committees; and
increased engagement with United Nations entities
that operate where sanctions apply and have a shared
interest on cross-cutting issues.

But we still need to do more. As a sponsor of the
high-level review of United Nations sanctions currently
under way, we have consulted broadly with Member
States on a range of working-methods issues related
to sanctions, including the role of the focal point. We
propose to convene a briefing on sanctions issues
during our presidency next month to enable a more
detailed Council discussion of these issues.

To conclude, our working methods shape and define
the Council's effectiveness and impact. We have made
some advances in the past year, and are grateful for that,
but we cannot stop here. The Council must continue
to review its working methods in order to ensure that
we are effective, transparent and representative of all
Member States.

