Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Russian Federation for holding
today's important meeting on situations that constitute
threats to international peace and security in the
Middle East and North Africa. We welcome Mr. Sergey
Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, and thank him for presiding over
today's meeting. We also thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his briefing.

My delegation hopes that today's debate will
provide an opportunity for the members of the Security
Council to hold a constructive dialogue on the root
causes and dynamics that fuel the conflicts that these
regions are facing. These exchanges should also enable
the Council to consider collective actions that would
bring these conflicts to an end in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. The
situations in the Middle East and North Africa continue
to be marked both by the persistence of old conflicts and
the emergence of new ones, whose asymmetrical and
complex nature requires concerted action by the United
Nations and regional organizations, in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly Chapter VIII.

In addition to the decades-long Israeli-Palestinian
crisis, there are conflicts in Syria, Libya and Yemen.
My delegation notes with regret the lack of political
prospects for resolving the various conflicts, the
shortage of democratic governance, the stalemate in
peace processes, the high geopolitical and religious
tensions and the humanitarian tragedies that the people
ofthe region are enduring. The emergence ofperipheral
and non-State actors, including armed groups and such
terrorist organizations as Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front
and the Islamic State, presents threats to security and
stability, not only in the Middle East and North Africa,
but worldwide.

My delegation would like to emphasize that it is
through unity that the Security Council could be in a
position to play a leading role in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa, and indeed anywhere else in the world. In this
regard, my country deplores the lack of unity in the
Council, particularly on the problem of Syria, the Iranian
nuclear issue and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, my
delegation is of the View that the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, adopted on 14 July 2015, constitutes a
solid guarantee for the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and for
regional and global peace and security. C6te d'Ivoire
therefore urges all the parties to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action to resolve any disagreements with
respect to the implementation of its provisions through
negotiations within the joint commission provided for in
the agreeement's annex IV. In this regard, we welcome
all initiatives aimed at finding a peaceful, lasting and
satisfactory solution for all concerned with the Iranian
nuclear issue.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its position in support ofa two-
State solution, in which Israel and Palestine coexist in
peace and security on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We therefore call on Israelis and
Palestinians to renounce violence and unilateral action,
which only make the prospects increasingly remote of
resuming political dialogue with a view to reaching a
peaceful solution to a conflict that has lasted too long.
My country also urges the Council to play its role to the
full, in order to stimulate a new dynamic in the search
for a negotiated solution to this crisis.

The conflict in Syria continues to crystallize tensions
and polarize the Security Council, particularly with the
recurrent allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by the warring parties. The absence of an independent
mechanism for accountability and the fight against
impunity remains a major challenge for the Council. It
is vital that we overcome our differences with a View to
establishing an independent international mechanism
for investigating the use of chemical weapons, in Syria
and throughout the world. My country also reiterates
its support for the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura aimed at resuming a political dialogue on
the basis of the Geneva process, as prescribed by the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

With regard to the situation in Yemen, my
delegation deplores the dire humanitarian situation
in the country and the military escalation around the
port city of Hudaydah. We remain convinced that
there can be no alternative to a political solution in
Yemen. We therefore urge the various parties to end
hostilities and engage meaningfully so as to achieve a
political settlement of the crisis as part of the efforts
of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths.

With regard to Libya, cote d'Ivoire reiterates
its support for the Action Plan of the Special
Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salame. We urge the
international community to give it its full support in
order to advance the national reconciliation process and
lay the foundations for lasting stability and peace in
Libya through an inclusive democratic process.

We believe that the persistence of these crises
reflects the limitations of the international community in
providing appropriate responses to these various armed
conflicts, which are factors ofinstability at the regional
and international levels. This situation undermines the
confidence of international public opinion in the ability
of the Security Council to restore peace and stability
in those regions, whose peoples have been affected by
years and even decades of conflict. From Afghanistan
to Yemen, Syria, Palestine and Libya, the Council is
struggling to meet its responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security because of the
numerous blockages to which it is often subjected, even
though civilian populations are dealing with extreme
humanitarian situations where violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are a daily
reality for them.

In the face of those blockages, which have rendered
joint action ineffective and promoted unilateral
initiatives, my delegation reaffirms its commitment
to multilateralism, which is the most effective way to
achieve lasting peace and development that benefits
everyone. In this regard, we particularly recommend
five areas to focus on: first, respect for the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including the
peaceful settlement of conflicts; secondly, the use of
dialogue and political solutions as the preferred means
of resolving crises; thirdly, collaboration with regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations; fourthly, identification
of the root causes of conflicts and a holistic approach
to their resolution that integrates regional actors and
strategies for development and combating poverty; and
lastly, a coordinated fight against terrorism and violent
extremism and the prevention of the spread of weapons
of mass destruction.

The current situation of conflicts in the world could
give rise to scepticism with respect to the Security
Council's ability to provide lasting responses to the
conflicts that the world is mourning.
Cote d'Ivoire, which in the recent past has been
a focus of the Security Council's attention, remains
convinced that wherever the Council has been able
to demonstrate unity and act with firmness, it has
been able to effectively rise to security and stability
challenges and put an end to the suffering of thousands
of people.

We would say in conclusion that the Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
play a leading role in the prevention and settlement
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa. In
that regard, regional organizations such as the League
of Arab States and the African Union must be fully
involved in the prevention and peaceful settlement of
disputes through the establishment and strengthening
of a strategic partnership between the United Nations
and such organizations.

