Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Secretary-General Dato Lim Jock Hoi for their briefings. I welcome my old friend, Dato Lim Jock Hoi, to New York.China supports the United Nations in deepening cooperation with regional and _- subregional organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, with a view to consolidating and strengthening collective security mechanisms and jointly safeguarding international peace and security. In the 53 years since its founding, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has worked in earnest to advance regional economic integration. It has also worked hard to build a regional cooperation architecture with ASEAN at its centre. At present, the ASEAN region is, on the whole, peaceful and prosperous. ASEAN and the ASEAN-centred East Asian regional cooperation platform have played an important role in that. The relationship between the United Nations and ASEAN has grown increasingly closer in recent years, with ever-improving cooperation mechanisms and expanding areas of cooperation. China highly commends that relationship. With regard to bolstering cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN, China would like to make some proposals. First, we should firmly defend multilateralism together. At present unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise, and factors of instability and uncertainty are multiplying, dealing heavy blows to the international order and the global governance system. That makes it even more important and pressing to strengthen multilateralism. The United Nations and ASEAN should work together to defend multilateralism in regional and international affairs; unswervingly safeguard the international system - with the United Nations at its core - and the international order, based on international law; support ASEAN in its continued adherence to the ASEAN Way, characterized by mutual respect, consensus and accommodation to the comfort level of all parties; and make a positive contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security. Secondly, it is important to respect the leadership and role of regional organizations and countries of a region when it comes to regional affairs. Because of geographic, historical and cultural factors, regional organizations and countries of a region have unique advantages in handling hotspot issues in the region concerned. The international community should fully respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries concerned and encourage regional and subregional organizations and countries of the region concerned to play a leading role in mediation. ASEAN members have been gravely affected by terrorism and violent extremism. It is therefore necessary to consider the regional counter-terrorism situation and provide strong support and cooperation to ASEAN members in their counter-terrorism efforts, with a view to implementing the Council's counter- terrorism resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as to join efforts to combat terrorist financing, drug trafficking and transnational crime. China applauds the important contributions of ASEAN members to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Thirdly, we should boost economic and social development and connectivity in order to promote peace through development. All ASEAN member States are developing countries. As such, accelerating their development is a primary task and a fundamental strategy to tackle regional risks and challenges. The United Nations should further leverage its own mechanisms and advantages in resources and capacity, step up coordination with ASEAN and lend greater assistance to its members in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to help narrow regional development gaps and promote youth employment and social stability. Connectivity is an important foundation for the interlinked and integrated development of the region. In the interest of greater synergy, we support stronger alignment between the regional connectivity initiative and the national development strategies of the ASEAN countries. As a good neighbour and partner to ASEAN member countries, China attaches great importance to developing its relations with ASEAN. China is the first dialogue partner to join the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and the first country to publicly express its willingness to sign the protocol to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone with ASEAN. China has been an active supporter of ASEAN's centrality in regional affairs, guided by the China-ASEAN Strategic Partnership Vision 2030, and through mechanisms and platforms such as the 10+1 and 10+3 frameworks and the East Asia Summit. We have deepened cooperation with ASEAN member countries, built mutual political trust, jointly pursued the Belt and Road Initiative and helped maintain regional prosperity and stability. The China-ASEAN relationship has become a pacesetter for East Asian regional cooperation. China stands ready to work with all countries to bolster the Organization's cooperationwith regional and subregional organizations, including ASEAN, staunchly support multilateralism and join hands in building a community of shared future for humankind. My statement was supposed to end here, but in the light of statements delivered earlier, allow me to speak for another hour. The focus of this meeting is cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN. We should not be discussing Myanmar here. Unfortunately, some countries have used this meeting to pressure Myanmar. China therefore feels it necessary to state its position on this issue. China pays close attention to the Rakhine state issue in Myanmar. We have been actively working with Myanmar and Bangladesh and encourage them to resolve their issues through dialogue and consultation. So far, China, Myanmar and Bangladesh have had three informal meetings with their foreign ministers, all of which registered progress and produced important consensus. ASEAN has played an important role in facilitating Myanmar-Bangladesh dialogue, building mutual trust and improving the humanitarian situation for the people in Rakhine state. China commends ASEAN and supports its continued efforts along those lines. Lately - thanks to the joint efforts of the countries concerned, the countries of the region, China and ASEAN - Myanmar and Bangladesh have had good interactions, Myanmar has taken a series of positive measures, and progress has been made in resolving the Rakhine issue. The situation on the ground has continued to improve. The international community should cherish the hard-won momentum, help promote bilateral dialogue and consultation between Myanmar and Bangladesh, encourage them to expedite the repatriation of the people who have fled from chaos and work to create a sound external environment. The Council should play an active and constructive role in those efforts by providing the necessary support and assistance to the countries concerned. Excessive pressure would only be counterproductive. China takes note of the International Court of Justice's interim decision on Myanmar and the Government of Myanmar's response, as well as the report recently submitted by the Independent Commission of Enquiry. The Rakhine issue has very complex historical, ethnic and religious components. China supports Myanmar and Bangladesh in their continued efforts to properly resolve the relevant issues through negotiation. The international community should play a constructive role in that regard. China also supports the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar in her ongoing efforts. In their statements today, some representatives made reference to the South China Sea issue. The United States representative made unfounded accusations against China, which my country firmly rejects. It should be noted that the United Nations is not the right forum for the discussion of the South China Sea issue, nor should that issue be addressed in the Security Council. At present, the situation in the South China Sea is largely stable and improving. Specific disputes are being resolved by the countries directly concerned through negotiation and consultation. On the other hand, China and ASEAN members are jointly committed to maintaining peace and stability in the South China Sea. Facts have shown that this dual-track approach is the proper way to resolve the South China Sea issue. Regrettably, this process has suffered from the constant disruption and sabotage of some countries external to the region, such as the United States. China has always respected and supported the navigational and overflight freedom enjoyed by the States in the South China Sea under international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Even as they enjoy those freedoms, States should fully respect the sovereignty and security interests of coastal States. China firmly opposes the attempts of any country to infringe upon its sovereignty and security interests in the name of freedom of navigation. In fact, there has never been any issue with freedom of navigation or overflight in the South China Sea. What is really worrying is the fact that some countries, such as the United States, under the pretext of freedom of navigation, sent military ships and aeroplanes to the South China Sea to demonstrate their strength. That is an act of provocation and threat to coastal States. That represents the greatest risk to security in the South China Sea and should be resolutely condemned by all States. As a firm defender of regional peace and security, China has always pursued a defence policy that is defensive in nature. Under international law, it 1s the legitimate right of a sovereign State to deploy defence facilities on its own territory. The United States hasrepeatedly accused China of militarization in the South China Sea. However, it is the United States that has hundreds of military bases across the world and has deployed hundreds of thousands of troops outside its own territory. The United States asks other countries to comply with international law but it has not even acceded to UNCLOS. Moreover, it has withdrawn from international agreements and mechanisms one after the other. The United States talks here about peace and stability in the South China Sea, but it has stirred up all kinds of disputes in many parts of the world, becoming a source of turbulence in the world. How can such a country be in a position to accuse others anywhere? On what grounds? I can tell the representative of the United States that the label of militarization is not the right one for China but could make a more appropriate one for the United States. Just now, some representatives referred to the South China Sea arbitration case. I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the Chinese Government has solemnly declared that the South China Sea arbitration award is null and void and has no binding force. China did not accept or participate in the arbitration. China neither accepts nor recognizes the award. Just now, the issue of the Korean peninsula was mentioned by some representatives in their statements. I wish to take this opportunity to say that in order to push the parties concerned to resume dialogue on the Korean peninsula issue and settle their disputes by peaceful means, China and the Russian Federation proposed not long ago a draft resolution on strengthening the political settlement of the Korean peninsula issue. The draft resolution is still on the Council's table. We have organized several rounds of consultations. We will keep an open mind and hope that everyone can put forward constructive ideas. Let us work together to create a good environment for making contributions to easing the situation on the Korean peninsula, pushing the parties concerned to resume dialogue, resolving differences through dialogue and achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and its long-term peace and stability.
