Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank today's briefers for their presentations and
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to engage
on the critical topic of peace and security in Africa.

The United States is deeply committed to realizing
a better life for all the people ofAfrica and demonstrates
that through our robust bilateral programmes. The
United States has spent more than one third of
its worldwide bilateral development assistance in
sub-Saharan Africa since 2011. We spent $13.4 billion
in 2017 alone to support stability and prosperity on
the continent.

There are strong economic incentives for investment.
Africa is home to six of the world's 10 fastest-growing
economies and over 1 billion consumers. But the
United States understands that that is only part of the
continent's larger story - the millions of individuals
with unique callings and limitless potential. That is
why our support does not burden African countries with
unsustainable debts or unreasonable expectations. The
Security Council's common wish should be for Africa to
be strong and vibrant, free from the limiting obligations
that some might place on it. But strengthened vibrancy
requires cooperation among regional actors. To that
end, the United States applauds the recent efforts by
African Governments and organizations to assume
responsibility for achieving those goals.

We are grateful for the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), which has urged
leaders to govern inclusively and abide by the election
timelines in Guinea-Bissau. We commend the
peacekeeping deployment of ECOWAS and its support
for the transition in the Gambia. We are also appreciative
of the work of the African Union (AU) and Ethiopia in
helping secure a civilian-led transitional Government
in the Sudan. Those examples are encouraging.

Regional actors should do even more to address
the challenges that threaten stability. For instance,
the anglophone conflict in Cameroon has led to the
deaths of thousands and the displacement of hundreds
of thousands. And, while we are also encouraged by
the Government's announcement to hold a national
dialogue, the region could do more. We also note that
flagging regional cooperation in South Sudan has
slowed the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan.

As many have highlighted here today, financing is
one of the challenges confronting regional cooperation.
That is certainly true in the case of African Union
peacekeeping operations. We recognize the sacrifices
that the AU and African troop-contributing countries
are making, and we are aware of the challenges
associated with taking on a greater role. The United

States supports the United Nations and the AU's efforts
to establish systems that offer predictable, sustainable
and reliable financing for future operations.

But any mechanism using United Nations-assessed
contributions requires a deliberate approach, with
the appropriate safeguards. Any draft resolution on
that topic must address long-standing United States
policy positions, including with respect to financial
transparency and trade measures. Such a draft resolution
must also address concerns regarding adequate
burden-sharing, fiscal transparency and adherence to
United Nations standards for conduct in peacekeeping
operations. Those principles will improve the integrity
and fiscal health of AU operations, but, more important,
they will allow the AU to deliver real peace and security
to vulnerable populations.

As we have heard throughout this high-level week
from world leaders, activists and countless others, our
words are ultimately empty if they are not backed by
concrete actions; we could not agree more. We want to
reiterate our commitment to doing more than speaking
of peace and security in Africa. That is one reason that
the United States has decided to co-lead with South
Africa the upcoming Security Council trip to South
Sudan. The trip will allow the Council to see how our
words and decisions are impacting lives on the ground
and to appreciate first-hand how we can help deliver
a measurably better life for every man, woman and
child in South Sudan, and on the African continent
more broadly.

