Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): Allow me first to thank
you, Mr. Axworthy, for the important Canadian initiatives
on United Nations sanctions. These have joined sanctions-
related initiatives by other countries, and the time has
indeed come to undertake a more in-depth review of the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions under the present
international circumstances, circumstances in which
humanitarian considerations are taking centre stage in our
ongoing debate on issues of international peace and
security.

The representative of Portugal will make a statement
on behalf of the European Union later in this debate. The
Netherlands fully associates itself with that statement, and
I will therefore limit myself to a few brief comments on
this subject.

I wish here to commend the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Prendergast, for his comprehensive
introduction, which rightly touched on all aspects relating
to sanctions.
We believe that the imposition of sanctions under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter remains an
indispensable tool of international diplomacy, both in
preventing armed conflicts and in directing conflict
situations towards a peaceful settlement. Therefore, if
sanctions are to be an effective political instrument, they
must be applied swiftly and with resolve.

However, sanctions cannot be viewed as an
instrument in isolation. They must be part of a broader
strategy aimed at bringing about factual changes in
behaviour by the targeted State or entity. Sanctions are to
serve clear goals. While sanctions should therefore not be
used as a blunt instrument, we should not lose sight of
the fact that sanctions are coercive measures under
Chapter VII, with an inescapably wide range of
consequences - and I must add, just a few steps, or even
only one step, short of military intervention in line with
Article 42 of the United Nations Charter.

Whenever the Security Council is considering the
imposition of sanctions, the guiding principle should be
that each sanctions regime is tailored to the actual
situation. Sanctions are not meant to punish nations or
peoples as such, but to exert strong pressure on the elites
with decision-making powers. However, it cannot be ruled
out that the population and the economy in general will
suffer as well.

That is why - especially in the case of
comprehensive sanctions and of general trade
embargoes - humanitarian exemptions are imperative.
Given the need for swift action when it comes to
imposing sanctions, the Netherlands believes it would not
be wise to adopt a policy of protracted pre-assessment or
impact reporting. In the view of the Netherlands, a better
course of action would be to make available, within the
United Nations Secretariat, further high quality and varied
expertise in order for the Security Council to be offered
well-considered and swift advice on possible options for
action. Once sanctions are in place, the humanitarian and
economic impact could and should be monitored
continuously and closely. Also, clear procedures for
adjusting exemption regimes must be in place.

When speaking about United Nations sanctions we
generally have comprehensive sanctions in mind. As a

 

matter of fact, sanctions regimes are much more diverse.
The Security Council has imposed arms embargoes, flight
bans, travel bans and financial sanctions. All but one of the
current sanctions regimes are in fact targeted and focused
on specific groups of people or economic activities and do
not harm the general population as such. Although not all
of them have been effective, the Libya sanctions regime
produced the desired results.

It seems superfluous to state, but for sanctions to be
successful, sanctions regimes must be enforced. Absence of
enforcement will lead to undermining the authority of the
Security Council and of sanctions as a policy instrument.
As stated in the International Peace Academy study,
sanctions often suffer from poor design, loose commitment
from Member States, inadequate monitoring and lax
enforcement. Sanctions committees should therefore play a
key role in enforcing the sanctions entrusted to them.

It is with great appreciation that my delegation has
followed closely the Angola sanctions Committee, which,
under effective Canadian chairmanship, is now well on the
way to producing significant results in fighting violations,
and is breaking new ground in the process. Tomorrow's
open meeting will surely testify to that.

Following up earlier steps of January 1999, the
Security Council should indeed now consider further
improvements, in particular to strengthen enforcement
capabilities. One could think of more effective
communications with Member States as one improvement.
Furthermore, Member States should be assisted in
administering sanctions, especially in the fields of arms
embargoes and financial sanctions. A feasibility study
should be undertaken on how the United Nations Secretariat
can become more effective in supporting and administering
sanctions. A strengthened Secretariat will also be able to
offer valuable assistance in the pre-assessment period.

In conclusion, the Netherlands wishes to pay tribute to
a few States that have actively sponsored studies on
"smarter" sanctions, notably Germany and Switzerland.
Canada has also made a recent valuable contribution, in
collaboration with the International Peace Academy. We
believe enough food for further thought and concrete
proposals are at our disposal that will tremendously assist
the Security Council in redefining elements of its sanctions
policies. It will therefore not come as a big surprise that the
Netherlands strongly supports the decision to establish on
a temporary basis an informal working group of the
Security Council on sanctions. Its terms of reference are
sufficiently broad to examine how to improve the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions from all
perspectives.

