Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I would like to start by
welcoming the participation of Deputy Secretary-
General Asha-Rose Migiro, and to thank her for her
statement. I also thank Mr. Antonio Maria Costa and
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for their statements.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
has had a devastating impact on peace and security in
Africa, and Uganda therefore thanks you,
Mr. President, for organizing a debate on that
important matter. We now know that the proliferation
and illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
are not the direct causes of conflict, but rather
significant factors that fuel and sustain conflicts
between and within States. Not only do they make

those conflicts more lethal, but they also make efforts
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts more difficult.
The greatest impact of all is on human security and the
socio-economic development of States.

Africa, like other parts of the world, has
continued to receive and recycle arsenals of arms to
devastating effect. In some parts of Africa, such as
Central Africa, the Great Lakes region and the Horn of
Africa in particular, we have seen how the easy
availability of small arms and light weapons has been a
major destabilizing factor. Several of the conflicts in
those areas are fought principally with small arms,
whose low cost, ease of use and maintenance make
them very popular. Such weapons also fuel crime and
Violence, displace civilians and undermine their rights.
In the Central and East African regions, small arms and
light weapons constitute a serious threat to peace,
reconciliation, safety, security and sustainable
development.

Small arms have also had an impact on low-
intensity conflicts, such as those between communities
in the border areas. In the pastoral communities
bordering Kenya and the Sudan, as well as those
bordering Kenya and Somalia, in the border areas of
northern and eastern Uganda, and also in parts of the
Kenyan border, cattle-rustling has had a long history
due to aspects of the pastoral nomadic culture. The
proliferation of small arms, particularly automatic and
semi-automatic weapons, has all of a sudden made
traditional cattle-raiding more deadly than ever before.

The illegal trade in natural resources in Central
Africa has also heightened the illicit trade in small
arms. Those new dynamics are a serious threat to
peace, stability and the socio-economic development of
the entire subregion. Illicit arms trafficking has also
increased the incidences of armed violence,
particularly in the urban centres in the region. It is now
evident, too, that small arms and light weapons also
play a role in facilitating and fuelling other illegal
cross-border activities, such as drug trafficking and the
trade in endangered species. Regional cooperation and
coordination are therefore necessary so that
programmes, activities or initiatives linked to that
challenge are regional in scope and utilize regional
institutions.

African Governments have initiated various
mechanisms aimed at addressing the problem of
proliferation and the abuse of such weapons. One such

initiative is the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of
the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. The signatories to the Declaration include
Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan, Ethiopia, Burundi,
Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda, Tanzania and Djibouti. Those countries are
tasked with ensuring that they take appropriate national
measures aimed at addressing the problem of small
arms and light weapons. The Declaration reflects the
cross-border dynamic of conflict, instability and small
arms proliferation and provides for an agenda for
action and an implementation plan.

As part of its efforts to fight the illicit
proliferation of arms and light weapons, Uganda has
established a national focal point on small arms and
light weapons under the Ministry of Internal Affairs to
coordinate, combat and control the proliferation of
firearms. A national firearm marking exercise is under
way in the country, beginning with those firearms
under the police and the army. Uganda also continues
to implement collection and disposal measures and,
since 2008, has disposed of more than 4,700 pieces of
recovered illicit arms and light weapons. Currently, a
countrywide firearms stocktaking exercise is being
conducted within the police and armed forces to
determine surplus stocks and serviceable and
commissioned small arms and light weapons for final
disposal.

Significant progress has been made in the Great
Lakes region to strengthen controls on small arms and
light weapons. It is encouraging to note that all
countries have now established national focal points
and are at different levels of implementing the action
plan. To date, over 200,000 illicit small arms and light
weapons have been destroyed in the subregion.

Now, the challenge is how Governments in the
region can maintain the existing momentum. The
efforts undertaken to improve cross-border cooperation
and the enhancement of reinforcement capacity must
be built on. The legal protocols on small arms control
must be signed, ratified and implemented.
Furthermore, the initiatives taken to improve weapons
collection and stockpile management, ensure the
effective demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, raise awareness in communities of the
dangers of small arms, and, above all, reduce the
demand for weapons need to be intensified.

One major challenge is how best to coordinate the

various national initiatives among countries with

different levels of resources, legal systems and

institutional and technical capacity. Another major

challenge to regional efforts has been the lack of
resources.

Finally, in a region with porous borders and with
people still living in conditions of poverty, efforts to
reduce small arms and light weapons by States on their
own are likely to have little or no impact. We wish to
underscore once again the importance of a regional
approach and focus in addressing this problem and the
need for increased support of the international
community in order to give greater assurance of human
security and socio-economic development to States
within Africa. Uganda therefore commends the
countries in Central Africa for pursuing this regional
approach.

