Mr. Valero Bricefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, we wish to express our
satisfaction with your direction of the presidency of the
Security Council, and to commend you for having
moved this debate on the situation in the Middle East
including the question of Palestine forward. Your
decision is a clear and accurate interpretation of the
concern that a considerable majority of this
Organization has about Israel's systematic disregard, as
a State policy, for the resolutions of this body, the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
regarding the Middle East and the situation in
Palestine.

The Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations associates
itself with the statement made today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement delivered by the Permanent
Mission of Egypt.

The matter of the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, has been of the greatest
importance to this Council. The creation of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization by the
Security Council in 1948 led to the first peacekeeping
operation, charged with verifying the ceasefire in the
Middle East. Since 1947 numerous resolutions have
been adopted by the United Nations on the matter of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East, from the
controversial General Assembly resolution 181 (II) on
the partition of Palestine to Council resolution 1860
(2009) adopted this year.

Absolutely none of these have been honoured by
the Government of Israel. Several decades have borne
witness to the continual military aggression of the
Government of Israel, which has increasingly violated
international law, and in particular international
humanitarian law, in its practices against the peoples
and Governments of the region of the Middle East.

In January 2009, given the inaction of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council acted to impede - or at least mitigate
- the brutal aggression launched against the people of
Palestine in the Gaza strip. In this context, the results
obtained by the Human Rights Council in the wake of
its resolution (A/HRC/S-9/ 1), which spoke to the grave
situation in Gaza, merit particular endorsement. The
Fact-Finding Mission charged with investigating those
events has now produced its report (A/HRC/ 12/48), the
content of which, in the opinion of Venezuela, demands
the support of the entire international community.

In its conclusions and recommendations, the
report underscores the need for effective
accountability. In addition, according to the report,
there is important evidence showing clearly that during
the military operation of 27 December 2008 through
18 January 2009 there were "serious violations of
international humanitarian law", as well as blatant
violations of human rights made worse by the blockade
to which the population of Gaza was subjected in the
months before Operation Cast Lead was launched.
Among the violations, which the entire world
witnessed and which have been disseminated by the
media to every corner of the Earth, were arbitrary and
abusive detentions, recurrent torture, ill treatment,
extrajudicial killings, forced expulsion, the demolition
of homes, and a brutal, unmitigated broadening of
settlement activity. These unquestionably abominable
actions were undertaken with total impunity.

Impunity is the most important issue we must
address in this meeting. The conclusions of the
impartial and thorough investigation are unequivocal
as to the grave responsibility of the Israeli Government
for the abominable events cited. The report of the
independent Fact-Finding Mission also indicates that

"there are serious doubts about the willingness of
Israel to carry out genuine investigations in an
impartial, independent, prompt and effective way
as required by international law. The Mission is
also of the view that the system presents
inherently discriminatory features that make the
pursuit of justice for Palestinian victims
extremely difficult". (A/HRC/12/48, para. 1961)

It is important to note that the International
Criminal Court, under the Rome Statute, plays an
important role in the quest for achieving justice and the
prevention of flagrant violations of international law.
The Rome Statute clearly codifies crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court: genocide, the crime of
aggression, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
My country sees evidence of such crimes reflected in
the reports of the Human Rights Council.

The Security Council is obligated to assess
Israel's non-compliance with the Council's resolutions
concerning peace and security in the Middle East. The
United Nations Charter confers on this body the
authority to do so. That includes the authority to
determine whether, in its judgment, a State is willing to
honour its obligations under the Charter. It can make
recommendations to the General Assembly in that
regard.

The Security Council faces a dilemma that must
be resolved. Should the Council gather further proof in
the case concerning aggression against the people of
the Middle East and Palestine, or should it shoulder the
responsibility that is incumbent upon it? The
Government of Israel has long acted outside the
principles of the United Nations and international
justice, and we cannot wait while the new,
reprehensible concept known as natural growth - that
is, natural extermination - is allowed to develop with
impunity. International law forbids Israel from
invoking conquest and colonization; it certainly cannot
be allowed to pursue such practices in the name of so-
called natural growth or, rather, natural extermination.

Israel has no excuse for expelling the
Palestinians, a dignified people with thousands of years
of history, from their own lands, or for its ongoing
aggression against them, its frequent indiscriminate
bombing of Lebanon and its occupation of Golan.
These constitute flagrant, clear and unconcealable
violations of the principles of international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, without
parallel, in their constancy and brutality, in modern
history.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, with President Hugo Chavez at its helm,
has been emphatic in its rejection of the historic
aggression of the Government of Israel against the
nations of the Middle East and Palestine in particular.
We endorse the demands of those peoples and the
peoples of the world to be allowed to live in peace, and
we call on the international community not to permit
jurisprudence to grant legitimacy to the military
conquest of any territory.

In conclusion, Venezuela will continue to suspend
its diplomatic relations with the Government of Israel,
which were broken off by my Government as a result
of the criminal attacks on the Palestinian people and
the Gaza Strip. My Government is unwilling to resume
diplomatic relations until the inhumane treatment of
the Palestinians comes to a definitive end.

