Mr. Backovie (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to speak to the Council today as
representative of the Republic of Serbia. I take this
opportunity to welcome the Presidents and Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. I thank them for their
semi-annual reports.

Before I specifically address the reports, allow me
to make a general statement in that regard.
The issue that we are concerned with is the scope
of the mandate of the Prosecutor with respect to the
issues addressed in the reports. The issues that are
raised therein relate to the fields of education, history,
politics, culture and social development. In that regard,
while we definitely consider those issues to be worth
discussing and addressing, the concern remains as
to the scope of the mandate provided in the statute
and the relevant resolution concerning the Residual
Mechanism. We note two elements of that concern.

The first pertains to the members of the Security
Council and is for them to deal with. What is the
actual mandate that they have given to the Prosecutor?
However, the other side of the issue, with which we are
concerned as one of the ultimate beneficiaries of the
mandate of the Prosecutor's Office, is the issue of the
competence of legal professionals to deal with issues
such as education, history and so on. To illustrate the
point concerning the scope of the mandate, I would
respectfully draw the Council's attention to the reports
of the President and the Prosecutor. If we compare the
two, we may be able to see what I am referring to in
greater detail.

The key principle of the fight against impunity for
the most serious international crimes is the proven,
continuous commitment of the Member States. To prove
their commitment, States need to align their normative
framework with relevant international conventions and
the ICTY statute, cooperate with the ICTY in order
to enable efficient investigation and prosecution; and
organize their domestic judicial systems in a way
that enables independent, impartial and efficient war
crimes proceedings.

If we are assessing today the extent to which
Serbia has fulfilled these requirements, it is clear that
Serbia has unambiguously shown its commitment.
Our criminal legislation is fully aligned with relevant
standards and enables cooperation with the ICTY,
without exception, regarding all acts that the Security
Council recognized in the ICTY statute as serious
international war crimes. Based on this legislation,
Serbia has proven its commitment, as clearly reflected
in the number and rank of defendants - I emphasize
the word "rank" - who have been surrendered to
the ICTY.

The Republic of Serbia has handed over 45
defendants to the Tribunal out of the total of 46
defendants whose surrender has been demanded from
Serbia. One defendant committed suicide before he
could be handed over to the Tribunal. Of that number,
14 defendants were arrested in the Republic of Serbia,
four defendants were arrested abroad, in the framework
of cooperation between national security services
with foreign agencies, and 27 defendants voluntarily
surrendered. No other country has surrendered even
close to a number of high-ranking officials as Serbia
has. That is - or should be - clear proof of Serbia's
commitment to prosecuting war crimes.

In addition, Serbia has granted the ICTY
Prosecutor free access to important evidence located
in Serbia, such as documents, archives and witnesses.
So far, Serbia has positively resolved 2,179 out of 2,180
requests for assistance received from the Offices of
the ICTY Prosecutor and the Mechanism Prosecutor.
Only one request from the Office of the Mechanism's
Prosecutor, of a newer date, is currently undergoing the
realization procedure.

Serbia has allowed 757 witnesses to testify freely,
despite the right/obligation they had to withhold
testimony due to the State, military or official rules
regarding privileged information. One thousand three
hundred and twenty-nine requests were issued by
various defence teams, and no pending requests for
assistance exist.

Serbia has carried out all 11 requests for witness
protection, efficiently monitored all provisional-release
cases and ensured that all accused were returned to
ICTY detention upon request. Currently, Serbian
authorities are monitoring two cases of provisional
release, in connection with which those persons are in
the process of being surrendered to the ICTY as well.

In parallel with the contribution to the ICTY'S
work, Serbia has shown an indisputable commitment
to continuously fight impunity for core international
crimes through proceedings before national courts.
Serbian authorities have a strategic approach, as
evidenced by the obligations that Serbia undertook
via its action plan under chapter 23 and its national
strategy for the prosecution of war crimes, adopted
by the Government in 2016. Both documents have as
a backbone the idea of zero tolerance for impunity
regardless of the ethnicity, religion or rank of victims
or perpetrators. Both documents have been welcomed
by the most senior Serbian officials, as evinced in
numerous public statements. Those facts stand squarely
against the assertions made by the Prosecutor in
his report.

The freedom of speech is highly ranked on the
list of Serbian priorities. Every citizen is free to
express her opinion without consequences, as long as
those statements do not constitute a criminal offence.
However, single statements by some individuals or
civil-society organizations should not be interpreted
as an official position of the State of Serbia. Serbian
commitment should not be judged on anything other
than results achieved so far in cooperation with the
ICTY, prosecutions of war crimes before domestic
courts and regional cooperation. Generalizations based
on impressions, speculation, conjecture or innuendo
cannot contribute to a fair assessment of the situation,
as mandated by the statute.

We are aware that the prolonged procedure for
the election of the new war crimes prosecutor raised
some concerns. However, they did not affect the
performance of the prosecutor; nor has it in any way
halted progress in Serbia on prosecuting war crimes,
or our commitment thereto. On the contrary, Serbia
actively works on strengthening the capacities of the
prosecutor. In addition to the appointment of the new
prosecutor, the election procedure for three more
deputy prosecutors is ongoing. Now that we have a new
prosecutor in place, a new prosecutorial strategy will
be finalized in a few months.

Trial monitoring of war crimes proceedings by
civil society will start again in September, along with
special ongoing training for judges, public prosecutors
and police officers in charge of the investigation and
prosecution of war crimes. Amendments to the criminal
code were adopted few months ago in order to align it
with the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Numerous
activities have been undertaken in order to improve
the status of victims and witnesses, in line with
international standards. Ten indictments for war crimes
against 21 individuals have been confirmed in Serbia
in 2016 and 2017.

We understand the Prosecutor's concern about
reconciliation and cooperation in the region, but I must
emphasize that regional cooperation remains a priority

for Serbia. Our singular commitment is reflected in
statistical data on regional cooperation, and the quality
of our efforts can be the subject of assessment when
we are talking about Serbia's commitment to regional
cooperation. However, reciprocity is needed if we are to
achieve more results in regional cooperation.

According to statistics from the war crimes
prosecutor's office, as of December 2016 Serbia had
positively resolved 38 of 52 requests coming from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and nine requests were
denied while five are still pending; 50 out of 78 cases
coming from Croatia have been honoured, with 11
requests denied and 17 are pending. In parallel, only
10 out of 22 Serbian requests have been positively
resolved by Bosnia and Herzegovina. The result is even
more worrying with regard to requests for assistance
submitted to Croatia: only 10 out of 27 requests have
been positively resolved.

Serbia should not be judged negatively because
of its respect for its own Constitution, laws and
court decisions, which all accord with the basic legal
principles. After all, the rule of law and separation
of powers are key principles of all traditional and
modern democracies. Bearing that in mind, let me raise
three questions.

First, could we elect the prosecutor or her deputies
without conducting a procedure in accordance with
relevant laws and contrary to the autonomy of the public
prosecution office and the liberty of the members of
Parliament to vote for or against proposed candidates?
Of course, the answer is no.

Secondly, could we surrender the Petar Jojie,
Vjerica Radeta and Jovo Ostojie contrary to an
independent court decision based on the law of Serbia
and the statute of the ICTY? In that regard, let me make

three points. First, those individuals are not accused of
war crimes. Secondly, those individuals are not accused
of war crimes. And, thirdly, those individuals are not
accused ofwar crimes. Those individuals are accused of
contempt of court. The Serbian court applied the clear
language of domestic law and the statute enacted by
the Security Council in deciding not to surrender those
three individuals. Again, they are accused of contempt
of court, not war crimes. I would respectfully request
that members please read the statute, in particular
article 29, which was mentioned here today. That may
help members understand why the Serbian court has
refused to surrender them.

Thirdly, could we finish Djukic' case while ignoring
the procedural rights of the accused? If there are any
concerns about the length of trials, I would draw
members' attention to the varying lengths of various
trials, even at the Tribunal itself. Procedural safeguards
and the rights of the accused, and respect thereof, are
among the basic principles of modern democracies. To
summarize in that regard, we believe that the rule of
law cannot be enforced by violating. That is just not the
way to enforce the rule oflaw.

In conclusion, Serbia's commitment to cooperate
with the ICTY and deal efficiently with war crimes
before its own courts is indisputable. The same goes for
the Residual Mechanism. We want to believe that other
Governments in the region are equally willing to work
together on reconciliation, cooperation and stability in
the region while all along supporting the ICTY and the
Residual Mechanism in accomplishing their missions.
We also hope that ICTY and Mechanism officials will
recognize the efforts of our Government to promote
those values.

The meeting rose at 12.40p.m.
