Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): The resolve and
effectiveness of the United Nations is tested whenever
lives are threatened. When conflict looms, the world
looks to the United Nations for a decisive response to
prevent violence through agile and creative diplomacy,
to stop aggression, to end conflict when it does happen
and then to help keep the peace, and be prepared to
stay the course so that fragile countries do not lapse
back into war.

I think we have shown this year that the United
Nations can take a lead in saving life and protecting
civilians. In Libya, we mustered legitimate diplomatic,
economic and military pressure to prevent a regime
from waging war against its people and to deter its
members from committing crimes. Our swift action
prevented a humanitarian catastrophe, saving the lives
of thousands of civilians. It led many to abandon the
Al-Qadhafi regime, so hastening its demise, and it
allowed the Libyan people to seize the opportunity to
determine their future.

In Cote d'Ivoire, acting with the unanimous
support of the Security Council, United Nations
peacekeepers undertook limited military operations to
protect civilians. The United Nations demonstrated
zero tolerance for attacks against civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers and for the desperate acts of a
ruler seeking to cling to power against the wishes of
the people.

These experiences hold lessons for us as we seek
to improve the role of the United Nations in preventive
diplomacy, because the first lesson is that the will to
act is the vital ingredient in conflict prevention.
Without international will and leadership, we risk
failing in our duty to uphold international peace and
security, giving comfort to the perpetrators of crimes
while causing victims to despair.

The increasing frequency of internal conflicts
rather than conflicts between States presents different
challenges but does not remove our responsibility to
protect the civilian population. The impact of conflict
is devastating and is not confined within national
borders. Lives are lost, people displaced, trade links
severed, economies crippled, and crime and terrorism
can flourish. The consequences are a burden on us all
and a danger to all.

We have a responsibility to use all the means
available to the United Nations to prevent conflict and
to ensure that it does not escalate. We must encourage
sustainable peace through mediation and dialogue,
through support to local conflict-prevention efforts, or
through more coercive measures, as the situation
demands. Military action may be necessary, as has
proved the case in Libya, but it is a last resort and is
appropriate only in certain circumstances. Britain is not
calling for this, for instance, in the case of Syria.

The second lesson is that actions to prevent
conflict must have a strong legal basis and attract
regional support, as we did in Libya working with the
Arab League and with a clear United Nations
resolution. We must also work with the grain of the
societies we are dealing with, recognizing that each
situation is different and that we cannot impose
solutions. Such legitimacy and wide support,
themselves the product of diplomacy, must always be
our goal, even when in the short term this can make it
harder for nations to act.

The third lesson is that we must develop our
capacity to anticipate and react to developing conflict,
both as individual countries and here at the United
Nations. The United Kingdom is now placing great
emphasis on effective conflict prevention. This means
not waiting for problems to become crises but using
our network of embassies as an early-warning system
and our role in international organizations to help
resolve disputes and create agreements.

We know that development is an indispensable
component of conflict prevention, so in Britain we will
not retreat an inch from our commitment to spend more
of our national income on development. We are
enshrining in our law our promise to spend 0.7 per cent
of our national income on alleviating poverty
elsewhere and ensuring that an increasing proportion of
it contributes to conflict prevention. By 2015, 30 per
cent of our official development aid will support
fragile and conflict-affected areas.

In the United Kingdom, we are also using our
new National Security Council to become better at
anticipating conflict, and we can share our analysis
with others. We also emphasize the need for strategic
patience in supporting States that are emerging from
conflict. Our experiences from the western Balkans to
the Horn of Africa show that a hard-won peace must be
preserved and not taken for granted. To cement peace,
it often takes generations, and so where we are
engaged, we must guard against turning our attention
and resources away too soon.

Looking forward, I believe that we must apply
these three lessons - political will and leadership,
international legitimacy and investment in conflict
prevention - to the immediate challenges we face.
Each case will be different, but we need to apply
conflict prevention efforts in a way that is flexible and
according to our best ability to influence the situation
on the ground.

For instance, in Syria the United Kingdom
believes that a response from the Security Council is
long overdue. The time has come for a resolution
demanding an end to violence and real political reform
that applies effective pressure on the Syrian authorities
to this end. The consequences of inaction would weigh
heavily upon us if we were to turn a blind eye to
killings, abuses and repression.

In Libya, we must support the National
Transitional Council's efforts to rebuild the State and
chart a new course for its country. I welcome the
Council's decision last week to mandate a United
Nations mission for Libya. Attention must now be
given to the United Nations role in coordinating
international efforts at the request of the Libyan
Government and in support of its own plans.

In the Sudan, we must work more effectively to
establish a strong position to respond to the worrying
levels of violence in Darfur, Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile state. And in Yemen, the United Nations
should continue to use its good offices to help mediate
a peaceful settlement and an end to the appalling
violence. In parallel, we must intensify our work to
build up the United Nations capacity for preventive
diplomacy. This means greater cooperation between
United Nations agencies to identify threats and the
regular attention of the Security Council on countries
at risk.

We support the United Nations increasing use of
mediation specialists and special envoys, and we
welcome the Secretary-General's call to increase the
number of senior female mediators in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). Above all, United Nations
Member States must be prepared to invest early on in
supporting fragile States where requested, as well as to
react rapidly when a crisis arises. Such preventive
action saves lives, protects fundamental human rights
and helps preserve peace. These are indeed our
essential tasks.

