The President: As agreed in prior consultations,
the Security Council is pleased to invite the following
representatives of regional organizations to participate
in this meeting in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure: His
Excellency Professor Omotayo R. Olanyan, Acting
Executive Secretary and representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission; His
Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali, Chairman of the New
York Committee of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Valery Kyrychenko,
Deputy Chairman of the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States; His Excellency
Mr. Terry Davis, Secretary General of the Council of
Europe; His Excellency Mr. Yahia A. Mahmassani,
representative of the Secretary General of the League
of Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Martin Erdmann,
Assistant Secretary General for Political Affairs and
Security Policy Division of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization; His Excellency Mr. Albert Ramdin,
Assistant Secretary General of the Organization of
American States; and His Excellency Mr. Mark Perrin
de Brichambaut, Secretary General of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to all the aforementioned representatives to
this meeting. I also thank them for taking the time to be
with us today.

In View of the limited seating at the Council
table, the first five speakers of regional organizations
are seated at the table. Upon the conclusion of their
statements, the Secretariat will invite the remaining
representatives of regional organizations to be seated at
the table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
8/2005/638, which contains the text of a letter dated 10
October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of
Romania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a background paper on
the item under consideration.

It is my particular pleasure to acknowledge the
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who, as we
all know, attaches great importance to the subject of
today's debate.

Allow me to begin the debate by making a
statement in my national capacity.

I would like to state at the outset that, as an
acceding country, Romania aligns itself with the
statement to be made later by Ambassador Jones Parry
on behalf of the European Union (EU).

I recognize with appreciation the presence of the
Secretary-General, as well as his steadfast overall
interest in the issue that we are addressing today. I also
wish to express my particular gratitude to the leaders
and representatives of regional organizations who took
the time to come to New York to participate in our
proceedings. I am also very pleased to acknowledge
the presence in the public gallery of a group of students
from Columbia University, a fine team of both
Romanians and Americans.

There are 3 main reasons why Romania has taken
up the issue of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security as the flag theme of its current
tenure in the Security Council. The first has to do with
Romania's own record of making the regional
dimension a hallmark of its long-standing foreign
policy and action, as well as with its experience in
contributing to conflict management in our region.
Working in partnership with the United Nations, the
European Union, NATO, the OSCE and the Council of
Europe have developed durable solutions to put an end
to conflict in the Balkans. That partnership allowed for
integrated solutions that addressed security issues
while supporting the building of democracy and
opening up the path to meaningful regional integration.
If such integrated conflict management were to be
practiced in other areas of our continent where disputes
and tensions continue to exist, Europe as a whole could
become free of conflict in a sustainable manner,
thereby finally ending insecurity and making it
impossible to relapse into violence.
Romania was a key player in such undertakings
as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, in 2001, and as
Chair of the South-East European Cooperation Process,
from 2004 to 2005. Next month, my country will once
again be at the forefront of regional efforts when we
assume the chairmanships of the Council of Europe's
Committee of Ministers and of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation Organization. In the meantime,
Romania has become a North Atlantic ally and
acceding country to the EU. Each of those
organizations is now also making contributions to
restoring or consolidating peace well beyond the
territorial realm of their respective memberships, be
that in Afghanistan or Iraq or in the Sudan and its
Darfur region.

In Romania's own neighbourhood, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
continues to be of the utmost importance to the process
regarding Kosovo. The same is true for the still
unresolved and protracted conflicts in the Black Sea
area. Among those, the issue of the Abkhaz region of
Georgia is on the agenda of the Security Council, and
will be taken up again towards the end of our
presidency.

In the same context, a recent example of joint
undertakings by regional organizations is the launch of
the EU mission for the monitoring of the border
between the Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
which we trust will have a positive impact on the
settling of the conflict in the Transdnister region of the
latter.

A second reason for our steady pursuit of the
regional theme relates to the important developments
that have taken place recently within the United
Nations in that regard. The Secretary-General himself
deserves praise and credit for having presided this year
over the sixth, and arguably the most successful thus
far, meeting with the heads of regional organizations
having a partnership with the world Organization. The
outcome of that meeting should lend itself to sustained
follow-up, especially since world leaders gathered in
New York last month resolved to expand consultation
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations through formalized agreements
between their respective secretariats and, as
appropriate, to involve regional organizations in the
work of the Security Council.

From a historical perspective, we have to
acknowledge the tremendous foresight and Vision the
Charter's authors had in laying down a sophisticated
Chapter VIII that stands the test of time despite the fact
that it was crafted at a time when regionalism was
anything but the driving force it certainly represents
today. However, something must have changed in that
regard in the six decades that have elapsed. We now
have to determine how to make the most of Chapter
VIII, and enhance global, regional and subregional
national synergies in the areas of conflict prevention
and management, as well as in upholding human rights,
democracy and development.

Our third reason has to do precisely with the
underlying conviction that creating the right
complementarity and subsidiarity between the United
Nations and regional action would significantly
consolidate both and generate a considerable pool of
resources assigned to peace that would ultimately lead
to the ability of the international community to
effectively and promptly address every tension, every
threat, every open conflict and every fragile situation
in the aftermath of conflict. We need to remain
flexible, open and creative when expanding on the
potential of global-regional cooperation.

Contributions that regional organizations can
bring span a wide range of options, as I am sure
today's debate with our valued partners and guests will
reconfirm. Our work on cooperation with regional
organizations should therefore be aimed not at
identifying universal patterns, but rather at
ascertaining, at the end of the day, which regional
actors can be relied on in a given situation, what they
can be expected to bring to the table of conflict-
resolution, and how the United Nations and other
regional partners can help fill in the gaps.

That approach is precisely what is upholding the
draft resolution before the Council today. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank all delegations that
have contributed to making its contents as substantial
as they currently stand, and I wish to express
appreciation for the interest that regional organizations
represented today have taken in the whole process.

The draft resolution provides an initial
framework to make the expanded regional involvement
envisaged in the outcome document work. It aims at
regular meetings with heads of regional and
subregional organizations and better communication
with those partners. It calls upon all States to
contribute to strengthening the capacities of regional
and subregional organizations. It invites the Secretary-
General to report on the dynamics, challenges and
opportunities of a more meaningful interplay between
global and regional actions in the area of peace and
security.

I am persuaded that the two regional debates
Romania has convened during its current term in the
Council and the adoption of the draft resolution will
only open up the way for the process to be carried on.
Already, other elected members have manifested their
readiness in that direction. At some point in time, a
wider group of friends of the Council's cooperation
with regional organizations could be set up. Romania
would certainly look forward to participating in such
an undertaking.

In fact, with practically every meeting it holds,
the Security Council invariably comes across regional
implications of conflicts. United Nations action is also
buttressed by regional contributions in the new areas of
global anti-terrorism and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

I trust that the advances in the regional outreach
of the Security Council will in turn lead the way to a
global United Nations-regional organizations
partnership that will be broader in scope than what is
currently possible under Chapter VIII. I trust that we
will eventually have the sort of Charter that will be
devoted only to the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, for that is what
will make our Organization not only live on, but
deliver better on the high expectations placed on it.
And that will be the lasting contribution my country,
Romania, will have been able to make as a responsible
elected member of the Security Council in the years
2004 and 2005.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Once again, I welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to
take the floor.

