Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Secretary-
General's first report on United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and Under-Secretary-General Miyet's
supplementary briefing contain some positive elements but
also give cause for deep concern. It is probably a
coincidence that Mr. Miyet gave us all the good news in
English and all the bad news in French.

Although important progress has been made in the
implementation of parts of the Lorne Peace Agreement and
the deployment of UNAMSIL is well under way, the
overall situation on the ground does not bode well for
lasting peace in Sierra Leone. Violent incidents, ceasefire
violations and human rights abuses have been reported with
increasing frequency over the past two months. The
neutrality and impartiality of humanitarian relief have not
been respected. Humanitarian access has been impeded by
the deteriorating security situation. Disarmament has been
proceeding at too slow a pace.

It is becoming more and more difficult to describe
these occurrences as isolated incidents. We call upon all
rebel leaders to demonstrate their genuine commitment to
the peace process in all its details. Only then can the
promise of peace held out in the Lome Agreement be made
a reality.

First, all actions by rebels and their leaders as here
described must cease right away. The Secretary-General
rightly states in paragraph 34 of his report:

"The continued violence against the people of Sierra
Leone and international personnel is unacceptable and
perpetrators should expect to be held accountable for
their actions."

It must be made clear to the rebels and their leaders that
the amnesty of the Lome Peace Agreement does not extend
to atrocities committed after the signing of the accord.

Second, rebel leaders must continue to call upon their
fighters to disband and lay down their arms. The report
indicates once again that all parties must give absolute
priority to the disarmament activities. The participation of
5,000 ex-combatants is a step in the right direction, but it
still leaves an estimated 40,000 of their colleagues outside
the programme.

As for the question of funding, we are glad to see
that a number of donor countries have made contributions
to the World Bank Trust Fund set up to cover the costs of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The Netherlands is finalizing arrangements
for a contribution of $1.5 million to this fund.

In paragraph 26 of resolution 1270 (1999), the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General to
provide it with "updates on the continued level of
deployment of ECOMOG personnel". We share the
Secretary-General's hope that ECOMOG will continue to
play its critical role in Sierra Leone as envisaged in the
Lome Agreement. In this connection, we commend
Nigeria and other troop contributing countries for their
vital contributions. In reaction to the Secretary-General's
urgent appeal to donors contained in paragraph 36 of his
report, we wish to remind the participants in the
forthcoming ECOWAS Ministerial Meeting that the
Netherlands is prepared once again to extend $8.2 million
in additional budget support to the Republic of Mali so as
to enable this country to contribute to ECOMOG'S vital
mission in Sierra Leone.

We acknowledge that the primary focus at this
moment should be on disarmament and the deployment of
United Nations and ECOMOG personnel, but we
emphasize once more that the work of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission must start as soon as possible.
We hope that in his next report the Secretary-General will
be able to report more progress on this aspect, as well as
on the outcome of the study on the nexus between the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a possible
international commission of inquiry into human rights
violations.

In closing, I wish to pay tribute to the outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra
Leone, Ambassador Okelo, and welcome Ambassador
Adeniji as his successor.

