Mr. Badji: Mr. President, allow me at the outset
to congratulate you on the exemplary manner in which
you have steered the work of the Council during the
month of July. I am grateful to you and to the other
members of the Council for having given me the
opportunity to participate in this debate on behalf of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.

The Council is meeting today to consider the very
alarming situation in the Middle East. While the
world's attention is mostly focussed on the grave
situation in Lebanon, Israel's military activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory are continuing unabated.
Since Israel's escalation of its military operation in the
Gaza Strip after the capture of an Israeli soldier on 25
June, more than 100 Palestinians have been killed,
including many civilians. Hundreds more have been
wounded. The number of casualties is also rising in the
West Bank, where Israeli incursions into major cities
continue.

The military activities of the occupying Power
are also deliberately causing a major humanitarian
crisis among the innocent civilian population. The only
power plant in the Gaza Strip was destroyed by Israel
right at the outset of its operation, and more than

1 million people are living without electricity for most
of the day - electricity which is needed, among other
things, to operate water wells, the main source of
drinking water. International relief efforts are
constantly being hampered, if not completely
prevented, by the occupying Power, because of the
almost total closure of the Gaza borders.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People condemns the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of Israel's
military might against the Palestinian population.
Deliberate attacks by Israeli forces against civilian
property and infrastructure in the Gaza Strip violate
international humanitarian law. The continued closure
of the crossing points of the Strip constitutes collective
punishment of an entire innocent population. Israel
needs to be reminded that, as an occupying Power, it is
bound under international law to protect and safeguard
the basic human rights of the Palestinian population.

The Committee has also called for a cessation of
rocket attacks on Israel and other violent actions by
Palestinian armed groups that put civilians in serious
danger and inflame and destabilize the already fragile
situation.

The Committee would also like to voice its
frustration at the inability of the international
community to de-escalate the alarming situation in
Lebanon and in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. We deplore the fact that the
Council was not in a position to adopt a draft
resolution that was widely perceived as a balanced first
step to engage the parties to end violence and embark
upon a comprehensive ceasefire. The Committee
considers that the Council should live up to its
responsibilities and help end the current escalation,
which is causing bloodshed and misery in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The Committee continues to consider that the
occupation by Israel of Palestinian territory remains
the root cause of the conflict. This longstanding
conflict can have no final solution without the
achievement by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, defined by the General Assembly in
1974 as the right to self-determination without external
interference, the right to national independence and
sovereignty, and the right of Palestinians to return to
their homes and property from which they have been
displaced and uprooted. The Committee will continue
its work under the mandate given to it by the General
Assembly.

