Mr. Palsson (Iceland): The situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory remains of grave concern
and continues to threaten stability far beyond the
region. Although Operation Cast Lead has ended, the
people of Gaza remain besieged by limited freedom of
movement, import restrictions on even the most basic
necessities, the near-total prohibition of export, and the
reversal of economic development. For the ordinary
civilians of Gaza, the situation remains unacceptable
by international standards.

Meanwhile, the closure regime is still operating
in the West Bank. Iceland remains deeply concerned by
the continued house demolitions, evictions and
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem. An immediate
end must be put to settlements and impunity. The
prolonged climate of impunity has created a crisis of
justice in the occupied Palestinian territory that needs
to be addressed.

Iceland fully recognizes Israel's legitimate
security concerns, including over weapons smuggling
and the unacceptable firing of rockets from Gaza,
which destroy and endanger the lives of innocent
civilians. At the same time, such violations do not
justify the disproportionate use of force or the
breaching of international humanitarian and human
rights law.

The comprehensive report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/ 12/48) has concluded that there is evidence
indicating serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law committed both by Israel
during Operation Cast Lead and in the West Bank, as
well as by Palestinian armed groups in their repeated
launching of rockets into southern Israel. The report
deserves serious consideration and follow-up. The
conclusions drawn require concrete action and the
establishment of a credible system of investigation into
the alleged violations. Every Member State must
commit itself to full cooperation with the United
Nations.

Iceland deems it imperative that every effort be
made to bring the human tragedy in the occupied
Palestinian territory to an end through negotiations and
mediation. The international community must step up
pressure on both sides and revitalize the peace process.
More needs to be done, in particular by the Security
Council, through a concerted effort to actively further
the goal of ending the occupation and achieving a two-
State solution, which is a prerequisite for durable
peace. The political momentum that has been created
must not be allowed to fade.

