Ms. DiCarlo (United States ofAmerica): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate. It will serve as a useful follow-up to
a related meeting organized by the delegation of
Burkina Faso last September (see S/PV.5979). I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/ 189) and for his commitment to strengthening
United Nations capacity to resolve conflicts peacefully.
My delegation appreciates Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe's comments today and congratulations him on
the mediation efforts of the Department of Political
Affairs.

Of all the principles in the United Nations
Charter, the peaceful settlement of disputes is among
the most powerful. We all know the human and
material toll of armed conflict. When countries are
looking for ways to resolve their differences without
violence, the international community bears a
responsibility to support them. We also know that
United Nations mediation and good offices missions
have played a crucial role in ending many conflicts
during the past 20 years. From these experiences we
have learned a great deal about how to make mediation
effective and its results enduring.

For its part, the United States is steering a course
that puts a new premium on energetic diplomacy to
resolve some of the toughest issues we face. President
Obama has spoken of a new era of engagement, and we
are serious about listening to and speaking frankly with
those with whom we have substantive differences. We
have also named special envoys to lead our efforts to
help resolve crises across the globe.

We welcome this debate today as an opportunity
to look closely at ways in which the United Nations
can better do its part to provide good offices and
mediation. In this regard, we welcome the
strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs,
including the creation of its mediation support standby
team, which can become one of the most effective tools
of the United Nations for early response to crises.

We also need to recognize and build into our
plans the reality that the need for mediation rarely ends
with a peace agreement or on the day that the Security
Council establishes a United Nations mission. Rather,
we should work to ensure that mediation capabilities
are built into United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations.
In his report, the Secretary-General has raised the
issue of the pursuit of peace and justice. He rightly
states that, when conflicts lead to gross violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, peace
and justice are indivisible.

Let me also offer a word on the role of women.
The United States stands firmly committed to
resolution 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which stress
the need for the active involvement of women in
efforts to promote peace and security. We support the
call of those resolutions to give women a larger
decision-making role in conflict resolution. Mediation
efforts that exclude women's perspectives and deny
them a seat at the table are likely to neglect issues that
are vital to securing lasting peace. My Government
also welcomes the Secretary-General's commitment to
increase the number of women among the special
representatives and envoys who pursue good offices on
his behalf.

There are times when the United Nations will be
in the best position to lead third-party efforts to support
resolution of disputes. In some situations, other actors
may be better suited, and we need to support the
mediation capabilities of other institutions or members
of the international community in this regard.

Regional organizations are particularly important
actors in mediation, as we are reminded by Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Regional bodies are often more
familiar with issues in their regions and able to deploy
resources more quickly. We encourage the United
Nations to continue to partner with regional
organizations and other actors to seek timely and
successful resolution of conflicts. We also need to
work to develop national and local mediation
capacities, since disputes are often most productively
resolved at that level.

Smart, principled and skilful mediation can
reduce threats to peace and security, but all parties to
the conflict must participate in good faith to achieve a
truly lasting settlement. The Council has many tools at
its disposal to deal with spoilers, and we need to work
diligently to deploy them to greatest effect when they
are needed to resolve crises and support peace
processes.

The United States will continue to be an advocate
of peaceful means of conflict resolution. We know that
mediation is never easy, but we must work together to
bring the conflicts and crises that trouble us all to a
swift and durable resolution. My delegation also
supports the statement prepared by the delegation of
Burkina Faso and thanks them for that initiative.

