Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by joining others
in expressing India's heartfelt condolences on the
losses of lives sustained by two of our close
neighbours, the People's Republic of China and
Myanmar, as a result of natural calamities. Let me also
place on record our appreciation of the leadership of
the Security Council by the United Kingdom
presidency for the month of may.

It was in recognition of the international
community's less-than-stellar record in securing lasting
peace after more successfully stopping conflict that we
established the Peacebuilding Commission as the
centrepiece of an international effort to promote
post-conflict peace consolidation. In that context, our
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Jamaica on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

I shall try to address the questions posed in the
concept paper (S/2008/29l, annex). The roots of
peacebuilding go deep into the Security Council
mandate on peacekeeping. It is therefore important to
implement Article 44 of the United Nations Charter
and to involve troop-contributing countries in shaping
that mandate. For instance, our armed forces have
effective programmes aimed at winning minds and
hearts.

National ownership is essential in peacebuilding.
This is not just a question of sovereignty; it is a
functional matter. For instance, schools and clinics
have on occasion been constructed by multiple
agencies and non-governmental organizations in
post-conflict situations, which later were found
unsustainable, leading to duplication and waste.
National ownership mitigates this. While the paper
correctly points out the need for better operational
coordination among international agencies on the
ground, empowerment of Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General is not necessarily the solution,
especially if such concentration of authority is
achieved at the expense of nascent national leadership,
which is often an inevitable if unintended consequence.
It is national ownership that must assess critical
requirements and gaps and must share that assessment
institutionally with those who have the ability to
deliver on bridging those gaps. That would also help us
respond to the problem posed by the inadequacy of
international resources in helping to stabilize
post-conflict countries when everything is urgent.

As for the planning and running of operations,
including the international financial institutions, the
Peacebuilding Commission has the mandate to bring
together and mobilize all actors, especially in
marshalling resources. Above all, it signals the
commitment of the international community to the
State concerned, unique as a hedge against political
risk to private capital.

The Bretton Woods institutions need to be
brought into an optimal agenda. They advised
Cambodia to reduce its civil service by 20 per cent -
after Pol Pot had already decimated it. The downsizing
was apparently not enough for them. Four countries in
Africa that collapsed into civil war had been, in the
preceding ten years, 62 to 83 per cent under a
programme of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Mining companies sometimes leave next to nothing to
Governments for spending on social infrastructure.
IMF pressure to privatize makes such imbalanced
contracting more likely. It would be useful for the
World Bank or another expert body to develop model
auction procedures and model contracts.

The concept paper touches upon factors that
hamper efforts of the United Nations and the

international community in country. The
United Nations contractual system needs to be
streamlined and conditions of service of the Secretariat
staff in the field harmonized with those of funds and
programmes in order to get and retain personnel of
better quality.

The concept paper outlines the need to establish a
rapidly deployable civilian capacity. That idea must be
elaborated through open, inclusive and transparent
negotiations in order to give the end result greater
legitimacy. India hopes to participate fully in
discussing this concept, which holds the promise of a
new paradigm of cooperation between developed and
developing States. Once the concept is fully elaborated,
recruitment of those who can deploy the appropriate
talents, skills and technologies would greatly help in
peacebuilding.

In conclusion, I would like to underline our
support for the notion that post-conflict peace
consolidation remains one of the most serious
challenges that the United Nations faces collectively.
However, we cannot produce more creative and
flexible approaches to address that challenge unless we
are willing to move beyond fixed positions. Outside
these walls, the world sees only one United Nations,
not its constituent organs or Member States. Our effort
must therefore be based on a more collective and
inclusive approach, one that justifies the first word of
the title: the United Nations.

