Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. I also welcome
you, Sir, as well as the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union,
Baroness Catherine Ashton. And I would like to thank
her and the Secretary-General for their presentations.

Jordan welcomes the partnership and cooperation
between the European Union (EU) and the African
Union. The EU enjoys great respect on the international
arena owing to its balanced role in different international
dossiers and because it is itself an example in terms
of regional progress and the establishment of peace.
We believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union on peacekeeping
and international security issues, pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, will make
a significant contribution to improving collective
security. The European Union has major economic,
security and political resources that enable it to play
an effective role as part of international efforts in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts.

Allow me now to address certain aspects of
complementary cooperation between the United
Nations and the EU.

First of all, the EU is a true and effective partner
in the framework of the efforts designed to bring about
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East based on a two-State solution. Jordan undertakes
to extend and strengthen the joint action with the
European Union to establish peace in our region. Jordan
agrees with the EU about the necessity of supporting
the efforts of the United States Secretary of State to
bolster direct negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis. We welcome the announcement made here
by the European Union that it will provide exceptional
support to the two parties if they reach an agreement, in
addition to its ongoing support of the European Union
for the Palestinian National Authority. We are also
pleased with the excellent and skilful role the European
Union plays in the Quartet, working with the United
Nations, the Russian Federation and the United States
of America.

Jordan also welcomes the speed and efficiency with
which the European Union reacted to the international
appeals with respect to the humanitarian crisis in
Syria and its repercussions in neighbouring States that
continue to host a growing number of Syrian refugees.
Jordan greatly appreciates the different forms of support
that the European Union is giving to the Syrian people
of Syrian and the peoples of neighbouring States.

Jordan supports the efficient role being played by
the European Union in the coordination of diplomatic
efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful and comprehensive
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Jordan
welcomes the agreement reached between the E3+3 and
Iran with respect to the joint plan of action, which we
consider to be step in the right direction.

Secondly, Jordan believes that the European Union
has a crucial role to play in the stability and economic
development of the Western Balkans. We specifically
welcome the personal efforts of Baroness Ashton to
strengthen the dialogue between the Republic of Serbia
and Kosovo in the framework of the historic First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between them. The Agreement will not
only help to meet the challenges of the next phase
between the two parties, but it will also help to spread
the culture of dialogue and cooperation in the region as
a whole, thereby guaranteeing its stability and respect
for human rights.

Thirdly, Jordan welcomes the commitment of the
European Union to contributing to the establishment of
peace, security and development in Africa by playing
a crucial role in the international effort to confront the
constantly recurring threat of piracy. We also welcome
its contribution to the training of the Somali forces in
cooperation with African Union Mission in Somalia.
We also welcome the European Union's efforts in
supporting the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and its
contribution in the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic. In that regard, we call for the contribution
of all support needed to bring stability back to those
regions.

Fourthly, when addressing issues related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, which
are at the heart of the Security Council's responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
we would emphasize the fact that peacekeeping
operations are among the most efficient tools at the
disposal of the United Nations in assisting States on the
difficult road from conflict to peace. Jordan, as one of
the principal troop-contributing countries, believes that
the support for United Nations peacekeeping operations
is a collective international responsibility, particularly
because demand for such operations continues to
grow. While we appreciate the support provided by
the European Union to the budgets of peacekeeping
operations, we express the hope that the States members
of the European Union, which have vast capacities in
the area ofpeacekeeping, will increase their investment
in terms of contributing troops and police to United

Nations operations.

In conclusion, we endorse the presidential statement
adopted earlier by the Council (S/PRST/2014/4).

