The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement of its
President of 8 July 1999 (S/PRST/1999/21) and
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
role of United Nations peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of 11 February 2000
(S/2000/ 101). The Council recalls its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and reaffirms its commitment to
the principles of the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
conducting all peacekeeping and peace-building
activities and the need for States to comply with their
obligations under international law.

"The Security Council has considered the matter
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants in a peacekeeping environment as part
of its overall and continuing effort to contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building activities in conflict
situations around the world.

"The Security Council underlines that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants are mutually supportive and that the
success of the process is dependent on the success of
each of its steps. The Council stresses that the political
commitment of the parties involved in a peace process
is a precondition for the success of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. The

Council reaffirms that disarmament and
demobilization must take place in a secure and safe
environment, which will give ex-combatants the
confidence to lay down their arms, and underlines
the importance of international assistance for long-
term economic and social development to facilitate
successful reintegration. In this regard, the Council
notes that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration must be addressed comprehensively so
as to facilitate a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
mandates of peacekeeping missions increasingly
include oversight of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration as one of their functions. The
Council further recognizes the importance of
incorporating, as appropriate, within specific peace
agreements, with the consent of the parties, and on
a case-by-case basis within United Nations
peacekeeping mandates, clear terms for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, including the safe and timely
collection and disposal of arms and ammunition. The
Council emphasizes that the international
community's advocacy is essential in this regard.
The Council also underlines the necessity of a clear
definition of tasks and division of responsibilities
among all actors involved in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, including
United Nations agencies and programmes, and that
this should be reflected, where relevant, in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council recognizes that effective
action to curb the illegal flow of arms and light
weapons into areas of conflict can contribute to the
success of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, and encourages further
efforts and cooperation at the national, subregional,
regional and global levels to this end.

"The Security Council underlines in particular
the importance of disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating child soldiers, as well as taking into
account the problems faced by war-affected children
in mission areas. It is therefore imperative that child
soldiers be fully included in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, and
that programmes also be designed to address the
special needs of all war-affected children, taking into
account differences in sex and age, and their

 

differing experiences in the course of armed conflict,
with particular attention to girls. In this regard, the
Council requests the Secretary-General to consult
relevant United Nations agencies, including the United
Nations Children's Fund, the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and other relevant organizations
with expertise in the field with a view to the
development of appropriatep r o g r a m m e s , a n d
underlines the importance of coordination in this
regard.

"The Security Council welcomes the initiative of
the Secretary-General to include within all
peacekeeping operations personnel with appropriate
training in international, humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law, including child- and gender-related
provisions. In this regard, the Council welcomes the
inclusion of a child protection adviser in some of the
recent peacekeeping operations, and encourages the
Secretary- General to include such personnel in future
operations as appropriate. The Council stresses the
importance of addressing, in particular, the needs of
women ex-combatants, notes the role of women in
conflict resolution and peace-building and requests the
Secretary-General to take that into account.

"The Security Council recognizes that adequate
and timely funding for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration is critical to the successful
implementation of a peace process, and calls for
coordination of voluntary and assessed funding to that
end, including among all elements of the United
Nations system. The Council welcomes the increasing
involvement of the World Bank in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and stresses
the importance of support of Member States for its
activities in this area. The Council further encourages
other international financial institutions to become
involved.

"The Security Council stresses that training of
peacekeepers in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants continues to be an
important asset in the implementation of these
activities in mission areas. In that regard, the
Council notes that the review by the Secretary-
General of lessons learned from disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration experiences may
assist Member States and others in their training
efforts. The Council encourages the Secretary-
General to explore avenues of cooperation with
existing and new peacekeeping training centres in
the implementation of such training programmes.

"The Security Council takes note that the
ultimate success of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process may require efforts long
after the withdrawal of multidisciplinary
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, the post-
conflict United Nations presence, including the
deployment, as appropriate, of a follow-on mission,
may help support the advances made and further
make progress on the matter.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to address this issue
on a regular basis and to draw to its attention any
new developments in this area.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/IO.

Before adjouming the meeting, let me, on behalf of

the Council, convey our deep appreciation to the
delegation of Malaysia for the initiative it took last year
with regard to this item, and for the contribution it made
with respect to the adoption of today's presidential
statement.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
