Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2005/740). We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jan Egeland and Mr. Jacques
Forster, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their briefings. We also wish to
commend United Nations agencies and, in particular,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations, for their enormous efforts in the field over
the years.

In recent years, the issue of the protection of
civilians has attracted increasing attention on the part
of the international community. Civilians are usually
the main victims in any sort of conflict, with the plight
of vulnerable groups - in particular women, children,
refugees and displaced persons - being even more
horrific. At times, they do not even have access to the
most basic humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council attaches priority importance
to the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Over the past six years, the Council has
adopted two resolutions and issued many presidential
statements in connection with this matter. The outcome
document of this year's High-level Plenary Meeting of
the General Assembly (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1) contains many references to this issue. We
obviously continue to face many challenges with
regard to the follow-up of the outcome document and
the implementation of the relevant resolutions. The
delegation of China would like to take this opportunity
to highlight the following points.

First, efforts to protect civilians should be in line
with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
provisions of international law. Individual States have
the primary responsibility to protect their own citizens.

In accordance with the Charter and the provisions of
international law, parties to a conflict should provide
effective protection to affected civilians. All activities
pertaining to protection, be they security guarantees or
humanitarian assistance, should not violate the
principles enshrined in the Charter; nor should they
infringe upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Member States. Humanitarian personnel and
agencies should abide strictly by the principles of
impartiality, neutrality, objectivity and independence,
in order to avoid becoming involved in a conflict or
supporting a given party.

Secondly, work in the area of civilian protection
should focus on the prevention of conflict, in order to
simultaneously address both root causes and
symptoms. The protection of civilians is not an isolated
issue. Effectively preventing armed conflict is the best
protection we can provide to civilians. Poverty, social
injustice and ethnic disputes can trigger conflict.
Policies to promote sustainable development, build a
sound and harmonious society and bring about national
reconciliation must therefore be pursued actively, in
order to eliminate the root causes of conflict. Absent
that, efforts to protect civilians will always be reactive
in nature. As the body with primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should actively encourage preventive
diplomacy and promote the resolution of existing
conflicts, so that civilians may be freed from the
scourge of war.

Thirdly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect should be the subject of further comprehensive
and in-depth discussions. The summit outcome
document clearly referred to "the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity"
(General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 138). The
outcome document went on to develop the concept at
length, owing to the sensitivity and complexity of the
issue.

The consensus opinion of the international
community, as well as its justifiable demand, is that
swift steps must be taken to mitigate and put an end to
large-scale humanitarian crises and gross violations of
human rights. The Security Council should make its
own assessment of situations in accordance with reality
on the ground, and should act accordingly. At the same
time, we cannot lose sight of the fact that all conflicts
are generally caused by a host of complex factors. A
cautious approach should be taken in determining
whether a Government is able or willing to protect its
citizens. Arbitrary and hasty intervention should be
avoided, as that may complicate situations and result in
greater harm to innocent civilians.

Fourthly, States concerned should take the
initiative in assuming responsibility to end impunity
and bring perpetrators to justice. Promoting the rule of
law and ensuring justice is conducive to the promotion
of reconciliation and the realization of long-term
stability. We encourage States concerned to fully utilize
their domestic judicial institutions. We also believe that
we should provide constructive assistance in order to
avoid violating State sovereignty and respect the will
of the parties concerned. In that regard, the Security
Council should proceed cautiously in order to avoid
adopting a one-size-fits-all approach to different
situations.

In conclusion, I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to humanitarian workers,
who risk their lives in wars and conflicts in order to
contribute selflessly. Their noble efforts deserve our
respect. Their safety and security should therefore be
fully ensured.

