Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me at the outset to
express my delegation's appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2005/88).

Let me also welcome the presence at this meeting
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen, and thank him for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Kosovo.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to
commend Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his tireless and
professional work as head of the Mission, for his
effective cooperation with the Kosovo Institutions and
with all other stakeholders, and for his active
diplomacy in the region. Once again, I would like to
assure him of Albania's full support.

We would also like to acknowledge here the
important contribution of UNMIK and of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), both of which have definitely played a
role in bringing about a much better situation in
Kosovo today.

The year 2005 is an important one for Kosovo. In
a few months the standards implementation review will
take place. Albania shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that the recent period, since his last report,
has marked significant progress. As the report notes in
paragraph 2, "encouraging and tangible progress" has
been found in the "commitment of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to the implementation
of the standards. Overall performance has improved",
and "work on standards has intensified". Also, as noted
in paragraph 4, "the new Government has undertaken
serious efforts to accelerate the implementation of the
standards". We know that much more remains to be
done, but those are tangible accomplishments for
UNMIK and the new government headed by
Mr. Haradinaj, who, as the report notes in paragraph 2
of annex I, has demonstrated an "outstanding personal
commitment to standards, and to accelerating standards
delivery".

These accomplishments show movement along
the right track, good will and the necessary
commitment. They form a solid and optimistic basis
for further overall progress on the implementation of
the standards during the upcoming months. The
implementation of the standards is a complex and long-
term process that needs time, capacity and the
cooperation of all political factors in Kosovo with the
international community. The commitment of all
parties and their shouldering of responsibilities in this
process will make possible the fulfilment of the
required standards.

It is important to highlight that an effective,
multi-ethnic, stable and democratic society in Kosovo
requires, first of all, adherence to prior commitments
and focus on the minority issues, good governance and
decentralization.

The issue of minorities, as a basic element of a
multi-ethnic society, demands the engagement of
governmental institutions at all levels and civil society
in Kosovo. We have encouraged the Government of
Kosovo to pay closer attention and to work harder in
this area; to exert further efforts to revitalize the return
process; to expand the inter-community dialogue; and
to respect the rights of minorities, including their
cultural and religious heritage. We are pleased to note
that the Secretary-General states in paragraph 6 his
report that "the Government has made the enhancement
of minority rights a priority in its programme".

Meeting those objectives not only demands the
vision, disposition and commitment of the Kosovo
leadership; it also requires the will, engagement and
efforts of the Serb community to become part of and a
contributor to the new democratic and multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo. The non-participation approach, the
boycott of the political elections, disengagement in the
Assembly and the provisional government, and outside
influences in the activities and decision-making of the
minority communities not only impede progress in
standards implementation but also calls into question
the establishment of multi-ethnic institutions and
society.

The Serb minority is a part of Kosovo society
and, as such, has equal rights and obligations. There is
no excuse for a lack of willingness to engage and
participate in political life, decision-making and even
the process designed to address their special needs. The
parallel structures should immediately be dismantled in
order not to keep that minority a hostage of the past.

Good governance is a priority objective for the
governing institutions of Kosovo. The establishment of
the rule of law, an independent judiciary, public
administration and respect for private property are
indispensable in this respect.

Meeting the standards requires that more
competences and responsibilities be transferred to local
authorities and that privatization be accelerated. That
process would have a positive impact on economic
development and on the climate for foreign investment
in Kosovo.

Decentralization remains a key process for the
establishment of a democratic society in Kosovo. We
think that this process should take into account the
following three important aspects: respect for the
parameters set out in the principles of the Council of
Europe on this matter; broad, but gradual,
implementation; and the avoidance of cantonization,
which would impede the normal functioning of a multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo. The Albanian Government
holds the View that decentralization should be in
parallel with the shaping and strengthening of the
central government structures and that the autonomy of
local authorities should not avoid or harm the vertical
line of power and, what is more, should not encroach
upon the territory of Kosovo. We see this as a
necessary process that will help the economic, social
and cultural development of all communities,
strengthen local initiative and bring all the
communities closer to the decision-making process.

The standards implementation review requires
preparation and commitment by the international
community with respect to opening the discussion on
the status of Kosovo. As we approach mid-2005,
"standards with status" might be the most realistic
approach. That would generate a positive impact on the
internal developments in Kosovo, as well as on
stability, peace and security in the region.

Albania firmly believes that the international
community and the Security Council, in cooperation
with the Contact Group, the United States of America
and the European Union - which have always had a
major constructive role in fostering a just and stable
balance in the region - need to move forward with the
discussion of the status of Kosovo. The solution of the
status issue is an indispensable factor for short-term
development, as well as for the long-term prospects of
Kosovo in the European family.

The Albanian Government thinks that the process
of discussion and definition of the status of Kosovo has
to take into consideration some basic elements which
will undoubtedly produce a long-term solution that
would have a positive impact on stability, peace and
security in the region. Among them, we would like to
mention the following: respect for the democratically
expressed free will of the people of Kosovo; guarantees
with respect to protection of and respect for minority
rights in Kosovo, including guarantees regarding the
protection of the legacy of cultural and religious
values; and ruling out the partition of the territory of
Kosovo.

Albania remains fully committed to cooperating
with the Security Council and the international
community in finding just and long-term solutions that
will better serve peace and security in the Balkans. As
part of the region's trend towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, Albania's policy is oriented toward the
future, bearing in mind that the past belongs to the past
and should not become an obstacle to that future.
Certain irreversible realities have to be accepted with
courage and realism in any country in the region. Only
in that way will we strengthen our cooperation and
achieve our common future in the European family.

