President Compaore (Burkina Faso)(interpretation from French): I am sure everyone will understand that I
feel particularly heartened and appreciative that, at a time
when I have come to speak on behalf of Africa before the
international community, the Security Council should be
devoting a special meeting to the situation prevailing on our
continent. I hail this commendable initiative which gives
me the opportunity to share with the Council some of our
concerns.

I would like to commend you and thank you very
sincerely, Madam President, for the sustained interest that
you are taking in the problems of Africa. I am confident
that your presidency of the Council will be of great benefit
to our Organization.

To the Secretary-General, I wish to express once again
our great satisfaction at the work he is accomplishing daily
in the service of peace.

As I said in the General Assembly, Africa's security
problems are huge and complicated. However, we are
convinced that with unity and the cooperation of the United
Nations we will be able to face all our trials, and with the
solidarity of the international community, we will win the
battle for peace. Admittedly, the resurgence of African
crises and the difficulty involved in resolving them lead us
at times to exasperation and pessimism. But strong in our
resolve and determination, we have confidence in our
ability to cope with all our difficulties.

A year ago the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement on the situation in Africa in which it reaffirmed
responsibility incumbent on all Member States of the
United Nations to settle their disputes by peaceful means.
Since then, the situation on our continent has not evolved
positively. Certain crises dating back many years still
present the international community with a genuine
challenge that it must deal with at all costs. This is the
case of Angola, of Somalia and of others.
Added to these endless crises are new conflicts
which clamour equally for our attention because of their
complexity and the grave dangers they pose to the
subregion where they are occurring and on the continent
as a whole. Ethiopia and Eritrea are on the brink of a
full-scale conflagration. Since its thirty-fourth summit, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) has been doing its
utmost to contain the situation. For that purpose, I went
to Addis Ababa and Asmara, accompanied by President
Mugabe of Zimbabwe, President Bizimungu of Rwanda
and the Foreign Minister of Djibouti.

That mission had the merit of containing the further
development of the situation following the appeal that we
issued to the two parties to show restraint and refrain
from any act which might provoke escalation. I would
like therefore to take the opportunity of this meeting to
express once again to the leaders of those two countries
our great appreciation for their commitment to giving
peace a chance, and we welcome the trust they place in
the Organization of African Unity to assist them in
settling their dispute peacefully.

We are still pursuing our endeavours. At present I
am in consultations with my counterparts with a View to
holding a meeting shortly in Ouagadougou, at which we
hope to present the two parties with specific proposals. In
our View, the solution to this conflict will require the
unreserved support and assistance of the international
community, and most particularly of the United Nations,
for the efforts of the Organization of African Unity and
its proposals.

Likewise, the OAU will need to work closely with
the United Nations in managing and resolving the serious
and dramatic crisis that has just broken out in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is serious and
dramatic given the number of countries whose armed
forces are currently involved in it and its huge potential
for subregional destabilization. It is thus a first in the
history of Africa and undoubtedly calls for international
mobilization in order to put an end to it. I urge the United
Nations, and most particularly the Security Council, to be
ready at the appropriate time to respond favourably to our
requests.

Such crises call for action by the United Nations as
well as by the Organization of African Unity. The
presidential statement on Africa recalled the particular
 

responsibility of the United Nations in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
commitment on the part of the United Nations is reflected
in the field by certain specific activities, such as the
dispatching of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA), with the support of certain
Member States whose spirit of solidarity and unselfishness
I wish to commend.

The United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) is also doing useful work, despite the tragic
death of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye, to whose memory I wish to pay
tribute, and despite the discouraging failure of the attempts
at reconciliation. I call on the two parties, the Government
of Angola and UNITA, to resume dialogue, without which
peace will remain no more than a dream. I also call on the
United Nations to persevere in its mission of persuasion
and mediation and become even more involved in the
process of seeking a lasting solution.

The same applies to the conflicts of the Great Lakes
region and in Guinea-Bissau. Here we urge the protagonists
to turn away from the clash of arms and towards
consultation. They must be convinced that no solution can
be contemplated without constructive dialogue.

I do not wish to conclude without returning to two
questions that currently fall within the purview of the
Security Council. The first is the dispute between the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Now that the question is being addressed
through legal channels, and that for this purpose the
Security Council has entrusted the Secretary-General with
a specific mandate, it seems vital that a minimum set of
safeguards be accorded the two Libyan suspects, with a
View to a fair and just trial, with specific respect for the
individual.

The second matter has to do with the bombing of the
pharmaceutical factory in the Sudan. Together with the
Non-Aligned Movement and the States of the Arab League,
the Organization of African Unity supports the sending of
an international commission of inquiry, as requested by the
Sudan, to clarify fully this matter.

For this purpose, and in order to avoid in the future
this kind of unacceptable reprisal carried out
indiscriminately in the name of combating terrorism, it
seems particularly urgent that the international community
address the question of terrorism in general, a barbarous
and vile practice which we vigorously condemn. As it is a
matter of worldwide impact, it is the international
community which should find a solution to it and an
appropriate response.

Furthermore, on the eve of the twenty-first century,
it is inconceivable that no international convention to
combat terrorism exists. I would therefore suggest that a
high-level international conference on terrorism be
convened in the year 2000 under the auspices of the
United Nations. Such a conference could be preceded by
regional preparatory conferences beginning next year.

Mindful as I am that economic development is
another dimension of peace, I envisage the convening of
a summit conference to address questions related to
economics and development in Africa. My contacts in this
regard with the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the President of the World Bank, the Managing Director
of the International Monetary Fund and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme have been
very promising.

But all our ambitions for Africa will be in vain if we
do not succeed in giving it a positive image, that is to
say, credibility at the international level. For that reason,
I also intend to bring together communications experts to
set to work on this task.

The need for cooperation between the OAU and the
United Nations is more Vital than ever. International peace
and security are a requirement, not only for our time but
also for future generations.

The Charters of both the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity remind us of how
indispensable it is that our two organizations cooperate.
For our part, I can assure the Council of the unfailing
care and support of the Organization of African Unity.

