Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for his presentation. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Mahbubani for the efforts made by
his team with a view to improving the working
methods of the Council, as well as for his complete and
extremely relevant statement.

My delegation welcomes the convening of
today's meeting devoted to a preliminary consideration
of the draft report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. This
welcome initiative is in the context of the Council's
determination to reform its working methods and
contribute further to strengthening its role in
maintaining international peace and security.

The draft report before us today is a reflection of
our common will to take stock of our activities for the
period of 16 June 2001 to 31 July 2002, and to draw
lessons from it with a View to improving our future
work. My delegation believes first of all that, from the
standpoint both of presentation and of content, the draft
report is a clear improvement. Indeed, instead of a
simple compilation or quantitative description of our
activities, we have this time come up with the outline
of a document which is more analytical and which
takes into account the basic criticism that has been
levelled many times at us by Member States. The draft
report has also become more concise, avoiding
overlapping and repetition with respect to items
already dealt with by other United Nations bodies.

With regard to items on the agenda of the
Council, it would seem that the introductory part of the
draft report is not simply a narrative but rather a lucid
and forward-looking analysis. The draft report also
deals with general issues, such as our campaign against
terrorism, sanctions regimes and thematic items that
are just as important.

During the period under review, it is undeniable
that the Council, thanks to the contribution of all its
members, has made considerable progress in improving
its working methods. It has also broadened the scope of
its activities by making fundamental changes in the
way it communicates with other Members States and
civil-society organizations. This was reflected, inter
alia, by the more frequent holding of public meetings
and of Arria-formula meetings, along with monthly
wrap-up sessions, which have enabled us to begin a
dialogue with a View to greater transparency and
broader openness.

We cannot fail to mention the missions
dispatched by the Council to conflict zones in Africa;
these have turned out to be most useful. Moreover, we
welcome the regular reports on the activities of the
Council's working groups and sanctions committees.
We should also point out the increased consultations
between Council members and troop-contributing
countries in evaluating peacekeeping operations. This
allows for greater interaction, thereby avoiding
decisions that could harm the proper conduct of such
operations.

But this significant progress should not make us
lose sight of the efforts we ought to make to achieve
our goals. We must, in that regard, strengthen and
improve our action with a view to meeting the
requirements linked to our basic duty to maintain
international peace and security. Among those goals,
we attach particular importance to greater openness
with other Member States, better coordination with the
various actors in the United Nations system and in
other institutions, and to fine-tuning our working
methods in order to make our work more effective and
efficient.

Finally, my delegation thinks that the Council
should consider the most appropriate ways of ensuring
the effective and full implementation of the many
resolutions, decisions and recommendations we take
together. We are convinced that, far from being
utopian, these objectives are indeed achievable if we
show more commitment, more determination and
collective will.

