Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): The discussion of
natural resources and conflict is indeed both timely and
necessary. By proposing such a specific topic, the
Belgian presidency has made it possible to draw a clear
distinction between African countries that are at peace,
where natural resources have become the lifeline of the
people, as opposed to those countries that are caught
up in conflict or emerging from conflict.

Africa is a continent richly endowed with some of
the most sought-after natural resources, such as oil,
diamonds, cocoa, coltan and timber. While many
African countries use their resources to promote a
better life for their people, it is in countries where there
is conflict that the presence of those natural resources
has become a curse.

During the 2006 United Nations Expert Group
Meeting on Natural Resources and Conflict in Africa,
the meeting identified the "need for a broad and
holistic approach that takes cognizance of the
interconnectedness between natural resource
governance and other peace, security and development
issues" as well as the "need for coordination,
cooperation and partnership in addressing natural
resources".
In many countries that have seen conflict, it is the
rebel movements that have developed access to
external markets of the developed world, as
demonstrated in the evidence gathered on the many
conflicts that have become the subject of the Security
Council, such as Angola, Liberia, Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cote d'Ivoire.
This situation makes the role of traders, transport
companies, international banks and transnational
corporations a critical part of this debate. On the other
hand, the home Governments of those involved in
trading with rebels, smugglers and arms traders must
also be held accountable for the actions of their entities
abroad.

In the case of diamonds, the Kimberley Process
has demonstrated how effective industry-wide
initiatives could be in creating accountability and
ensuring that the illicit export of resources is curtailed.
Accountability, transparency and ethical behaviour on
the part of the private sector in the trade of natural
resources should therefore be encouraged. This
approach would be a proactive way to ensure that
natural resources contribute to peace, prosperity and
economic development.

In responding to conflicts, the Security Council
has since 2000 implemented numerous sanctions
regimes. The success of those regimes can be assured
only if States and transnational corporations exercise
their obligations to fully adhere to and implement the
sanctions regimes imposed by the Security Council.
The role of the United Nations expert groups in
monitoring the implementation of the sanctions
regimes and in ensuring compliance with and
enforcement of those regimes is indispensable. It is
therefore critical that the capacity and role of the
Secretariat and the expert groups be continuously
improved and enhanced in order to have a proper
appreciation of and response to changing developments
on the ground.

The role of targeted and individual sanctions has
also become an important tool in the hands of the
Security Council in addressing the illicit trade in
natural resources and its negative consequences.
However, the reversibility of targeted sanctions can act
as an important carrot in ensuring that once
behavioural modification has been ensured, those
measures are reversed. A case in point is the recent
lifting of the Liberia timber and diamond sanctions
regimes.
In the case of peacemaking and peacebuilding,
the Council should ensure that the root causes of
conflicts and the role of resources as a contributing
factor are addressed in the peace agreements as a way
of ensuring that countries do not relapse into the
vicious cycle of conflict. In this regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission is critical in ensuring that
natural resources are taken into consideration when
developing its integrated peacebuilding strategies for
countries emerging from conflict.

The nexus between natural resources and
conflicts manifests itself in different ways in different
countries. A holistic approach is critical in designing a
multifaceted policy response to these complex issues in
the areas of governance and the role of the private
sector, and in addressing inequality and
underdevelopment. This debate today, in our view, will
certainly assist in developing such partnerships and
broad holistic approaches. It is for this reason that we
support the statement that will be adopted today.

