Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting, which is being held at a particularly
important time for the Central African Republic.
I would also like to thank our briefers for their very
enlightening statements.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains especially fragile because of the violence
perpetrated by armed groups against civilians, in
particular women and children, humanitarian and
medical personnel and the Blue Helmets. Abuses
committed against internally displaced persons in
Bria in September, during clashes between ex-Seleka
and anti-balaka factions, are tragic and unacceptable.
In that challenging environment, we reiterate our full
support for President Touadera's efforts to promote
national reconciliation and re-establish State authority.
We encourage him to continue working for justice,
disarmament and the country's economic recovery.

We also believe that the message to armed groups
must be clear. They must lay down their weapons,
commit themselves immediately and unconditionally
to the peace process and understand that the violence
they perpetrate will not go unpunished. In that regard,
France welcomes yesterday's inaugural session of the
Special Criminal Court, which marked the official
launch of investigations into gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed in
the country. It is an important step in the crucial fight
against impunity.

The current situation, as worrisome as it is, must
not overshadow the genuine progress that has been
made since last year. It shows that a solution to the
crisis is possible.

We therefore welcome the holding of the high-
level meeting on the Central African Republic on the
margins of the General Assembly, which reaffirmed
the international community's support for the Central
African Republic and emphasized that the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic is the only framework for the peace
process in the country. That is an essential point. In
that context, while the list of the claims of the armed
groups was finalized and sent to the Central African
authorities at the meeting in August organized in Bouar
by the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative,
the priority now must be to move forward, without
delay, towards a direct dialogue between the Central
African Government and the armed groups in order to
reach a comprehensive political agreement that leaves
no issue aside, particularly that of the fight against
impunity. In that regard, I would like to highlight three
elements that we consider crucial to the success of the
African Initiative.

First, we believe it is essential to avoid parallel
initiatives, which lead to confusion, and to ensure that
all partners of the Central African Republic are well-
coordinated. That is a prerequisite for the success of
the African Initiative. It is also crucial that the African
Union and all of the States in the region continue their
commitment, at the highest level, in order to ensure
the success of the next steps in the implementation of
the road map adopted in Libreville. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decision of the United Nations and
the African Union to appoint a joint special envoy to
support the African Initiative, and who, of course, will
have the full support of France. Finally, we believe it is
important that the direct dialogue between the Central
African Government and the armed groups involve
other segments of Central African society, in particular
women, whose participation in the peace process
is essential.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming France's
full support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic. As a mission
that operates in a difficult environment, MINUSCA
plays an indispensable role, whether in protecting
civilians, supporting the peace process, facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance or supporting
the recovery of the Central African Republic. As such,
MINUSCA requires the full support of everyone. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to the peacekeepers
who pay a heavy price for their service in the Central
African Republic. I would also like to commend all
the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA to increase its
mobility, reduce its footprint, improve its operational
performance and continue the work that has already
begun with the troop-contributing countries to prevent
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and ensure that
they do not go unpunished. Those welcome efforts must
clearly continue.
In that context, as the renewal of MINUSCA's
mandate approaches, France fully supports the
Secretary-General's recommendations, in particular
that of maintaining MINUSCA's robust format and
mandate. We also feel it is crucial that MINUSCA be
able to strengthen its role in supporting the political
process. In that regard, we welcome the decision
of the United Nations and the African Union to
integrate MINUSCA into the African Initiative and to
integrate the Special Representative into the panel of
facilitators. France strongly urges the Security Council
to authorize UNMISCA to provide limited logistical
support for the gradual and controlled redeployment
of the Forces armees centrafricaines trained or
certified by the European Union Military Training
Mission (EUTM) in the Central African Republic.
That support, alongside internal security forces, is
essential to enable the restoration of Government
authority in all its administrative, security and judicial
components - that is our collective priority. It is a high
expectation of the Central African authorities and the
Central African population itself. I would like, once
again, to commend the excellent work of the EUTM
in supporting the reform of the security sector in the
Central African Republic.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance for the Council and the entire international
community to remain mobilized and united in support of
MINUSCA and in favour of lasting peace in the Central
African Republic. That is one of the conditions for
success in supporting the Central African Republic and
all Central Africans, and it is in that spirit that France
will present, in the coming days, a draft resolution for
the renewal of MINUSCA's mandate.

