Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his highly informative briefing.
I also welcome the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo,
and thank them for their statements.

Kosovo continues to make significant progress in
re-establishing a unified, democratic, multi-ethnic State
participating actively in the international community.
We therefore urge all States to support Kosovo in taking
advantage of the progress achieved. We duly note that
the elections convened in Kosovo and in Serbia have
slowed the dialogue facilitated by the European Union
in the framework of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013.
Despite our support for ongoing technical
discussions, we consider it extremely important to
resume the high-level dialogue as quickly as possible.
Furthermore, we believe that it is the duty of both parties
to pursue the dialogue and the thorough implementation
of the First Agreement. The European Union will have
an essential role to play in accelerating dialogue.

We hope that the aspirations of both sides to
integrate with the European Union and that their
relationships with regional organizations will contribute
to strengthening security and stability in the region,
and to promoting relations among the countries of the
region in various spheres with a view to fulfilling the
aspirations oftheir peoples and achieving prosperity. On
this point, we reiterate the importance of the activities
of EULEX aimed at helping Kosovo in strengthening
the institutions of justice and the rule of law.

We condemn the incident in which a EULEX
convoy was shot at, and we encourage an investigation.
Furthermore, Jordan welcomes the transparent and
successful elections that were organized on 8 June with a
high participation of voters. Furthermore, we commend
the decision to establish new municipal councils. These
successes clearly show that the Kosovar authorities are
committed to establishing fully inclusive institutions
and that they have a long-term political vision and are
capable of managing a democratic process.

We urge the parties to continue engaging politically
in a constitutional framework in order to establish
a new Government that can address the challenges
facing the region. We have already reaffirmed the
importance of post-conflict transitional justice that
seeks to strengthen reconciliation among communities.
Jordan therefore commends Kosovo's determination
to establish the rule of law and a new special tribunal
to follow-up the decisions of the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force.

It is essential to continue monitoring the problems
caused by this conflict, which have had a major impact
on the collective spirit of the various communities in
Kosovo and the region. One such problem is that of
displaced, repatriated and missing persons. We hope
that UNMIK and international organizations will
continue to find solutions to all these problems in order
to strengthen trust. Furthermore, religious tolerance has
a key role to play in achieving political reconciliation.
Coexistence among the different religions is the
only path to building a real democracy in Kosovo.
We therefore call on everyone to take advantage of
the outcome of the annual conference on inter-faith
dialogue that took place during the week of tolerance
and reconciliation in Kosovo.

To conclude, we would like to express our gratitude
to the head of UNMIK and his team for their efforts to
ensure that the Mission fulfils its responsibilities in all
areas.

