Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
The picture in the Middle East is grave and the
prognosis of how it might evolve is critical and
pessimistic. Nothing of what has been attempted so far
to alleviate the situation. The resolutions of the
Security Council, diplomatic initiatives by the
"quartet" and Secretary Powell's trip have either been
ignored or have not produced the outcomes that
everyone hoped for. International diplomacy in the
Middle East seems to be at an impasse. None of the
initiatives to alleviate the situation has worked. The
Palestinians and Israelis are trapped in an inescapable
spiral of resentment, reprisal and hatred. The events in
the Palestinian territories, particularly in Jenin, deepen
the wounds of history and prevent them from healing;
they cast a pall over the future. The persistence of
suicidal terrorist acts exacerbates the suffering and
anguish of the Israeli people and drives the parties even
further from a solution based on reconciliation and
hope.

Given this situation, my delegation wishes first to
express its most profound concern at the grave
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in the Jenin refugee camp,
where, according to preliminary reports, there has been
large-scale destruction with devastating effects on the
civilian population.

The Secretary-General's statement before the
Security Council yesterday seems to confirm the
international community's fear that deplorable acts
have been committed in Jenin. Thus, a necessary first
step is for the international community to move
urgently to protect the civilian population and to
provide humanitarian assistance so that the minimum
conditions for sustenance can be ensured. In this
context, my country once again calls on Israel to
comply fully with international humanitarian law and
to provide unhindered access to relief and assistance
organizations.

We know that this is not enough. That is why
Mexico strongly supports the request of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, to
be allowed to carry out her functions on the ground so
that a report can be prepared on the human rights
situation in the occupied territories. We also believe
that resolute action must be taken by the Secretary-
General, such as his attempts to provide humanitarian
assistance to the region. We also consider the role of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and of
the non-governmental humanitarian community to be
fundamental in dealing with the problem.

Given the gravity of events in Jenin, as
preliminary reports suggest, the international
community requests the creation of a commission of
inquiry to shed light on the facts and to assess their
true scope. Mexico supports that request and believes
that it is the Secretary-General's duty to define the
shape such an inquiry would take.

Mexico deplores once again that the international
community's appeals to break the cycle of violence
have gone ignored. That cannot be tolerated. Security
Council resolutions must be complied with fully and
unconditionally. In this respect, we have already
pointed out that the United Nations Charter clearly sets
out the measures to ensure compliance with the
Organization's decisions and the actions necessary to
maintain international peace and security in critical
situations, such as that of the Middle East today.

My country reaffirms that the Council must not
lose sight of its own powers and mandate. The
premises according to which we must act are obvious
and of indisputable validity. We cannot base our
actions in the Middle East on assumptions that reality
and the behaviour of the parties to the conflict have so
often proven wrong. We must therefore first recognize
in the clearest manner that the recent actions of the
Israeli armed forces in Palestine demonstrate that the
use of force is not the solution. The proof is irrefutable.
There is no military solution to the conflict. The
violence of both sides lacks any political, legal,
military or moral justification. The parties do not
acknowledge this; they remain committed to violence.

Confronted with this situation, the international
community must be unequivocal. The friends of the
Palestinian people, especially in the Arab world, and
the friends of Israel must not even insinuate that there
is any valid justification, reason or understandable
basis for the acts of violence committed by either side.
That must be the unquestionable starting point for the
international community's response to the conflict.

Furthermore, a solution will not come from the
initiatives or the resolve of the parties, nor can they
impose their will by force. However, the international
community, the Council, the United Nations as a whole
and the "quartet" must craft formulas for a viable
solution based on international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, drawing on the diplomatic and
political skills of all, especially of those with the
greatest influence over the parties. A qualitative leap
must be made; we must move beyond diplomatic
efforts and the promotion of understanding in the
region to positive action so that Israel and Palestine can
escape the trap of violence into which they have fallen.
That will enable us to tackle the roots, structure and
multiple dimensions of the conflict.

My country believes that, in addition to the
preceding elements, we should call for a third party
with a direct presence in the area of conflict and with
full legitimacy and determination to enforce
international law and the civilized will of the
international community.

The lack of a solution coming from the parties
themselves has led to a situation of paralysis which, for
the sake of international peace and security, must not
be tolerated. We must be clear: the paralysis of the
parties must not spread to the international community.
On the contrary, the international community must
adopt a proactive stance capable of offering
alternatives leading to a peaceful solution to the
conflict. Thus, Mexico, conscious of the difficulties
and the risks involved, has nevertheless decided to
welcome with complete enthusiasm the Secretary-
General's proposal to the Security Council on the
creation of a multinational force under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter.

We are pleased that this proposal has been
submitted for the consideration of the international
community so that it may be examined and defined
prior to its due and prudent implementation. The
proposal offers a new range of action towards which
we must mobilize our forces. In the face of the
deadlocked situation and the endless suffering of the
civilian population, we can no longer postpone
international action. History shows that the parties are
extremely unlikely to break the cycle of violence, much
less re-establish the minimum level of trust necessary
to relaunching the negotiations.

Only through the intervention of such a
multilateral force on the ground can we ensure
compliance with the decisions taken by the community
of States, in particular Security Council resolutions
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), and thus
move towards a definitive solution to the conflict: the
establishment of a Palestinian State within secure
borders with Israel.

We agree with the Secretary-General that this
mechanism for mediation should establish a secure
environment for the parties and the conditions
necessary to the resumption of political negotiations
towards a definitive settlement that will make reality
the vision described in resolution 1397 (2002) of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living in peace within
secure and internationally recognized borders.

