Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time that Luxembourg is taking the
floor in a public meeting of the Security Council, allow
me, Madam President, to congratulate your country,
Pakistan, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January 2013. I also thank you
for having organized this open debate on the theme of a
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.

Today is also the first time in its history that
Luxembourg has taken the floor in a public meeting
as an elected member of the Security Council. We
commit ourselves, in the course of the next two years,
to contributing actively to the work of the Security
Council in the exercise of the primary responsibility
conferred upon it by States Members under the Charter
of the United Nations, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Terrorism is one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. The Secretary-General
aptly illustrated that fact in his presentation, for which
I thank him. The threat is spreading, as the example of
the Sahel demonstrates. Very recently, unfortunately,
Pakistan was again the victim of deadly terrorist
attacks. I would like, through you, Madam President,
to extend to Pakistan the heartfelt condolences of my
country. Luxembourg wishes to express its solidarity
with all those who suffer because of terrorism, and to
reaffirm the importance of respecting the rights of the
Victims of terrorism.
Luxembourg strongly condemns terrorism. We
consider terrorist acts as unjustifiable criminal acts that
must be prosecuted and punished regardless of their
perpetrators. To counter this scourge, Luxembourg
commits itself at the international level, at the European
level and at the national level. European efforts will
be outlined in the statement to be made by the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union, which I
wholeheartedly endorse.

As for United Nations efforts, it is commendable
that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy has expanded the framework of the fight
against global terrorism to include not only repressive
and security measures but also measures to ensure
respect for human rights and to address the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. That Strategy
provides a comprehensive approach allowing for
more effective responses to the threat of terrorism, by
combining security, the rule of law, development goals
and the protection of human rights, as the President just
now said.

Indeed, in order to prevent terrorism, we must
strengthen and make better use of United Nations
capacities in areas such as conflict prevention, the
primacy of law, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and development. Security and development are truly
complementary. The long-term goal of any strategy
in the fight against terrorism is to save lives and
safeguard the well-being of the population. Conversely,
development can help counter the appeal of terrorism,
especially if it promotes youth employment, which is
one of the priority areas of Luxembourg's development
cooperation policy.

I would like to emphasize that the fight against
terrorism must be guided by fundamental democratic
values, human rights and good governance. All measures
adopted to prevent and fight terrorism must respect
the principle of the primacy of law, and they must be
taken in accordance with international law, including
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
Indeed, experience has shown that serious violations of
human rights may create conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism. In the same vein, counter-terrorism
strategies must pay due attention to the promotion of
tolerance, to dialogue and to respect for diversity.
UNESCO has a major role to play in that regard, as has
the Alliance of Civilizations, which Luxembourg has
actively supported since its creation in 2005.

Luxembourg fully supports the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001), and 1540 (2004),
which are at the heart of the United Nations response
to terrorism. Sanctions are an important tool in the
international fight against terrorism. We recall the
importance of prompt and effective implementation of
applicable sanctions measures.

At the same time, the protection of human rights
and respect for the primacy of law are of crucial
importance if we want to achieve the ultimate goal
of preventing and countering acts of terrorism. We
welcome the measures adopted by the Security Council
in recent years to ensure the application of clear, fair
and transparent procedures in the work of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee. We extend our full support to the
Office of the Ombudsperson, which was established in
December 2009 and whose mandate has just recently
been renewed for a period of 30 months, until June
2015. It is important to work for steady improvement of
procedures within the Council.

I would not want to conclude without saying a word
about the struggle against the financing of terrorism.
As an international financial centre, Luxembourg is
conscious of its special responsibilities in the matter.
My country has adopted a modern and coherent
arsenal of legislative and regulatory measures in the
fight against money laundering and the financing
of terrorism. Those measures are in line with the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force. Furthermore, Luxembourg is contributing to
strengthening the capacity of developing countries to
counter the financing of terrorism. For example, we
have assisted Senegal by funding a training project
developed by its Financial Intelligence Processing Unit,
in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.

The draft presidential statement prepared for this
open debate is commendable for including all the
ingredients of the comprehensive approach to the fight
against terrorism that I have just set out. Luxembourg
therefore fully endorses it. If together we succeed in
translating its words into action I have no doubt that
we will make decisive progress in the fight against
terrorism.

