Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haq for her comprehensive briefing
on the recent developments in Timor-Leste. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste for her statement.

We are pleased to see that, as a result of the
efforts of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste and the vigorous support of the international
community, the overall situation in Timor-Leste over
the past year has remained stable. President Ramos-
Horta has continued with his dialogue initiative
entitled "Road to peace and national unity", and
various parties have maintained the momentum of
political dialogue.

The Government has formulated its National
Strategic Development Plan for the economic
development of the country in the next 20 years. The
increase in input by the Government in the areas of
health and education has played a positive role in
improving people's lives. The Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) has started to gradually take over
policing responsibilities and to increase its law
enforcement capacity. At the same time, we should also
realize that Timor-Leste still faces many challenges to
develop the economy, improve people's lives and
maintain stability. In that connection, I wish to make
three comments.

First, to realize long-term peace and security in
Timor-Leste, various political factions should continue
to seek to resolve their differences through democratic
dialogue. In order to effectively respond to the various
challenges Timor-Leste faces, it is crucial for the
various parties, especially the Government and the
Frente Revolucionaria do Timor-Leste, to put aside
their differences and engage in full cooperation.

We appreciate the efforts by President Ramos-
Horta and Special Representative Haq to promote
dialogue among various parties. We call on the
country's stakeholders to make the interests of the
nation and the people the top priority, seize the current
favourable opportunity to restore peace and achieve
development and lead the people of Timor-Leste in
focusing on promoting the national process of peace
and reconstruction.

Secondly, in order to achieve long-term peace and
security in Timor-Leste, it is necessary to constantly
improve the country's own capacity to maintain
security and stability. We support the PNTL in
continuing to take over policing responsibilities. At the
same time, in the course of its drawdown and
reconfiguration, the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) should also give full attention
to policing needs in various parts of the country. While
ensuring the security and stability of the country,
UNMIT should, in accordance with the local situation
and the views of various parties, focus on helping the
PNTL to enhance its own law enforcement capacity
and expand training for Timor-Leste police.

Thirdly, to achieve long-term peace and security
in Timor-Leste, it is necessary to make great efforts to
develop the economy and improve people's lives. We
support the Government in continuing to strengthen
social stability while also focusing on its development
efforts on infrastructure and human resources capacity-
building and working to develop the economy and
improve the employment rate of the population, so as
to fundamentally eliminate factors that cause social
instability. The international community should
continue to provide various forms of assistance in line
with the development strategy of the country in order
to speed up the country's process of peaceful
reconstruction.

China appreciates the work done by Special
Representative Haq and UNMIT and supports the
Mission in continuing its hard work in accordance with
the mandate given to it by the Council. We hope to see
the final smooth withdrawal by UNMIT from Timor-
Leste, which will set an example for United Nations
peacekeeping operations in formulating and
implementing exit strategies. After the withdrawal of
UNMIT in the future, the United Nations should
continue to provide assistance to Timor-Leste in line
with the wishes of the Government.

