Mr. Choi Young-Jin: The announcement of the
new Ivorian presidential election date of 29 November
2
2009 is a very positive step towards the resolution of
the Ivorian crisis. This progress was made possible by
the determined efforts of the Ivorian protagonists and
the timely intervention of the Facilitator.

Also, unmistakable worrying signs of probable
delays in both the elections and the reunification
process notwithstanding, solid and significant
achievements have been made in the Ivorian electoral
process. They include the mobile court operation and
the identification and voter registration operation,
which resulted in over 6.5 million people identified.
All the major protagonists appear to have accepted the
end of the voter registration operation on 30 June 2009,
which is another positive step forward.

It should be highlighted that these historic and
strategic achievements have been accomplished
without a single major incident. The prevailing climate
of peace and stability attests to the maturity of the
political culture and the spirit of compromise and
non-violence of the Ivorian people, as well as the
critical contribution made by the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement and the impartial forces.

The United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
will leave no stone unturned in its provision of
assistance and in its role of accompanying the process
with a View to minimizing any further delay in the
electoral and reunification processes.

However, given the ownership by the Ivorian
protagonists of the Ivorian peace process, it is
incumbent on them to deliver on their commitment to
the 29 November presidential election as well as on the
reunification-related provisions of the fourth
supplementary agreement to the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement (Ouaga IV), which increasingly appear to
place conditions on the electoral process.

The second half of 2009 appears to be decisive
for the Ivorian peace process. If things proceed as
envisioned and planned by the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement protagonists, both the electoral and the
reunification processes should produce irreversible
results by September. On the other hand, those
processes may encounter profound difficulties in
September if the complicated political-security-
fmancial matrix facing the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement process remains unresolved.

In terms of Ouaga IV, four critical reunification-
related issues are to be accomplished at least two
09-42011
months prior to the election, that is by September. They
are, first, the transfer of authority from zone commanders
to prefets; secondly, the centralization of the treasury;
thirdly, the profiling of Forces nouvelles - the rebel
elements - for integration into the army, police,
gendarmerie and as ex-combatants; and fourthly, their
reintegration as well as payment. Numerous efforts
have been made to address those issues, but things are
not moving as planned. Genuine progress has yet to
materialize.

Yet, even before we worry about reunification
issues of a political nature, the Ivorian elections
management body appears to be struggling with the
more chronic questions of managing and planning the
electoral process. As it stands now, non-political
challenges, such as the technical, managerial and
planning aspects of the electoral process, are rapidly
emerging as the major impediments to respecting the
29 November deadline. These non-political
impediments are not to be underestimated. We have
already seen that the identification process, originally
planned to last six weeks, eventually lasted nine
months and two weeks, from September 2008 to June
2009. A public electoral timeline with detailed stages
will constitute one of the most important remedies to
this chronic and pervasive problem.

Given this mixed picture of worrying signs amid
solid progress, and given that the nature of these
worrying signs will become more evident in
September, we may have to develop options in the
run-up to the next Security Council consultations on
Cote d'Ivoire, due in October, with a view to finding a
way to reconcile the contradictions currently facing the
Ivorian electoral and reunification processes.

