Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection of
Civilians.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/689), for which we thank him, provides us
with a sad truth: the situation of civilians has worsened
in most armed conflicts. It is appalling to see that
terrorizing the civilian population has become an
integral part of the military strategies of many parties
to conflict.

In Syria, in the Central African Republic, in South
Sudan and in many other conflicts, we are confronted
daily with abominable violence against civilians. In
Syria alone, more than 10,000 children have already
died in the conflict.

Although the responsibility for those atrocities lies
with the parties to conflict, the international community
needs to do its utmost to improve the protection of
civilians in all situations of conflict. The genocide in
Rwanda 20 years ago is a constant reminder of that
obligation.

On Red Hand Day, let me recall that those who are
traditionally the most vulnerable members of society,
women and children, deserve our special attention and
protection.

We therefore welcome actions such as taken by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to break the
cycle of violence, rape and death affecting thousands
of civilians and in particular women and children.
While the situation on the ground remains volatile, we
also commend the role of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan in providing shelter and protection to
more than 70,000 internally displaced persons in South
Sudan. It is essential that we build on those examples.

We strongly support the Secretary-General's
"Rights up front" initiative and call for its swift
implementation. The initiative, if taken seriously, has
the potential not only to help peacekeeping missions to
better protect civilians, but also to place the overall goal
of protecting people at the centre of the Organization's
policies throughout the system. The implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions,
particularly concerning the need for protection against
sexual violence in conflict, is equally important in this
context.

We have seen how illegal and irresponsible transfers
of weapons can contribute to increased instability,
exacerbated conflicts, atrocities, human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law. We therefore welcome the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) as the first treaty that addresses those risks at
a global level by establishing clear and legally binding
criteria, also with regard to international humanitarian
law. The ATT needs to be swiftly signed, ratified and
fully implemented on a global scale.

What else can we do? In his recent reports,
the Secretary-General has identified a number of
challenges, some of which I would like to briefly touch
upon.

First, we need to ensure that those responsible for
grave breaches of international humanitarian law, in
particular for war crimes, as well as for violations of
human rights, are held accountable. Impunity fosters
crime. It is therefore crucial that we further strengthen
the International Criminal Court. We urge the Council
to insist that Member States cooperate fully with the
Court.

Secondly, the arbitrary withholding and denial
of humanitarian access in Syria cannot be tolerated.
Using starvation as a method of warfare constitutes a
war crime. We urge all parties to the conflict in Syria
to allow unimpeded humanitarian access to all people
affected, as the Council demanded in its presidential
statement of2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).

Since then, the situation of civilians has only
worsened, in blatant disregard of the appeals made by
Syrians and the international community alike. The
Old City of Homs stands as testimony to the fact that
the Geneva negotiations cannot in themselves produce
even small progress if they are not backed by active
international diplomacy.

We look to the Council to follow up on its
commitments and ensure that the basic principles of
international humanitarian law are upheld in Syria.
In that regard, Germany fully supports the Secretary-
General's call for a strong humanitarian resolution.

Finally, as witnessed in Syria and beyond,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians using explosive
weapons with wide impact in densely populated areas
remain

an appalling aspect of conflicts to which the
international community has to react. We share the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in that
context and welcome the Secretariat's continued
engagement with Member States and others to raise
awareness of the issue and to provide further guidance
on the matter.

