Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): | would like to thank Belgium for the choice of this topic at a time when the populations of several countries of the Sahel, including the Niger, are facing a surge in extremely lethal terrorist acts. I would also like to thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for their briefings As the Secretary-General clearly underlines in his report (S/2020/95), the destruction of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant did not put an end to the spread of barbarity by its combatants, let alone diminish their ambition to conquer and possess territory. We therefore do not have the right to give them yet another chance to reconstitute their sanctuary in another part of the world. In his briefing to the Council on 8 January (see S/PV.8698), Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, drew our attention to the intensification in recent months of terrorist attacks of unprecedented scope in the Sahel region, with the threat progressing from the north of Mali towards the so-called three-border zone countries - Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger - and potentially spreading to coastal countries. In the space of three years, he told us, the number of victims of terrorist attacks in those three countries had risen five-fold, rising from approximately 770 in 2016 to over 4,000 reported deaths in 2019. One month ago, my country experienced three deadly attacks that claimed the lives of 179 Nigerien soldiers. The Islamic State's West African Province claimed responsibility for the attack on the military camp of Inates, on the Malian border, on 11 December, killing 71 soldiers; the ambush of 25 December, against a convoy of soldiers escorting teams in charge of the electoral registration, killing 14 people; and the attack against the military camp of Chinagodar, also on the Malian border, on 9 January, killing 89 soldiers. The recurring terrorist attacks in the subregion have led to the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of people, thereby exacerbating the already worrying food insecurity in the region and accelerating the closure of thousands of schools and health centres. It is evident that the Sahel has become an ideal zone for the most dangerous terrorist groups, which collaborate with other transnational criminal organizations operating in the region, such as drug, arms and human traffickers, to do their dirty work. As a result, the Governments of those countries are making enormous efforts to protect their populations and the integrity of their territories. For example, the Government of the Niger allocates more than 25 per cent of its national budget to that end, to the detriment of basic social services, such as health and education. To be even more effective against this transnational enemy, those countries have pooled their forces through the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational Joint Task Force, which have been effective, particularly in the Lake Chad basin, where they triumphed over the Boko Haram combatants, now entrenched in the Sambisa forest. I thank all the friendly countries and organizations that support us in this struggle by training and/or equipping our soldiers, as well as through military operations on the ground. Despite the resolve of our Governments and the bravery of our soldiers, our countries clearly do not have the necessary or appropriate means to defeat this transnational enemy. That is the reason for the escalating threat to which I referred earlier. That is why - in the name of collective security and before it is too late - I call for more active and effectiveinternational solidarity to eradicate all security threats in the Sahel and other affected parts of Africa, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's report. In conclusion, we believe that such international solidarity would be embodied by an early resolution to the Libyan conflict; the financing of the G-5 Sahel; broad membership of the international Coalition for the Sahel, created on 10 January in Pau, France; the strengthening of the capacity and mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to enable it to be more on the offensive and lend a hand in the event of an attack on a G-5 Sahel country by terrorists; the promotion of information-sharing between MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel on the presence and movement of terrorist groups; substantive support for the Governments of the affected countries in the implementation of their development and good governance programmes - because, as we fight the terrorists militarily, we will also have to simultaneously combat the sources of its financing and address the factors that promote the emergence of its ideology, such as ignorance and precariousness; and the effective implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
