Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mwakawago for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).

The Japanese delegation is particularly pleased to
note that UNAMSIL is expected to successfully
complete its mission very soon. We are also
encouraged that there has been steady progress in
Sierra Leone in the areas of security and general living
conditions of the people. Thus, Sierra Leone now finds
itself in transition from the decade-long conflict to
finding peace, however fragile. The successor
arrangement, the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL), is now proposed to replace
UNAMSIL in order to consolidate this fledgling peace.
In this connection, we welcome the appointment of
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General da Silva Angelo as the Executive
Representative for UN IOSIL.

Despite some difficulties at the beginning of its
deployment and some delays in its scheduled
withdrawal, UNAMSIL has proved to be a successful
peacekeeping operation. It is worthwhile to analyse
factors that contributed to the success of the Mission.
From our own perspective, we would like to point out
the following four factors as important.

First, we should like to note the high quality of
leadership provided at the top of the Mission, first by
Mr. Adeniji, the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at UNAMSIL and current Foreign
Minister of Nigeria, and then by Mr. Mwakawago, the
current Special Representative. They have shown both
decisiveness and quality leadership in steering the
Mission through some of its difficult phases and have
worked in close consultation with Headquarters in New
York. For their leadership, they deserve the Council's
full commendation and gratitude.

Secondly, we note that efforts to restore peace
have been made in a manner that respects to the fullest
the ownership of the host country, Sierra Leone. The
designation of specific benchmarks to provide
direction and to measure future progress has also
proved particularly useful.
Thirdly, UNAMSIL worked in close collaboration
with other international organizations, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and the donor
community on the ground. For example, UNAMSIL's
security-related work on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and on capacity-building for the local
security authorities was carried out in a manner that
complements and supports peacebuilding projects
implemented by the donors, international organizations
and NGOs. As a donor participant, Japan was part of
such collaborative efforts in Sierra Leone and has been
satisfied with the way the United Nations peace
mission has taken care to ensure good teamwork
among various actors involved in assisting in the
consolidation of peace in Sierra Leone.

Last but not least, in addition to being equipped
with the necessary resources, in particular the military
personnel, UNAMSIL was successful because
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), particularly Nigeria and Ghana, had
a positive involvement in the peace process of Sierra
Leone.

UNIOSIL includes a United Nations country
team, and its leader is expected to fulfil concurrently
the roles of Resident Coordinator and United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Resident
Representative. This type of mission composition
could serve as a good model for the peacebuilding
presence in a post-peacekeeping phase. Recently, my
delegation, as the Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, hosted a workshop that
focused on the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. In that workshop, we
learned in some detail that the modalities of
UNIOSIL's activities, as presented in the Secretary-
General's report, had been elaborated through close
consultations between Headquarters and the field
mission. That method of work, no doubt, contributed to
fostering an environment conducive to reaching a
consensus among all stakeholders in UNIOSIL.

On the basis of what I have just said, my
Government is reasonably hopeful that UNIOSIL
should be able to take the achievements of UNAMSIL
further in consolidating gains, as well as to play a key
role in the transition to the development process in
Sierra Leone. In that context, we consider two things as
relevant and essential.

First, stability in neighbouring countries is
essential. It is clear that development in peace and
stability in Sierra Leone will be difficult to achieve in
isolation, without peace in neighbouring countries. It is
therefore essential that we tackle the task of
peacebuilding in a broader perspective that takes into
account the regional dimension. We would therefore
like to see the various United Nations missions and
offices deployed in the subregion of West Africa
continue to closely cooperate and collaborate with one
another towards that goal.

Secondly, from the mid- and long-term
perspectives, the importance of local ownership cannot
be overemphasized in the next phase into which Sierra
Leone is moving under UNIOSIL. As I have already
noted, one of the reasons for the success of UNAMSIL
was its respect for, and encouragement of, Sierra
Leonean ownership of the process during its transition,
with the support of the international community. That
practice should continue to prevail, and should be
reinforced as the country moves to the next phase, in
which development will begin to take on greater
importance.

In conclusion, there are enormous needs and high
expectations among the population, not only in
Freetown but in rural areas as well, for improvement in
such areas as education and health care. In addition,
the issues of unemployment among young people -
who should be key to the future development of the
country - corruption and the vulnerability of the
judicial system are potential threats to the security and
political stability of Sierra Leone. They must be
addressed urgently under the ownership of the Sierra
Leone Government.

At the November meeting of the Consultative
Group, Japan affirmed its commitment to continue to
be actively involved in the consolidation of peace in
Sierra Leone in collaboration with the Government of
Sierra Leone and working closely with UNIOSIL and
other international actors.

