President Tadie: I would like to express my
gratitude for the statements I have heard here today in
the Security Council, including those by Mr. Zannier,
Mr. De Kermabon and the Ambassadors of Member
States represented here.

In reference to the statement by Mr. Hyseni, I
would say that a few ethnic groups have lived together
for centuries in Kosovo and continue to do so today,
including Albanians, Serbs, Turks, Bosniaks, Romas
and Egyptians. Many peoples live in Kosovo today,
and in the Balkans in general. Those proud nations
have lived next to each other for centuries. There have
been oscillations in our relations throughout history,
but I respect all peoples and nations living in the
Balkans today, including in my country of Serbia and
in our southern province.

But I do not know about the so called Kosovar
identity. That is a new creation. I am sure that, if so
called Kosovars are living under a new identity in other
parts of Kosovo, they are not living in communities in
which Serbs are the majority. That is especially the
case in the northern part of Kosovo. Ethnic Serbs
citizens of Serbia are living in Kosovo. They do not
recognize the illegal unilateral attempt at cessation by
ethnic Albanian citizens of Kosovo. Let us be very
clear - the Security Council continues to support the
position against the unilateral declaration of
independence. Resolution 1244 (1999) is still our legal
framework. Kosovo is therefore not a State. It has no
sovereignty. This is not only Serbia's position or that of
the majority of the States Members of the United
Nations; it is the position of the Security Council.
Mr. Hyseni should accept that reality once and for all.

To my great regret, the representative of the
United States has just supported the establishment of
the Pristina office in North Mitrovica, saying "it was
the right thing to do". That is disappointing. Everyone
knows that the office is unwanted by Kosovo Serbs;
everyone knows that this was a provocation; and
everyone knows that it will not contribute to stability
on the ground. Yet, it was supported. This means that
"proving" Kosovo's so called sovereignty is more
important than restoring stability. Now I know the
position, and I am greatly worried because of it, but I
will continue to pursue a policy of peace and to pledge
our commitment to finding a compromise solution to
Kosovo's future status.

Some have mentioned history and 1989. I am
very sorry about what happened in 1989. We could go
back even further in history, to 1973, 1968 and 1941,
but that would get us nowhere - like the unilateral
declaration of independence, which was the
consequence of the 2004 pogrom. So let me make a
fundamental distinction between the sovereign State I
represent and the authorities in Pristina.

We prosecute our criminals. Those who
committed atrocities in 1999 are brought to justice.
Mass graves are uncovered and those who are
responsible for them will go to jail. Some of them are
already in jail. But no one went to jail for the hate
crimes and ethnic cleansing of 2004. No one was held
responsible by the ethnic Albanian authorities. The
violence was seen as acceptable. It is a legacy of the
Kosovo Liberation Army's value of terror that surfaced
yet again on Friday. That needs to be condemned.

By definition, a community service centre that
has been established against the will of the community
itself is a clear act of aggression - an illegitimate act.
So let me ask a simple question. What would happen if
the Republic of Serbia established its own community
service centre in Pristina to issue Serbian passports to
the massive number of Kosovar Albanians who are
asking for Serbian passports even today? Would the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and Kosovo
police special units defend such an office? Would
KFOR and EULEX assist us? I am sure that they would
not.

We have to have consistent policies. We have to
take into consideration both points of view, and we
have to be very careful in order to find a real
compromise solution that would bring peace and
stability to the region.

Serbia is committed to continuing such efforts in
order to create a stable and prosperous region. Serbia
respects all Serbian citizens and all people living in the
region. We are pursuing such efforts, and I hope that, at
the end of the day, we will all be together in the
European Union. But before that, we have to find a real
compromise solution in which both sides get
something. It is not a compromise solution when one
side gets everything and the other side - Serbia -
loses everything.

