Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. It is of particular importance,
not only because it keeps Council members updated on
the events taking place in a region at the centre of the
world's attention, but also because it gives expression
to the Council's concern over the situation in the
Middle East and its serious desire to bring about a
comprehensive and lasting peace in that region. We
therefore appreciate the holding of this plenary
meeting.
In that regard, I would be remiss if I failed to
thank His Excellency Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements to be made later by the representatives of
the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

The importance of this meeting lies in its timing.
It is being held at a time when the region is witnessing
political changes - whether they be in the Palestinian
political arena under the new Government or in the
light of the outcome of the Israeli elections - not to
mention the events on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks.

The State of Qatar strongly believes in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and is of the View that
violence and counter-violence will not lead to a
solution, but will only serve to heighten tension and
instability in the entire Middle East region. In addition,
violence undermines the prospects of the peace process
and exacerbates extremism and terrorism instead of
supporting the peace process. Indeed, the peace process
is the only means to establish a comprehensive peace
in the region - a peace that must be built on the
foundation of international legality and must provide
security, stability and peaceful coexistence for the
region's peoples.

In the light of those principles, we would like to
reaffirm the following points.

First, early this year, we witnessed a very
important event: the Palestinian Legislative Council
elections. Those elections reflected the free will of the
Palestinian people, who exercised their democratic
right by participating in them. Given our belief that the
peace process must continue, we emphasize that all
parties must respect the outcome of the constitutional
process and must respect the authorities elected by the
Palestinian people.

The Israeli decision to halt the transfer of taxes
due to the Palestinian side should thus be viewed as
punishment for the Palestinian people for exercising
their right. This is of particular importance because
those revenues belong to the Palestinian people and
because failure to transfer them constitutes a violation
of the Protocol signed between the two parties in Paris
in 1994. This measure will only exacerbate the
situation and obstruct the implementation of the road
map. We therefore call on the international community
to continue providing financial and economic
assistance and grants to the Palestinian National
Authority so as to avoid any dangerous repercussions
on the day-to-day life of the Palestinian people.

Secondly, no settlement of the Palestinian
question can be comprehensive and sustainable if it is
based on unilateral measures. Such measures run
counter to the terms of reference and the foundations
on which the peace process was built. The solution
must be the result of a negotiated agreement between
the two parties.

Thirdly, the oppressive practices against civilians,
extrajudicial killings and other illegal policies -
including settlement construction and expansion, the
continued construction of the separation wall and the
isolation and separation of Palestinian towns and
villages - ultimately hinder peace efforts and
exacerbate the humanitarian crisis of the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories. Such measures also
increase the daily suffering and hardships of the
Palestinian people. The most recent example of such
measures was the storming of the Jericho municipal
complex and the detention of its prisoners, which
constituted a violation of the agreement that Israel
concluded with the Palestinian Authority in 2002.

Fourthly, the changes in the Governments of the
two parties has put the Middle East on the threshold of
a new historical stage that will determine the fate of
the region: either a return to the negotiating table or
further suffering and hardship for the peoples of the
region. The main actors must now take advantage of
those changes to better serve the peace process. Since
the Security Council has repeatedly called for the
establishment of a democratic, viable and sovereign
Palestinian State that can live side by side with Israel
in peace and security, the Security Council and the
international community, particularly the co-sponsors
of the peace process and the Quartet, must exert further
efforts to resume the peace process on the basis of the
agreed terms of reference, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the principle of land for
peace, and the Arab peace initiative endorsed by the
Beirut summit and reiterated by the Arab leaders at
Khartoum.

The State of Qatar renews its support for the
Palestinian Authority in its quest to fulfil the
aspirations of its people. We therefore urge the parties
concerned to shoulder their responsibilities and return
to the negotiating table. We also call upon the Israeli
Government to approach the peace process seriously
and withdraw to the borders of 4 June 1967. We
believe that the main reason for the conflict is the
continued illegal occupation of the Palestinian
territories. The international community must realize
that as well.

Israel must also withdraw from the Lebanese
farms and cease its violations of the Blue Line, because
this need to end occupation also applies to the Syrian
and Lebanese tracks, which cannot be separated from
the Palestinian question if we are to reach a just and
comprehensive peace in the region.

