Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, upon the assumption of your
duties as the President of the Security Council for the
month of May. I assure you of our delegation's support
and cooperation during your presidency. We look
forward to your upcoming visit to South Sudan.

With your permission, Madam President, I
would like to officially extend our condolences to the
delegation of Cote d'Ivoire on the untimely passing of
their Head of Mission.

1 would also like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ambassador
Ismail Wais, Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Special Envoy for South Sudan,
as well as Ms. Jackline Nasiwa, in Juba.

My delegation would like to make the following
brief observations for the record regarding the final
report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2018/292).

First, we are dismayed that the report is openly
tilted against the Government and its senior officials.
Although the Panel has been visiting Juba, it mainly
cites sources and information taken from interviews
conducted with members of the opposition in Nairobi
and Kampala. Government senior officials are
mentioned repeatedly as hardliners in order to paint
their strong verbal defence of the Government as an
obstacle to peace. One cannot help but deduce that the
purpose of those officials being referred to in that way
is to lay the ground for the justification of international
sanctions against them.

Secondly, the report of the Panel of Experts is
biased, in our opinion. For example, paragraph 82
states that the opposition forces

"continue to have limited access to external arms
and ammunition. The shortage of ammunition,
in particular, has limited offensive operations by
opposition groups in many locations. Opposition
commanders reported that they were increasingly
limited to small-scale guerrilla tactics, dependent
on movement and the avoidance of direct
confrontation with Government forces."

On the other hand, the Panel reports that the Government
is still receiving arms through the region, information
which leads them to recommend an arms embargo
against the Government.

Thirdly, as mentioned in paragraph 77, the
Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations
advised the Panel in an email "to carry out its activities
in accordance with the mandate of the resolutions and
in an objective and just manner". Indeed, we would
like to associate ourselves with the response of the
Chinese Mission - that the Panel ought to confine
its investigation to the boundaries and time frame
of its mandate. In trying to establish certain facts,
connections and associations, the Panel has been
looking and reporting on events and arrangements that
happened before 15 December 2013 in South Sudan. The
Panel is even going after family members of those who
are under sanctions, because of information provided
by the opposition.

The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
is committed to cooperating with the Panel of Experts
in order to quickly end the crisis in South Sudan. But,
unfortunately, this report is full of one-sided examples
against the Government, which brings into question the
neutrality and the fairness of the Panel. The Government
of the Republic of South Sudan would like to see a panel
that is constituted by the Council to investigate and
report credible and balanced findings to the Council
in order for it to adopt fair, credible and realistic
resolutions. Calling for an arms embargo based on this
report aims only at punishing the Government, but will
not end the war or bring peace to South Sudan. If we
may humbly state, the Council ought to focus on other
effective means of ending war and bring about lasting
peace in South Sudan, rather than risk prolonging it.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate and assure
the Security Council of my Government's commitment
to cooperate with the United Nations Mission in South

Sudan and of its continued commitment to finding
lasting solutions to the various challenges facing
the Mission and the various humanitarian actors in
South Sudan.

The meeting rose at 4.10pm.
