Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank and congratulate the Jordanian presidency
on bringing the Council's attention to the impact of
the humanitarian crisis in Syria on its neighbouring
countries. While affecting each of those countries, the
implications of that conflict also have an impact on
regional and global peace and security. Consequently,
the challenges that Jordan faces affect us all, and we
must collectively contribute to providing a response.

The presidential statement that we have adopted
today (S/PRST/2015/10) provides clear recognition and
firm support for the extraordinary efforts undertaken
by countries such as Jordan, Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon and
Turkey to host the 3.9 million refugees who have fled
their homes since the beginning of the conflict that
is devastating Syria. They include 600,000 children,
whose basic and educational needs are being barely
covered or not covered at all and who require urgent
attention. The High Commissioner, Mr. Guterres,
his Special Envoy, Ms. Jolie Pitt, and Ms. Cousin of
the United Nations World Food Programme have
eloquently described the plight of the Syrian refugees
and the challenges that their presence poses for the host
countries. We appreciate their briefings and, above
all, the extraordinary work they do as humanitarian
workers.

We are witnessing the greatest refugee crisis
of our time. It is a drama that crosses borders and
challenges the conscience of the entire international
community. It is, above all, a drama that has 3.9 million
faces and names. Let us put ourselves in their place,
and try to imagine spending five years of our lives
uprooted by force from our living environment, often
from the closeness of our loved ones, surviving in
precarious material conditions - five years taken
from our professional careers, five years stolen from
our children's education, five years of our lives living
without hope that the situation is going to change in the
immediate future. That is, until we are able to find a
political solution to the Syrian conflict, which we have
not done. That is our failure and our shame.

What can we do in the meantime? The neighbouring
countries, which have received most of the Syrian
refugees, are giving us an example of solidarity and
humanity under conditions that test the resilience of
their own societies. As I said, we cannot and we must
not leave them to manage alone in that effort. We
are not facing a solely humanitarian crisis, but also a
situation that undermines the development efforts of the
neighbouring host countries. It is vital to keep in mind
the link between the two dimensions, humanitarian
and development, when considering how we can more
effectively aid those countries.

At the recent donor conference for Syria, held
in Kuwait on 31 March, we were able to see at first
hand the magnitude of the amounts needed to respond
adequately to the crisis and to support neighbouring
countries in the two dimensions just mentioned.
Certainly, the generosity of many donors has provided
the opportunity to gather approximately $3.6 billion,
but we are still far from covering the $8.4 billion that
the United Nations requires. Overall in that regard, we
must do more. I am speaking about current and potential
donors, as well as funding from international financial
institutions. Those institutions could consider the use of
financial instruments adapted to the neighbouring host
countries' needs, taking into consideration that they
are middle-income countries, whose access to funding
under more favourable conditions would be restricted.

The situation of the Syrian refugees is one aspect
of the broader Syrian humanitarian crisis. We are
facing a crisis that affects, within a country of more
than 22 million people, 7.6 million who are internally
displaced. Those figures are from the Secretary-
General's most recent report (S/2015/264), which Under-
Secretary-General Amos presented. We appreciate
her presence among us and value her dedication and
valorous efforts in extraordinary measure. Those are
figures that, again to our shame, have been repeated
and have continued to increase month by month over the
past years. The Council's actions through resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) have, since
their adoption, undoubtedly contributed to improving
the lot of the Syrian population.

But that is not enough. Instead, in debate after debate
we find that the most important requirements of the
resolutions on protection and humanitarian assistance
remain unfulfilled in their entirety. We are especially
but not only concerned about the systematic violations
of the medical neutrality principle and the removal
of medical and sanitary supplies from humanitarian
convoys that are essential to civilian populations. It is
necessary, therefore, to reflect on how to ensure urgent
and effective compliance with the resolutions. Above
all, it is necessary and urgent to act.

As a member of the Council, Spain has insisted
in recent statements on practical measures to realize
that goal. One measure in particular relates to an
area of humanitarian action noted as a priority in the
Secretary-General's reports. I am referring to access to
areas under siege, where, according to available data,
440,000 people live in poverty and where humanitarian
access has not gotten through or has opened very
sporadically in recent months. One such area is the
Yarmouk refugee camp, on which the Council held two
consultations this month and where the situation has
been described as one of the deepest circles of hell for
the thousands of civilians still trapped inside.

The action proposed by Spain, along with other
countries working on the humanitarian dossier for Syria,
is the launch of a mission to assess the humanitarian
needs in the besieged areas. That mission could at the
same time facilitate humanitarian access. It may be
late for Yarmouk, but it is not for the rest of the people
living in similar conditions elsewhere in Syria. Such a
mission could be at a level that the Council determines,
but it would in any case have to be supported by a clear
mandate that included three essential elements. First, it
must appeal to the parties concerned not to obstruct it.
Secondly, we must determine its level and composition.
Thirdly, the expected results must be delivered within
a defined time frame and be reported in a timely
manner to the Council. I am outlining its design for
the Council's consideration, and the Spanish delegation
is ready to begin work on it immediately with other
Council members.

I conclude by reiterating my congratulations and
thanks to the Jordanian presidency for convening this
timely and much needed debate.

