Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Seventy years ago, the
United Nations was created for the purposes and
principles enumerated in the Charter: the maintenance
of peace and security, the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the self-determination of peoples. Upholding
these purposes and principles of the Charter, the world
body has made important contributions. Placing high
importance on the role played by the United Nations,
Japan has come a long way together with the United
Nations.

Japan expresses its highest appreciation for the
work of the United Nations in maintaining the peace and
security of the international community. At the same
time, when we look at the world's current situation,
people are still suffering from conflicts, poverty and
human rights violations. This reminds us there is an
even greater need to be united in order to tackle threats
common to us all. In view of these circumstances and
given that this year marks the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations it is important for us to reaffirm
that all the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are equally important as we head
towards the future. I therefore welcome the holding of
today's open debate and express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
Throughout its post-war history Japan has, based
on feelings of deep remorse regarding the Second World
War and by upholding all the purposes and principles of
the Charter, walked the path of a peace-loving nation
that contributes to the peace and security of the world
while consistently respecting freedom, democracy, the
rule oflaw and human rights. Since becoming a Member
of the United Nations, Japan has made assiduous efforts
to contribute to the peace and prosperity of the world.
That is a reflection of the genuine desire of my country
to dedicate itself faithfully and actively to promoting
the ideas and objectives enshrined in the Charter.

We place particular importance on the principle
stipulated in the Charter that international disputes shall
be settled by peaceful means, based on international
law and not by force or coercion. In this context, Japan
fully associates itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf of
more than 20 countries from the Group of Friends on
the Rule of Law. Japan has made great efforts to fully
comply with international law and we are proud of
our record. Japan is committed to every international
tribunal, including the International Court of Justice,
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
and the International Criminal Court. We have made
significant and constructive contributions for their
better use and universalization.

At the same time, if the Organization is to deal
effectively with the ever-changing realities of the
international community, the United Nations, including
the Security Council, must consistently reform and
strengthen itself. The seventieth anniversary of the
foundation of this world body should be a golden
opportunity for us to renew our resolve to redouble
our efforts to this effect. Japan will continue with its
endeavours to achieve concrete results, together with
an overwhelming majority ofMember States calling for
reform.

Peace, democracy and human rights now constitute
an inherent part of the identity of the Japanese people.
That is proven by the fact that, based on feelings of
deep remorse regarding the Second World War,
our people have endeavoured for 70 years to build a
free and democratic nation respecting fundamental
human rights and the rule of law. Japan has walked
the path of a peace-loving nation and has made
significant contributions to the peace, development and
democratization of the world. The path we have taken
so far is the pride of Japanese people and will never
change.

Since the inception of the United Nations, history
has shown how important all the purposes and
principles of the Charter are to us. I should like to end
my statement by reaffirming Japan's determination to
continue on its path as a peace-loving nation together
with the United Nations. We will do so in order to
that the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter are duly crystallized in the actual world. My
full text will be circulated.

