Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, my delegation would like to
associate itself with those delegations that have
expressed their condolences and sympathy to the
delegation of the People's Republic of China with
regard to the natural disaster that has struck China.

We are grateful to the Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden, Mr. Dahlgren, for having
introduced the document summarizing the results of the
work of the Stockholm Process, in which Russian
representatives played an active part. We are also
grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Turk for his
briefing.

Over the past decade, the question of sanctions
has been the focus of ever greater attention in the work
of the Security Council. We believe that there is a need
for more rational and effective use of this tool of the
Council. In that context, we support the initiative of a
large number of countries aimed at conducting studies
of an effective sanctions mechanism.

We believe that improving targeted sanctions is
impossible without intensifying work to combat the
unintended consequences of their use. Here, we must
bear in mind the humanitarian needs of populations
that do not bear direct political responsibility for the
actions of their authorities, and we must minimize
harm to the interests of third countries, on whose
support the Council often depends for success in
achieving its political objectives.

We favour the expansion of the current practice
by which restrictive measures imposed by the Security
Council are evaluated from the perspective of their
humanitarian consequences. It is perfectly clear that,
once it has been determined that bans and restrictions
imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter have had a
negative impact on the situation of the population in a
given country, or that such sanctions have inflicted
substantive damage on third parties, the Council must
adjust those sanctions measures appropriately. We
share the views expressed on this issue in the outcome
document of the Stockholm Process. At the same time,
in the light of the importance of conducting such
evaluations in raising the general level of confidence in
sanctions, we believe that it would be justifiable for the
Council to use such a process at the stage of preparing
the relevant decisions.

We also agree with the organizers of the
Stockholm Process that the Security Council still has
much to do to optimize the modalities for the
functioning of the recently created United Nations
groups of independent experts charged with monitoring
the required compliance with sanctions. In that
connection, the View has already been expressed -
and we agree - that one of the most successful
examples in this area is the work of the Monitoring
Mechanism on sanctions against UNITA, which played
a considerable role in halting the military and financial
fuelling of the Angola conflict, as is well known. We
believe that the experience acquired by the Monitoring
Mechanism could today become a sort of gold standard
for other expert groups with regard to a wide range of
their activities.

We have no doubt that the study introduced by
the Swedish delegation today will be extremely useful
for the United Nations. We hope that its conclusions
and recommendations will be properly assessed by
Member States and will be of practical use in the work
of the Organization.

