Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you once again,
Mr. President, on your wise conduct of the work of the
Security Council.

The Security Council is meeting today in an
emergency meeting to consider the war being waged by
the United States and the United Kingdom against an
Arab State, namely, Iraq, as well as the repercussions
of that war on the security and safety of neighbouring
Arab States and on Arab national security. Since 20
March, the armies and air forces of two permanent
members of the Security Council have, without the
Council's authorization, been waging an unequal and
unjust war against Iraq, which has been a Member
State of the Organization since the signing of the
Charter.

The ministerial decision adopted by the Council
of the League of Arab States on 24 March 2003 in
connection with the Anglo-American aggression
against Iraq decided the following:

"To condemn the American/British
aggression against Iraq, a State Member of the
United Nations and a member of the League of
Arab States;" (S/2003/365, annex, para. 1)

"To deem this aggression a Violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law, a departure from
international legitimacy, a threat to international
peace and security and an act of defiance against
the international community and world public
opinion, which call for the settlement of disputes
by peaceful means and compliance with the
decisions of international legitimacy;" (ibid., para. 2)

"To call for an immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of the invading American/British
forces from Iraqi territory and to make them bear
the material, moral and legal responsibility for
this aggression;" (ibid., para. 3)

"To mandate the Arab Group at the United
Nations to call for an urgent meeting of the
Security Council, with a view to the adoption of a
decision to halt the aggression and to secure an
immediate withdrawal of the invading forces
beyond the international borders of the Republic
of Iraq, affirmation of respect for Iraq's
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity, and a commitment by all States not to
interfere in its internal affairs." (ibid., para. 5)

American and British forces have chosen to wage
war at a time when Iraq was actively cooperating with
United Nations inspectors. The inspectors themselves
stated as much in the Council, saying that they needed
a few months to carry out their tasks. In that regard, we
once again wish to reaffirm that the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) is the only party authorized to disarm
Iraq.

Would it not have been better to wait a few
months in order to avert a war that we today watch in
agony, sadness and terror? This war will have grave
consequences in both the region and the world. It is
taking place despite the fact that the Security Council,
despite numerous pressures and temptations, has
refused to give its approval to a draft resolution that
would have provided a mere fig leaf for the waging of
an unjustified war.

The waging of war against Iraq today leads us to
believe that the question of Iraq was never about
weapons of mass destruction. The motive behind the
war was to usher in a dangerous era in which absolute
power is made necessary in order to implement plans
and schemes against the peoples and States of the
region, so as to redraw the map of the region in a way
acceptable to the occupying Power. This is totally
unacceptable and will cause turmoil in the Arab world,
and in the Middle East in general.

At this difficult time, when the Arab nation is
facing grave challenges, we once again reaffirm that
the form of the Arab peoples' political regimes must be
decided by the peoples of the region without foreign
interference. Any attempts to impose changes on the
region, to interfere in its affairs or to control its
resources are totally unacceptable. In addition, they
will have grave consequences on regional stability,
including in the Mediterranean region.

At a time when we had hoped and waited that
good offices would bring an end to Israel's occupation
of Arab territory and to the Arab-Israeli conflict in
accordance with the Arab initiative and relevant
international resolutions, we have been stunned to see
Iraq invaded and occupied. Now we must deal with two
occupations, instead of just one. This will generate
violence, extremism and hostility among the Arab
peoples. The good relations of Britain and the United
States with the Arab peoples depend upon the policies
of those two States vis-a-Vis fateful Arab issues.
Unfortunately, all we see in that connection is negative,
biased and not objective.

The real threat to the safety and security of the
Arab nation is Israel's possession of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. Another threat is Israel's ongoing
occupation of the Arab territories, its policy of killing
and destruction against the Palestinian people and its
refusal to comply with Security Council resolutions.

The current international system, established in
1945 after the Second World War, is in grave danger.
The world is fast moving into an arena of frustration
and international chaos. The security and safety of
weak States are in serious jeopardy. The imposition of
the logic of force and domination and the flouting of
the United Nations Charter and international law will
plunge the world anew into its pre-l939 condition and
foment wars that will bring nothing to humanity but
tragedy, pain and sadness.

We call upon the Security Council today to
shoulder its obligations as the organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. How
can the Security Council remain silent while this
violent war is being waged before its very eyes? How
can the Council turn a blind eye to the devastation, the
aggression and the hundreds - nay, thousands - of
civilian victims of this war? We call upon the Council
to put an end to this war and to urge the immediate
withdrawal of the invading forces. That is the
Council's responsibility, upon which depends its
credibility and, indeed, the credibility of the entire
international system, which is collapsing under the
multifaceted bombing of Basra and Baghdad.

