Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we would like to thank
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, Mr. Anifah
Aman, for his presence here and for convening this
open debate on children in armed conflict, a topic to
which my country attaches great importance due to
its impact on the weakest and most vulnerable part of
the population. We would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka
Brandt, for their briefings. We would also like to thank
Ms. Eunice Apio for her testimony and participation
today.

Venezuela reiterates its firm rejection of the abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law against boys and girls
in armed conflict, and urges all parties to comply with
their obligations under applicable international law.
The report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2015/409) that we are discussing
today points out that in 2014 we saw unprecedented
difficulties in protecting tens of millions of children
who live in conflict situations. That is discouraging
because it undermines the future of children who
today are experiencing the atrocities of war and who
are condemned to grow up with a culture of hate
and violence. That must draw the attention of the
international community to make children a priority
and to decisively tackle grave violations of children's
rights.

In many cases, socioeconomic vulnerability,
abuses, ethnic and religious intolerance, discrimination,
exclusion and violence, which these children face as
a consequence of war, facilitate their participation in
the hostilities and worsens the harmful repercussions
that armed conflict can have on them. The report of
the Secretary-General and the deplorable and tragic
situation of children in armed conflict should serve
to mobilize all of the moral forces of the international
community to stop the military escalation of conflict
and to protect girls and boys with all available resources,
children who on a daily basis are traumatized daily,
kidnapped, abused and killed.

The Secretary-General's report stresses that the
majority of violations of the rights of children are
committed by non-State actors and that extremist
violence has intensified to unprecedented levels. We
reiterate that the Council should take the necessary
measures to guarantee a genuine commitment to stop
encouraging armed groups and other non-State actors
with financial or military capabilities, whose goal is to
destabilize Governments and perpetuate the spiral of
Violence.

With regard to the references to Syria, Iraq and
Yemen contained in the report, we are deeply concerned
about the situation of children in those conflicts.
We wonder how many more children will have to
lose their lives and become martyrs to terrorism and
Violent extremism before the actors with influence on
the parties to the conflict understand the urgency of
working decisively to find a political solution to that
tragedy - a solution that should include all parties.

The Secretary-General's report states that 557
Palestinian children were killed in 2014, the third
highest figure in the world for that year, and that at
least 4,249 boys and girls were wounded. At least 543
schools were damaged or destroyed in the State of
Palestine in 2014, which is the highest number recorded
in all situations of armed conflict during that calendar
year. We can therefore see that the occupying Power
in Palestine repeatedly violated at least three of the
six criteria used to designate grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. However, we
note with concern that the military forces responsible
for those acts were not included on the annexes in the
Secretary-General's report this year. We ask what scale
the grave violations committed by the occupying Power
in Palestine against civilians, especially children,
would need to reach in order to consider including the
perpetrators of those violations in the annexes to the
report.

We emphasize that failure to act in accordance
with the Council's resolutions on this issue - making
selective use of the criteria for listing the parties in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's report - saps the
spirit and intent of those resolutions. That weakens and
calls into question the transparency and objectivity of
the mechanism that the United Nations and its Member
States should employ in that respect. We support
accountability for violations committed against children
in armed conflicts, as the report recommends. No one
should be exempt. States have the primary responsibilty
to put an end to impunity and to try and punish the
perpetrators of heinous crimes against children.

We congratulate Malaysia for taking the initiative
to bring to the floor resolution 2225 (2015), which was
unanimously adopted today and which our country
resolutey sponsored. The inclusion of kidnapping
among the criteria for inclusion in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's reports had been a pending issue.
We welcome the consensus achieved today among the
members of the Security Council and hope that the
resolution will be effectively implemented.

Venezuela condemns the abduction of boys and
girls in armed conflict such as those currently taking
place in Africa and the Middle East. We believe
such abductions should be included in the category
of crimes considered by the International Criminal
Court. At the same time, we repudiate and condemn the
indiscriminate bombing in densely populated areas and
the use of weapons prohibited under international law.

We urge all parties to conflict to refrain from using
schools for military purposes and goals. The use of such
facilities for military purposes undermines the human
rights of children in terms of their right to education
and constitutes an act of intolerance and barbarism.

Finally, in our own region, we would like to
highlight the consolidation of the progress being made
by Colombia, within the framework of the ongoing
peace process, with respect to the protection and
reintegration of children affected by the long conflict
in that brotherly country.

To conclude, we would like to state that Venezuela
will continue to offer its firm support to the efforts of
the international community, including the Security
Council, to protect and assist the most vulnerable
groups in areas of conflict, especially girls, boys and
women, in order to ensure their rehabilitation, including
their physical and psychological recovery and their
reintegration into society.

