Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me, Sir, to
begin by thanking you for presiding over this meeting
today. It is no accident that this issue has come before
you, because your Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani
was a Vice-Chairman of the General Assembly's Open-
Ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of
Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and
Sustainable Development in Africa, and he did us
proud even then.

I also wish to express my delegation's
appreciation and thanks to Ambassador Koonjul of
Mauritius, Chairman of the Security Council's ad hoc
Working Group on Africa, for the terms of reference
and other proposals before us and for his commitment
to the issues of African peace and development. It is
also gratifying that the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity were also invited to
participate in this meeting.

It is realistic to accept that the Security Council
will always be faced with issues that are beyond its
mandate. My delegation has on previous occasions
urged that the Security Council review its relationship
with the Economic and Social Council. We are pleased
that this effort is continuing, and we remain convinced
that how these two main councils ofthe United Nations
work together will go a long way towards addressing
some ofthe challenges that we face in Africa.

We endorse the recommendation that the Security
Council's ad hoc Working Group on Africa should
maintain effective interaction with the Economic and
Social Council ad hoc Advisory Group on African
Countries Emerging from Conflict to be established
during the substantive session of the Economic and
Social Council this July. The cooperation between
these two Working Groups will help create a useful
instrument for addressing conflicts in Africa.

Article 24 of the United Nations Charter confers
on the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. But
conflicts in Africa are complicated and cannot be
resolved only by using the tool of peace and security.
These conflicts in Africa are rooted in poverty and
underdevelopment, and they result in the displacement
of millions of people and the destruction of the social
infrastructure within those countries. These are just two
issues which fall outside the mandate of the Council.
However, we believe that the mandate ofthe Council is
premised on the broader framework of the United
Nations and not in isolation from it. That mandate
includes maintaining peace and security through
arrangements with regions and subregions as specified
in Chapter VIII of the Charter.

It is for that reason that the primary objective of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD), as a central programme of the Organization
of African Unity/African Union, is to eradicate poverty
in Africa and to place African countries, both
individually and collectively, on a path of sustainable
growth and development, thus reversing the
marginalization of Africa in the globalization process.
In other words, NEPAD is about Africans resolving
African problems.

NEPAD has identified three elements of
achieving comprehensive peace and security in Africa.
They are: promoting long-term conditions for
development and security; building the capacity of
African institutions for early warning, and enhancing
Africa's institutional capacity for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts; and
institutionalizing the commitment to the core values of
NEPAD, which are peace, security, democracy, human
rights and sound economic management.

My delegation believes that, if effectively
managed, the ad hoc Working Group on Africa has the
potential to facilitate interaction between the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and, indeed,
the entire United Nations system in helping Africa
rebuild its capacity to manage all aspects of conflict.
Africa has the structures in place to provide effective
support to the Security Council's ad hoc Working
Group on Africa when it is ready to engage. The
proposals already made by Ambassador Koonjul are
providing the international community with a good
basis for further work in developing adequate strategies
for conflict prevention, resolution and management in
Africa.

In conclusion, I recall that in the earlier part of
this meeting, the representative of France raised the
important issue of partnership between the Security
Council and African countries with respect to conflict
resolution and peace-building. We agree with the
representative of France that very sensitive issues are
often raised in this relationship. However, we would
encourage the Security Council to continue to be open
to the views not only of the countries in conflict, or
even of those that have taken sides in a conflict: the
Council, in carrying out its mandate for peace and
security, must continue to be willing to hear the views
- no matter how contrary - of the countries that have
an interest in conflicts or are affected by their spread.
In the past few years, the Council has begun a very
commendable practice of visiting countries and regions
that are engulfed in conflict. We believe that that is a
good practice that should be followed wherever there is
conflict. We believe that such Visits allow Council
members to observe first-hand the impact of the
decisions and the resolutions that are adopted in New
York. That, indeed, is a good thing.

