Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Republic of France for convening
this open debate, which gives us the opportunity to
exchange views on an issue that continues to have a
damaging impact on the world. We also welcome
the concept note (S/2019/239, annex) that has been
circulated as a basis for our deliberations.

We have recently been shocked to see the effects of
terrorism, which has been used not only as a threat but
also as a direct attack against the most basic elements
of human dignity. Innocent civilians are attacked by
radical extremists who snatch innocent lives in an
atrocious and cowardly way, driven by a perversity
that knows no bounds. The severity of terrorist acts
generates a huge sense of insecurity, the consequences
of which affect us globally. The issue that brings us
together today - the threat to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts and combating the
financing of terrorism - remains a critical one.

My delegation has repeatedly stated that terrorism
is a global phenomenon that must be addressed at its
very origins. All States are vulnerable to terrorist acts,
which represent a threat to international peace and
security, undermine democracy and create instability.
Terrorism represents an equally serious threat to all
States. With regard to my country's region, we are
deeply concerned about the growing links between
transnational organized crime and terrorism and we
believe in the importance of strengthening cooperation
to effectively prevent and combat such illicit activity.

Despite the fact that the international community
has innovative legal instruments to combat terrorism
and organized crime, in many cases the general
perception of our populations is that those instruments
are insufficient. Here, at the heart of the United
Nations and within the Security Council, it is therefore
necessary to harmonize efforts to implement the four
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in a balanced manner.

We welcome the coordinated efforts of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the implementation of its
Strategy. We also call for efforts to converge with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
field of prevention, because increasing the visibility
of United Nations activities to prevent terrorism will
improve international cooperation to identify sources
of financing, anonymous transactions and the misuse
of financial resources.

Before the Council, we also urge the international
community to resort to a more rigorous control of the
illicit market of small arms and light weapons and
their respective ammunition, since the trade in those
weapons and their indiscriminate use helps terrorist
and organized crime networks to acquire them for
malicious use. The Arms Trade Treaty provides
explicit and specific regulations to prevent the misuse
of such weapons.

In addition to small arms and light weapons,
weapons of mass destruction are also one of the main
causes of death around the world and their impact on
civilian populations is indiscriminate. The commitment
of our countries to ensure the proper implementation
of Security Council resolutions must therefore take
centre stage. The full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) requires States to adopt and apply laws
that would effectively prohibit the provision of any
type of support to non-State actors that seek to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems, in particular for terrorist purposes.

To conclude, Guatemala once again reiterates its
strong and unequivocal condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
perpetrators, where it is committed and for what
purpose. Our position is that terrorism and violent
extremism cannot be justified by beliefs, ideology or
religion. That not only plainly contravenes the rules
of public international humanitarian law but also
undermines human dignity.

