Mr. Otunnu: I have listened very attentively to
all the comments, critiques and suggestions. We shall
follow up on all these in the coming months, and we
shall stay in touch with both the Council and
delegations that are not on the Council.

Let me very briefly touch on a couple of things.
First, as the Council begins to discuss a resolution on
this issue, our clear preference and hope is that this
would be the occasion for the Council to act, and to act
in terms of the targeted measures that are outlined in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2003/1053) -
targeted measures which would attach to the leadership
of fighting entities and measures which would attach to
organizations involved in fighting.

If it should prove impossible on this occasion for
the Council to act, then it would be exceedingly
important that a clear signal go forth from the Council
that this is not a pro forma postponement but that it is
part of very graduated measures the Council proposes
to take.

In that context, I think it would be very important
that the Council ask parties to conflicts to prepare in
collaboration with United Nations country teams - the
United Nations country presence on the ground -
specific action plans indicating how and within what
time frame they propose to end the recruitment and use
of children as child soldiers, to give a time frame that
would suggest a sense of urgency on this issue and to
come back to the Council within a reasonable period of
time with updated information. Otherwise, I fear that
the credibility of this agenda - the credibility of our
collective efforts to protect war-affected children - as
well as the credibility of the Council, might suffer as a
consequence.

My second point concerns my satisfaction in
hearing so many delegations underscore the fact that
there are other grave violations of the rights of children
beyond child-soldiering; that all these child victims of
armed conflict deserve the attention, support and
protection of the Council; and that in any monitoring
exercise we should keep most of these grave violations
in View in terms of action and compliance. I express
great satisfaction in hearing that.

The third point I would like to make concerns
monitoring and reporting. Again, I take note of the fact
that there is unanimous support for establishing a
monitoring and reporting system. The Secretary-
General's report outlines most of the elements: the
instruments and standards, what kinds of violations
might be monitored and what actors within the United
Nations system might participate in such a monitoring
exercise - and there are other actors outside: non-
governmental and regional organizations. What we
now require is to deepen and intensify consultations,
discussions, about how the contributions of these

various stakeholders - the gathering and flow of
information, the added value of various
contributions- how all these elements can be

coordinated, integrated and become an effective
system.

Fourthly, it is crucial that the Council should
underscore the important role of the United Nations
presence on the ground in relation to monitoring and
reporting and the era of application. United Nations
peace missions, as well as United Nations country
teams and, of course, the non-governmental
organizations - we rely on them to gather information
on the basis of which we then compile reports to the
Council for action.

And in that connection, I would like to say that
beyond the Security Council, there are other centres of
action - the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the International Criminal Court, the
Commission on Human Rights. They, too, should
become engaged in the campaign for the era of
application within their own areas of competence.

I should just like to refer briefly to two comments
by two delegations. First, I should like to thank very
much the delegation of India for a very systematic,
carefully constructed and serious critique of this
agenda and the response of the United Nations system
to the use of children in armed conflict. I may not agree
with all the views expressed, but I appreciate the
seriousness with which that critique has been put
forward. This is not the moment to engage in dialogue,
but I promise, following this, to engage in bilateral
dialogue with the delegation to discuss some of those
issues.

The second delegation that I would like to refer to
by name is the delegation of Uganda. I listened with
much interest and with deep sadness to the polemic by
the representative of Uganda, directed at a particular
individual. I know the Council has enough wars on its
hands, so I want to assure members that I am not to
embark on a response to that statement. I think the last
thing the Council wants is to add another civil war,
between the Ugandan delegation and Olara Otunnu, to
its list of conflicts to handle. I do not believe it
appropriate to do that here. Rather, I invite the
delegation of Uganda to join all of us - rather than
fighting each other - in ensuring that we can salvage
the children of northern Uganda, who are condemned
to abominable conditions of human rights abuses and
neglect.

With regard to the lists, I should like to say that
one can question what kinds of lists we might have, but
I think it is very difficult to question the criteria, the
vetting system and the method we use in producing the
lists. The Office of the Special Representative, in fact,
has no presence on the ground, so we rely entirely on
United Nations agencies on the ground and non-
governmental organizations to provide us with
information, on the basis of which we then convene a
group here in New York, which has within it all United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations,
to vet in the most thorough way possible all the
information in order to agree on a list to submit it to
the Secretary-General, who in turn submits to the
Security Council. And that is the same criterion we use
for all situations. So Ijust wanted to clarify that; I do
not want to embark on a response to the polemic.

Finally, I should like very much to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Foreign Minister for taking the
time to be with us personally today to underscore the
importance that she and Chile attach to this issue. I also
thank the delegation of France, which has taken the
leadership in the past several years in shaping and
guiding this issue within the Security Council. We
appreciate that leadership enormously. Again, I thank
the Council warmly.

