Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien, whose briefing
was clearly not just a set of business-as-usual remarks.
Mr. O'Brien just described what could soon become the
most serious food-security emergency in the modern
era, unless States members of the United Nations act
now to stop it.

The United Nations is warning us that more than
20 million people are starving in Yemen, South Sudan,
Somalia and the Lake Chad Basin. As Mr. O'Brien
pointed out in his briefing, famine has already been
declared in some areas of South Sudan. The same
could soon follow in Yemen, Somalia and the Lake
Chad basin if the international community does not
intervene immediately.

Every member of the Security Council and of
the United Nations should be outraged that we are
confronting famine in the year 2017. Famine is a man-
made crisis with man-made solutions. No country
should be destined to face famine in a world that has
more than enough food to feed every single person. It is
not too late to prevent famine from spreading. It is not
inevitable. However, preventing famine means that the
parties fighting on the ground have to prioritize access
to food, health care and other life-saving aid. They must
also take measures to reduce the impact of hostilities
on the civilian population. We therefore call on the
members of the Council to use their influence over
the parties in these four situations to allow unfettered
access and not obstruct aid.

Additionally, it is Vital that the United Nations and
its partners have the resources they need in order to
respond. Right now, only 1.6 per cent ofthe four appeals
for Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and Nigeria are
funded. Collectively, we must contribute more to this
relief effort. By numbers of people at risk, the stakes in
Yemen are the highest, as Mr. O'Brien has impressed
upon us. The United Nations has assessed that 65 per
cent of all households in Yemen are food insecure.
Some 7.3 million people need food and emergency
aid, and 460,000 children under five years old are
suffering from severe, acute malnutrition - which
is up 200 per cent since 2014. Moreover, we hear that
the United Nations Children's Fund now estimates
that one child dies every 10 minutes in Yemen from
malnutrition-related causes. We know that Yemen
is overwhelmingly dependent on imports for its food
and that humanitarian aid is insufficient to meet the
enormity of the need. Commercial food imports are
critical to averting famine. And, just like the other
three cases, in Yemen, an end to the conflict would do
the most to help alleviate the humanitarian crisis.

That is why the United States supports the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, to renew the cessation
of hostilities and bring the parties back to the table
for negotiations. There is no military solution to the
conflict in Yemen. A comprehensive peace would
require compromise from all sides for the sake of the
Yemeni people. While the conflict continues, the parties
must allow sustained access, both for humanitarian aid
and for the commercial import of food, medicine, fuel
and other basic supplies. These essential goods must
be able to arrive through all of the ports of Yemen, and
they must be able to move within Yemen. The United
Nations verification and inspection mechanism plays
a key role in facilitating food deliveries. However,
constraints on access, particularly at Hudaydah - as
Mr. O'Brien noted contribute to the risk of famine.
The closure of Sana'a airport, along with checkpoints
on the ground, complicate relief efforts even more. The
obstructions to aid in Yemen must be lifted.

 

The United States also urges international and
regional partners to help Yemenis afford to buy food
again. Contributing to the cash transfer programmes
that provide payments to Yemen's neediest families
would help prevent families from going hungry.

The United Nations has already declared a famine
in certain areas of South Sudan. Responsibility for this
famine lies squarely with the country's leaders, who
are fighting a senseless conflict as their people starve.
This conflict has caused almost 3.5 million people to
flee their homes, forcing many to abandon their farms.
People are hiding from the violence in swamps. They
are surviving by eating waterlillies and grasses or
taking enormous risks by trying to flee to neighbouring
countries. But even as 100,000 people face starvation
now and 5.5 million people face severe hunger this
coming summer, South Sudan's leaders are making
it even more difficult to deliver aid. Of couse, South
Sudan's leaders have tried to say that they will solve
these challenges, but look at what they are actually
doing. There are reports that Government officials
are expelling humanitarian staff from famine-stricken
areas. This is an outrage.

The United States calls on the Government of
South Sudan to uphold one of its most fundamental
obligations to its citizens, that is, to keep them from
starving to death and to allow humanitarian aid
organizations to do their jobs in helping people. As
Mr. O'Brien noted, with the Secretary-General's recent
visit to Somalia, he brought much-needed attention
to Somalia's worsening hunger crisis. The Somali
people, however, continue to grapple with the impact
of decades of conflict. We know that in 2011, nearly
260,000 Somalis died in a famine and now after several
poor rainy seasons, Somalia yet again faces a looming
famine with 50 per cent of the population in need of
assistance. But the difference between then and now is
that the international community is mobilized and in
place to provide aid and that a new Federal Government
of Somalia is ready to coordinate a drought response.
But again, funding, as Mr. O'Brien noted, is the primary
obstacle to saving lives. Of the $825 million required
for famine prevention and response in Somalia, only
16.2 per cent of what is required has been received.

Finally, members of the Council just saw first hand
the suffering in north-eastern Nigeria and the Lake Chad
Basin, where more than 10 million civilians - two out
of every three people in the region - are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Some organizations already
believe that famine occurred in parts of Nigeria last
year and experts warn that up to 120,000 people could
face famine by this summer.

It is a daunting challenge, as we saw, to get aid to
this area, as the region's militaries continue to combat
Boko Haram's brutality. In the midst of this fight,
humanitarians and civilians are threatened by ambushes,
suicide attacks and improvised explosive devices. But
to save people from starving to death, humanitarians
need safe ways to reach them - again echoing Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien. We saw during our trip
that there is scope for greater collaboration between
military officials and humanitarian organizations,
which could allow greater access. These groups are
able to deliver aid to 2.1 million people now, which is a
massive improvement from where we were last year, but
5.1 million people still need help. The United Nations
and its partners are still not able reach more than 50 per
cent ofthe people going hungry. That is why the United
Nations and the Governments around the Lake Chad
basin have to do more to open up access in the areas
hardest hit by the fight against Boko Haram.

In closing, the bottom line is that all of us know the
steps required to prevent famine. The members of the
Council and all other countries with influence need to
press the parties on the ground to open up humanitarian
access and minimize the impact of hostilities on the
population. We also need to give the United Nations the
resources it needs to help. Starvation is preventable, but
only if we all have the will to act.

