Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I wanted to
warmly thank President Meron, President Mose,
Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow for their reports and
presentations today and to welcome them here to the
Council. I will not try to cover my country's entire
approach to the two Tribunals, but will just focus on a
limited number of points, if I may.

I will turn first to the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
where we welcome the Tribunal's efforts in the past
year to increase the efficiency of ICTY proceedings.
Those efforts are clearly reaping dividends, but we
recognize, and we have heard this morning, that there
are still obstacles to achievement of the completion
strategy. One of them, of course, is the financial
situation, on which President Meron has spoken
eloquently. We have to continue to press all States to
pay their dues if we are going to enable the Tribunal to
fulfil the purpose for which it is set up. The
international community really does face a choice. The
ICTY, without adequate funding, will struggle to
complete its work effectively and it will do so over a
much longer and, probably, more costly time frame
than envisaged; or it can be enabled to continue
working towards its completion strategy, which
envisages a swifter ending and a more effective
completion of the mandate.

A second obstacle is the ICTY's concerns to
avoid undue delays over the election and re-election of
judges. We welcome the President's efforts to deal with
these problems. He has flagged those for us. My
delegation believes that we should give some
consideration to allowing trial judges who are not
re-elected to complete their cases where those cases are
over six months old. I would welcome President
Meron's views on that.

A third question that is important for the
completion strategy and its timetable is that of the
transfer of cases to the region. We welcome the
Prosecutor's plans to conduct a further review of cases
in 2005, but I do want to underline our View that the
key indictees - Mladic, Karadzic and Gotovina -
have to be tried at the ICTY. I note also and take
account of President Meron's more general point about
the distinction between senior and less senior indictees.

A fourth and really important area for timely
progress on the completion strategy is the delivery of
at-large indictees to The Hague. This is really key to
making efficient use of trial time. The United Kingdom
is determined to maintain appropriate pressure on all
countries to meet their obligations to cooperate with
the Tribunal, assisting in the apprehension of fugitives
and providing access to documents. We welcome
Croatia's step change in cooperation with the ICTY.
We think it important that Croatia continue to
cooperate fully and, in particular, take steps to locate
and transfer to The Hague fugitive indictee Ante
Gotovina.

Bosnia's failure to cooperate fully with the ICTY,
as we have heard this morning, represents, we think, a
fundamental obstacle to Bosnia's Euro-Atlantic
relations, so we call on the Republika Srpska
authorities to demonstrate a credible and sustained
effort to track down and transfer all fugitive indictees,
in particular Radovan Karadzic, to The Hague. We
fully support Lord Ashdown in his efforts to ensure
that Bosnia and Herzegovina makes the changes
necessary to be able to meet its ICTY obligations.

Turning to Serbia and Montenegro, we expect
that Mr. Tadic's election will now enable the
Government to take action to meet its international
obligations, for cooperation is certainly a requirement,
not an option. Continuing non-compliance will
frustrate any aspirations of Serbia and Montenegro to
closer integration with Euro-Atlantic structures. We
think that continuing hesitation is unacceptable. Claims
of ignorance about the whereabouts of indictees are not
sufficient. It is Serbia and Montenegro's duty to assist
in their arrest and extradition to The Hague.

Turning to the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), I should like to applaud
the approach which puts the completion strategy at the
centre of the overall management of the Tribunal. We
welcome the evidence of shared responsibility
throughout the Tribunal's organs for the overall work
of the Tribunal, including the completion strategy, and
we are encouraged that the ICTR appears likely to
meet its completion strategy. Here, we welcome the
trend towards shorter trials, which is helped by the
innovative measures that President Mose has
introduced. All, of course, will not be plain sailing.
Budget arrears are one possible threat to the ICTR's
completion strategy and we will explore with Security
Council colleagues, among others, how to encourage
States to pay their dues.

I want to note and agree with Prosecutor J allow's
belief that it is important to explore the possibility of
transferring cases to African countries where certain
suspects are now detained. Perhaps he could comment
on whether he will be advising on the conditions
necessary to allow that to happen. We assume, of
course, that the majority of cases to be transferred will
go to Rwandan jurisdiction. To conclude, I would be
interested to hear the Tribunal's thinking on how that
might best be assisted.

