We wish to congratulate Estonia on its successful and impressive presidency of the Security Council. Estonia's example demonstrates that smaller countries contribute substantively to international peace and security. I thank you, Sir, for your excellent leadership this month and for convening this important debate. It has been more than 20 years since the Security Council included the protection of civilians in armed conflict on its agenda, recognizing it as a matter of peace and security. We thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this annual debate and for doing it at the beginning of the protection of civilians week despite the global hardships we all face at the moment. Latvia aligns itself with the statement of the European Union. Latvia supports the Secretary-General's call for an immediate ceasefire across the globe in the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) outlines the realities on the ground and the ongoing challenges and increasing risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We strongly concur with the Secretary-General that we have the tools to strengthen the protection of civilians, but all we need is strong political will. And yet political will is what many struggle to exhibit. States are the ones that bear the primary responsibility to protect their populations. According to the latest report, 2019 was yet another year of suffering; civilians continue to be disproportionately affected by armed conflicts and suffer devastating consequences. More than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 10 conflict-affected areas, including Syria, Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Libya, Yemen and Ukraine. We need to be determined to address those situations, act promptly and demand accountability. We are extremely concerned about direct and indirect attacks against civilians, civilian infrastructure, journalists and humanitarian and medical personnel during armed conflicts, including in the light of COVID-19. Deeply disturbing methods of warfare such as sexual and gender-based violence, harassment and rape, terror, starvation and torture are still being used and often go unpunished. Women and girls face heightened risks of sexual and gender-based violence during conflict. A robust implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is crucial and must be a priority. To further strengthen our efforts in this area, Latvia recently became a member of the Group of Friends for Women, Peace and Security, chaired by Canada. The reduction of gender-based violence was also Latvia's priority during its presidency last year of the Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, which resulted in a consensual action plan to tackle gender-based violence, including the gendered impact of armed violence and conflict, as well as specific aspects of risk assessment related to gender-based violence in considering the issuance of export licences. We must work tirelessly to reverse the aforementioned appalling trends and ensure respect for international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law. We reaffirm our strong support for the international justice and accountability mechanisms, including the work of the International Criminal Court. The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an integral part of the Security Council's agenda. The prevention of conflicts; the existing challenges to the protection of civilians in various conflict-affected areas; and accountability for violations against civilians are matters that should be addressed with a sense of urgency. In that context, we remain deeply concerned by the continual suffering of civilians in Syria. We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons in Syria, as concluded in the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team to the Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and to the Secretary-General (S/2020/310, enclosure). The use of chemical weapons by anyone is a brutal violation of international law, and those responsible for such terrible crimes must be held accountable. We remain deeply concerned about the deterioration of the human rights situation in the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea as well as in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions currently not under the control of the Ukrainian Government. Thousands of civilians have been killed and wounded in the conflict. We call on the authorities of the Russian Federation, as the occupying Power in Crimea, to end all human rights violations and abide by international law. It is essential that the international community maintain pressure on Russia until Ukraine's sovereignty is fully restored and secured within its internationally recognized borders. Libya remains a matter of great concern owing to the growing number of indiscriminate attacks against civilians, the increased violence and the escalation of hostilities in the past couple of weeks. We strongly condemn the shelling of residential areas by General Haftar and the forces aligned with him and any other attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure. Such activities undermine further efforts towards sustainable peace. We call on all actors to de-escalate hostilities and fully implement the United Nations-sanctioned arms embargo and their commitments in line with the Berlin process. The protection of civilians is also an important component of United Nations peacekeeping operations and can be strengthened by the implementation of the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative Declaration. Latvia will continue its support by contributing experts to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The recent outbreak of COVID-19 has given rise to a new set of challenges that negatively affect the protection of civilians. We must focus our efforts on tackling the worst impacts on the most vulnerable and ensure that adherence to international law prevails, especially now. In addition to other unprecedented challenges, States face growing liabilities in the digital sphere. According to statistics, today 4.57 billion people are active Internet users. Digital technologies can and should provide us with the means for everyday communication and sources of reliable information. However, the report recognizes the countless hidden vulnerabilities that cyberspace presents and the risk that it could become a tool for manipulation, recruitment and the spread of violence. It is essential to counter intolerance, hate speech and the dangerous spread of misinformation. Latvia supports the recent initiative by the Secretary-General on COVID-19 communications in this regard. It is the responsibility of States to provide an orderly cyberspace based on international law and on building digital literacy and resilience to protect its population. While digital technologies have provided unprecedented opportunities for citizens and Governments, challenges lie in the possibility of their multiple applications. For instance, we can see that the same technology may be used in self- driving cars and in autonomous military systems with inbuilt lethal functionality. These very complex issues are currently being discussed within the framework of the Group of Governmental Experts on Emerging Technologies in the Area of Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems (GGE on LAWS). Latvia is contributing to that international discussion by chairing the GGE on LAWS process in 2020. In his report, the Secretary-General outlines the importance of retaining human control over the use of lethal force. That is one of the main topics of the international experts' debate in the GGE on LAWS this year and dovetails with the attempts being made to protect civilians in armed conflict. We cannot become detached from human suffering and calls for help. The international community must step up its commitment to provide stronger protection to civilians and implement the comprehensive recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's report. It is a fundamental legal obligation and in our common interest to promote and ensure the effective protection of civilians.
