Mr. King (United Kingdom): I should like to
begin by complimenting you, Sir, on the early months
of your chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). We are grateful for what you have
done. We endorse the work programme that you have
set out for the next 90 days and the principles that
guide this. I will associate myself with the statement to
be made later this morning by the Italian presidency of
the European Union and would like to underline the
very considerable efforts that the European Union is
making in this field. I will therefore confine myselfjust
to two general points and three more specific ones on
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

The first general point is that, in many ways, the
challenge that the CTC faces is getting increasingly
difficult. On the one hand the work is getting more
technical and more complex, and, on the other,
although the shock remains, the memories of 11
September are inevitably fading.

Progress has been made, of course, since we
adopted resolution 1373 (2001), but there is no doubt
that the threat posed by terrorism remains. We must
hope that we never confront another event similar to
that of 11 September, but we cannot yet say that that
possibility is excluded.

Terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction
remains a key concern, and we welcome the fact that
the CTC has met agencies involved in addressing
weapons of mass destruction and that agreement was
reached to include this as an issue in the outgoing
letters from the CTC. But, and this is the end of my
first point, across the board we think that the CTC is
going to have to redouble its efforts to maintain
momentum. The United Kingdom is ready to offer
whatever support it can.

My second general point is the key challenge of
keeping the CTC's work operational. It can be a
success if, and only if, it makes a real difference on the
ground. It is, of course, in all our interests that the CTC
remain effective, because that will reduce the scope for
atrocities.
We all have a responsibility to ensure that the
CTC can be effective by supporting it and fully
cooperating with it as it pursues increasingly
substantive work.

I have three suggestions about the substantive
work for the next period. In making these, I should like
to echo others in praising the assistance that the
independent experts have provided.

First, the CTC needs to build on its work on
assistance. We think that we need to strengthen the
expert team in this area. The experts are increasingly
identifying areas in which States can benefit from or be
able to access help. The CTC and its experts need to be
proactive in discussing their conclusions With States
concerned, including through direct contact with
capitals, Whether that is by telephone or by actual
visits. They will help States to access the increasingly
wide-ranging assistance programmes which are
available. A priority in moving forward in this area is
sorting out legislation, which needs to be in place
before States can move on to other areas.

My second point - and it is quite closely
related - relates to States that are falling behind on
implementation or on cooperation with the CTC, as
requested in resolution 1456 (2003). There is a range of
reasons for this, but we see a need for sharper analysis
of these reasons and think that the experts must be
prepared to advise the CTC and the Council where
there are concerns. In our turn, we, the Council, need to
be prepared to respond to these points from experts.

My last point is about the need to continue to
deepen contacts with other organizations - a point that
several others speakers have already touched on. We
have established these contacts with those in other
organizations who set the standards, but we hope that
the CTC's experts will explore What more could be
done to get regional organizations to address terrorism
themselves. There was much interest expressed at the 6
March special meeting and we should be prepared to
help those organizations for which this is a new agenda
item to develop the expertise to take discussion
forward. So we look forward to the October meeting.

