Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, join in
welcoming Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and thank him for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/617). We also
welcome the Ambassador of Afghanistan, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, and thank him for his statement earlier.

The international community has a shared interest
in a stable, peaceful and democratic Afghanistan. It is
for that reason that my delegation believes that the
challenges facing Afghanistan, which are detailed in
the latest report of the Secretary-General, should not be
underestimated. Key among those challenges are the
deterioration of the security situation, the increase in
civilian casualties, the continued human rights
deficiencies and the worsening humanitarian situation.
The persistent threat to security posed by insurgent and
terrorist activities is the main challenge to
Afghanistan's nation-building efforts and stability.

Paragraphs 16 to 22 of the Secretary-General's
report clearly illustrate the deteriorating situation in
Afghanistan, especially in recent months. In that
context, we deplore all attempts to destabilize the
country, in particular terrorist attacks on innocent
civilians, including children. It is also worrying that, as
noted in the report, the deteriorating security situation
has hampered the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

Another area of concern is civilian casualties. As
noted in the report of the Secretary-General, the
country has experienced an increase in civilian
casualties. My delegation condemns all attacks
targeting innocent civilians. We also call upon the
international forces in Afghanistan to minimize the risk
of civilian casualties.
Despite the aforementioned challenges in
Afghanistan, the country is slowly making progress in
some areas. One notable area is that of counter-
narcotics efforts. South Africa is encouraged by the
reported decrease in opium cultivation and the decline
in opium production. We encourage the Government of
Afghanistan and other stakeholders to continue their
efforts to address the narcotics problem. We further
encourage the Government to improve its institutional
capacity for service-delivery and development in
support of viable alternatives to poppy cultivation.

We also welcome the notable progress in the
fields of the rule of law, governance and regional
cooperation. We underscore the importance of regional
cooperation as an effective means of promoting
development and stability in Afghanistan. In that
context, my delegation commends the improved
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours, in
particular Pakistan. We appreciate the resolve already
expressed by both countries to combat extremism and
terrorism by further improving existing mechanisms
for the exchange of information.

In order to address the challenges facing
Afghanistan, a holistic and comprehensive approach is
essential. In that regard, improved coordination in the
military, political, humanitarian and development areas
is of vital importance. It is for that reason that South
Africa continues to support the central and impartial
role of UNAMA and its activities in leading the efforts
of the international community. We agree with the need
to strengthen UNAMA's coordination capacity, in order
to enable the Mission to make a significant difference
on the ground.

South Africa reaffirms its support for the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy under the
ownership of the Afghan people. We also commend the
central role played by the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board in facilitating and monitoring the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Eide, and
the personnel of UNAMA for their tireless efforts in
Afghanistan.

