Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2011/514). We
also welcome the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, and
thank him for his briefing on recent developments. Our
delegation will continue to fully support the work of
the Special Representative and the staff of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

We welcome the participation in today's meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, as well as of
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its
appreciation for UNMIK's efforts to fulfil its mandate,
including its support for the reconciliation process, its
facilitation of constructive dialogue and regional
cooperation and its focus on mediation between the
communities, as well as its support for minority
communities.

We remain convinced that sustained dialogue is
indispensable to achieving a mutually acceptable
solution to all outstanding issues in Kosovo. It is
important that the positive development - the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by
the European Union, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 64/298 - continues, in order to
produce concrete results and solutions to the topics
under discussion.

In that context, we welcome the agreements on
freedom of movement, the civil registry and acceptance
of university and school diplomas. Furthermore, in
order to resolve longstanding issues affecting the day-
to-day activities of the local population, it is essential
that both sides remain committed to implementing the
aforementioned agreements and to continuing dialogue
on pending issues.

With regard to the rule of law, we reiterate our
support for the activities of UNMIK, as well as of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), operating within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations. We also support the
existing practice of cooperation and coordination
between UNMIK, EULEX, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO - the
latter present through Kosovo Force troops - and we
hope that this practice will continue.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's position, which is well
known, is that the rule of law is crucial to stability and
progress in the Balkans. In that regard, we would like
to re-state our concerns regarding the allegations
contained in the report of the Council of Europe's
Special Rapporteur Dick Marty on the inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo.

Without a doubt, there is a need for a thorough,
impartial and independent investigation into these
serious allegations, with a strong witness-protection
programme and the full cooperation of all relevant
stakeholders. We welcome the recent formation of the
EULEX task force, to be composed of international
prosecutors and several international investigators
specializing in war crime investigations. We call on
EULEX to start working on those investigations
immediately. We also welcome UNMIK's readiness to
extend its full cooperation to any investigation that
may take place.

We have taken note that the security situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period has remained
relatively calm, although tensions remain, mainly in
northern Kosovo, where the situation continues to be
sensitive and politically delicate, as the Secretary-
General's report states. However, the most recent
incidents - which were not covered by the report -
remain a cause for concern for our delegation. In light
of these developments, we would like to appeal to the
parties to remain calm and act in a responsible manner,
in order for peace to prevail.

In the context of improvement of inter-
community dialogue and confidence-building among
the parties, we believe in UNMIK's crucial role and
welcome its efforts to decrease tensions, draw attention
to common needs and create conditions conducive to
sustainable returns. During the reporting period,
UNMIK and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees facilitated several "go-and-see" and "go-
and-inform" visits, which gave displaced persons the
opportunity to visit their properties and make firsthand
assessments of conditions in the receiving community.
The number of voluntary returns remains low, despite

the efforts of local and central authorities and the
international community, due to socio-economic
difficulties associated with the reintegration of
returnees.

In conclusion, we would like to repeat our
longstanding position that stability and security in
Kosovo are crucial to achieving lasting peace and
prosperity in our region. We consider that the
international community should continue to play an
important role in supporting the aspirations of the
countries of the region to integration into European and
Euro-Atlantic structures.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends
UNMIK, operating within the framework of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), and its role in
maintaining peace, security, stability, and respect for
human rights in Kosovo.

