Mr. Rock (Canada): I welcome this opportunity
to address the Council on behalf of Canada with
respect to the grave crisis that is enveloping Haiti. The
Organization of American States (OAS) and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) have taken the
lead in responding in recent weeks, and Canada has
fully endorsed their efforts. But now the time has come
for the Council to once again become seized with the
situation in Haiti, as the OAS Permanent Council asked
in its resolution adopted this morning.
(spoke in French)

Ten years ago, this body was called upon to
decide how to respond to similar troubles in Haiti. The
action by the international community then was
decisive and successful, but only in the short term.
Haiti is again in the process of sliding into anarchy, its
population in a state of great vulnerability. Civilians
are being attacked with impunity, and humanitarian
workers are increasingly unable to help them.

(spoke in English)

We can be under no illusions. The international
community cannot solve Haiti's problems. It is
Haitians themselves who must determine the way
forward, finding a new way to work together for their
own future. That is why Canada was so deeply
distressed by the decision of the Haitian opposition to
reject the CARICOM. Plan. We believe the Plan is still
the best option for a peaceful resolution of the current
situation. No winners will emerge from the path of
violence on which Haiti is embarking. It will take
generations for people to heal from the grief and anger
that that violence will leave in its wake.

There is a heavy responsibility on President
Aristide and on the opposition parties to reject
violence, to make compromises and to embrace
democratic and peaceful solutions. We urge them to
implement the provisions of the CARICOM. Plan. As
the Plan itself makes clear, any transition in Haitian
leadership must respect the Haitian Constitution and
the rule of law. It is, in the last analysis, the people of
Haiti who bear the pain and the suffering of
intransigence.

(spoke in French)

The international community stands ready to
help, but Haiti must take the first steps. Without clear
political will to commit to reform, the situation will not
change. President Aristide and the democratic
opposition must commit themselves, in a concrete and
convincing way, to work together to put an end to the
bloodshed and to restore the rule of law and respect for
human rights. And they must act urgently.

(spoke in English)

For our part, we, the international community,
must now ready ourselves to respond when the
conditions are right - not to defend one side or the
other, but to protect the people of Haiti by restoring
order and by creating a stable environment to enable
democratic processes to unfold. Canada will do its part
in such a coordinated and authorized international
response.

The humanitarian situation in parts of Haiti is
becoming severe. Violence is joining forces with
poverty to deprive thousands of Haitians of food, water
and medical care. President Aristide, the leaders of the
democratic opposition and leaders of armed groups
must give unequivocal direction to their supporters to
refrain from attacking civilians, to allow humanitarian
personnel safe access and to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches those in need. Haiti's neighbours
also have a role to play in facilitating aid delivery and
in giving safe haven to displaced persons in search of
safety.

(spoke in French)

To date, Canada has provided almost $2 million
for immediate humanitarian assistance. We have also
pledged $5 million to support an expanded role for the
Organization of American States special mission to
Haiti. But this mission will not be able to achieve its
goals as long as conditions of lawlessness and anarchy
prevail.

(spoke in English)

Canada is ready to do more. But first, we are
looking to Haiti's political leadership and democratic
opposition to take steps that would make those
additional measures possible.

