Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarIo, for her briefing.

At the outset, I would like to emphasize our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations when dealing with issues on the
Council's agenda. We also emphasize the importance of
preventive diplomacy in addressing disputes and crises
at an early stage through peaceful ways and means and
dialogue. In that regard, we stress the pivotal role played
by regional and subregional organizations in ensuring
preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts with a
view to maintaining international peace and security,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We have followed with concern the accelerated
events of recent days in Venezuela, which have resulted
in the death or injury of a number of victims. We
stress the importance that those responsible for these
deplorable acts be held accountable, as well as of
respecting people's rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful demonstration, as guaranteed by international
law, including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and in accordance with the national
laws governing those rights.

We call on the parties concerned to respect all
principles of international human rights law, the interests
of the Venezuelan people and the future of their country
above any other interest. We share the international
community's concern about the humanitarian situation
in Venezuela, which in recent years has caused the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans
to neighbouring States. It has been a tremendous
challenge for the host countries to provide safe and
secure shelter to those people, constituting a threat
to regional security and stability. In that regard,
we are grateful to a number of Latin American and
Caribbean countries for hosting those large numbers
of displaced persons. We call on all stakeholders to
cooperate and take the necessary measures to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches those in need,
in accordance with accepted humanitarian principles,
without discrimination or distinction.

The crisis in Venezuela requires all relevant
stakeholders to give priority to national interests
above personal or partisan interests and to commit to a
comprehensive political dialogue in order to address the
current crisis. We urge all parties to exercise restraint,
reduce tensions, renounce violence and make every
effort to prevent further acts of violence. In that regard,
we support all efforts of the Secretary-General to reach
a political solution to ensure the stability ofthe situation
in Venezuela as soon as possible, while preventing the
region from descending into a humanitarian crisis and
a cycle of violence and instability.

