Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for the comprehensive presentation of the
ninth report he has submitted to the Council - the
forty-third report of his Office. We particularly thank
him for his work in ensuring that the Dayton Peace
Agreement is fully implemented.

Let me also commend the international efforts that
have for so long tried to foster peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly those of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council.

Mr. Inzko's ninth report presents mixed progress.
We have all noted that the security situation in the
country has remained calm and stable without any
major incident. We commend the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in that regard, as well as the European
Union Force-Operation Althea for its valuable
assistance to the Government.

We are also encouraged by the fact that the Council
of Ministers met regularly and that the budget was
adopted on time. We are also happy to hear that a
tripartite summit will be held today among Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Turkey and hope that it will
boost regional cooperation.

However, we are concerned by the current political
stalemate. We note that the Government's cohesiveness
and unity have been severely challenged by disagreement
among the political actors, particularly within the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The stand-off
has negatively impacted their own development and the
fulfilment of the agenda containing five objectives and
two conditions, set for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative.

It is important to stress that every branch of
power - particularly the Government and the
Parliament - must abide by its constitutional role.
It is also important that all stakeholders continue to
engage in dialogue in order to dislodge the stalemate.
For progress to be made, constructive dialogue among
all ethnic groups, including minorities, and among the
various structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina on one
side, and the High Representative on the other, are
critical.

Rwanda reaffirms its support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
believes that all parties must refrain from divisive and
secessionist rhetoric, which is not only in Violation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement but could also jeopardize
the fragile reconciliation process in the country.

Let me also point out that, far from representing
a handicap, the cultural differences constitute an
important asset ofthe people ofBosnia and Herzegovina.
Therefore, all parties and entities need to look beyond
ethnic lines in order to reach greater heights, including
meeting the requirements for joining the European
Union.

On justice and human rights, let me be clear as the
representative of Rwanda: the Srebrenica genocide is an
unquestionable fact, as established by the International

Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We
therefore condemn all senior officials of Republika
Srpska who deny it or defend its perpetrators.
Genocide denial is not only an insult to the victims
and to history, but also a serious hindrance to genuine
reconciliation. However, we believe that, in order for it
to be an effective tool for reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, justice must be carried out for all victims
without discrimination.

Rwanda also wishes to stress that human and
political rights need to be extended to the minorities.
I recall that the Sejdie-Finci ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights, on the right of minorities to be
elected to the presidency and to the House of Peoples of
the Parliament, is yet to be implemented. We therefore
urge all parties to engage in dialogue on that issue, with
a view to exploring constitutional reforms that could
ensure equality for all in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In the same vein, we call for the implementation of
the November 2010 ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the electoral system
of the city of Mostar. We urge the local authorities to
assume their responsibility and abide by the Dayton
Peace Agreement in order to allow the people of Mostar
to exercise their democratic rights.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that the achievement of sustainable peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina lies with its people and its leaders.
We hope that, in the near future, the Government of
the country will be able to own its future with a limited
international presence. We therefore call upon all
parties to demonstrate political will and to implement
in good faith the outstanding requirements of the "5+2"
agenda, which is the only way to graduate from the
monitoring of the Office of the High Representative
and to ensure a better future for the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

