Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The Spanish delegation is grateful, Mr. President, that
today's open debate on Afghanistan is being held under
your expert guidance. We wish you every success in
the presidency of the Security Council this month.
I wish to thank Mr. Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for the comprehensive briefing he has just
given us and for his tireless work as Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Spain fully subscribes to the statement made by
the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of
the European Union.

I should like, first and foremost, to pay a heartfelt
tribute to the 17 Spanish soldiers who, in an air
accident near Herat on 16 August, gave their lives
helping to defend freedom and peace in Afghanistan.
We are deeply grateful for all the expressions of
condolence that we have heard today in this Chamber,
including from the representative of Afghanistan
himself, whom we thank very much. I wish also to
remember the other 62 Spanish soldiers who were
killed in an air accident in May 2003 as they were
returning home after participating in the international
peace mission in Afghanistan.

From the very beginning, Spain has been present
in Afghanistan, within the framework of the operations
authorized by the Security Council, to help safeguard
the lives, freedom and prosperity of a people that for
decades had endured tyranny and violence and that
now, with the assistance of the international
community, looks forward with hope to the prospect of
peaceful coexistence.

The Government of Spain, with the ongoing
support of parliament, is committed, in a lasting manner,
to the stabilization and rebuilding of Afghanistan now
and during the new phase that will begin shortly, after
the elections scheduled for 18 September. To that end,
Spain has taken charge of the Forward Support Base at
Herat and established a provincial reconstruction team
at Qal'eh-ye Now in the west of the country, with more
than 500 military personnel and a civilian and
cooperation component.

The parliamentary and provincial elections of 18
September constitute one of the most important
challenges that the Afghan authorities will face in the
short term. In this regard, we are especially concerned
about the worsening of the security situation in various
areas of the country. We are concerned in particular -
and here we fully agree with the observation made by
the Secretary-General in his report - about the
increase in intimidation and violence perpetrated by
radical terrorism. We must not allow it to prevail
against the fully expressed will of the Afghan people.
To that end, Spain has already deployed an
additional military contingent of 500 military
personnel in the region of Herat for a period of three
months to support the electoral process. That brings
our current military presence in Afghanistan to about
1,000 personnel. At the same time, the Spanish Agency
for International Cooperation has pledged more than
1.5 million euros for electoral assistance, to be
channeled through the United Nations Development
Programme. Likewise, Spain has contributed a
significant number of observers to the European
Union's Electoral Observation Mission.

There is no doubt that Afghanistan is a State with
a key role in the international struggle against
terrorism, based on democracy, respect for human
rights and the rule of law and the central role of the
United Nations.

As the Secretary-General rightly states in his
report, with the conclusion of the Bonn political
process after the September elections, a new chapter
will begin in which the presence and the assistance of
the international community will remain essential in
the rebuilding and development of Afghanistan, whose
authorities will, of course, have to gradually take on
greater responsibilities. Furthermore, the donor
community and the Afghan Government will have to
focus attention increasingly on aspects such as the
economic and social development of the country, the
building of State institutions, the promotion of human
rights, including the situation of women, and the
reform of the administration and the justice system.

In that respect, Spain intends, from the beginning
of September, to include in the provincial
reconstruction team at Qal'eh-ye Now a civilian
component composed of an international cooperation
team headed by an ambassador on special mission,
with a View to working together with the Afghan
authorities to develop projects focusing initially on
improving health conditions, access to water and basic
infrastructure.

At the same time, with regard to efforts to combat
drug trafficking, we have established channels of
cooperation with the criminal justice programmes
being developed by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, again in cooperation with the Afghan
authorities.

Spain undertakes to contribute actively, together
with its European Union partners, to discussions on
and the development of the new Kabul process, in
which the United Nations will no doubt have to
continue to play a leadership role in international
context. We therefore await with great interest the
recommendations and proposals of the Secretary-
General in that regard, as well as the guidelines that the
Security Council may develop.

