The United Arab Emirates would like to thank Indonesia for organizing today's open debate. We also thank the briefers for highlighting several critical points related to today's discussion. The United Arab Emirates remains concerned about the growing link between organized crime and terrorism, especially in this difficult time. As highlighted in the twenty-sixth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, terrorist groups are "using the outbreak to advance propaganda and fundraising" (S/2020/717, summary). The report also mentions that some of these groups have been using the lockdown during the pandemic to increase illegal excavations and thefts from archaeological sites in conflict zones. In addition, terrorists continue to raise funds through money-laundering and trafficking in persons, weapons, drugs and natural resources, as well as through kidnapping and extortion. Last year, the Security Council adopted resolution 2482 (2019), on the links between organized crime and terrorism. The United Arab Emirates co-sponsored that resolution because we strongly believe that our efforts to eliminate international terrorism cannot succeed without cutting off all sources of funding, including organized crime. To achieve this goal, the United Arab Emirates recommends the international community enhance its efforts in the following four ways. First, we must strengthen our legal frameworks and implement relevant United Nations resolutions that address terrorism and transnational organized crime. Laws work only if States enforce them through investigation and prosecution. For its part, the United Arab Emirates continues to update its legal frameworks and enhance the efforts of law enforcement bodies to combat and criminalize terror financing. The United Arab Emirates has also implemented the latest recommendations by the Financial Action Task Force to strengthen its anti-money-laundering/counter- financing of terrorism system. In addition, the United Arab Emirates reiterates that the United Nations system must hold Member States accountable for their financing of terrorism when it occurs, especially when such actions violate relevant Security Council resolutions and their obligations under the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Secondly, we need to enhance the capacity of Governments, the private sector and relevant institutions to combat the threats of terrorism and organized crime. This requires the provision of human, financial and logistical resources, especially to affected regions and countries. Terrorist and criminal groups constantly adapt, and we must do the same to disrupt and dismantle trafficking networks, in addition to enhancing border-control capacities. The financial intelligence units of the United Arab Emirates have the training and equipment necessary to analyse and investigate suspicious transactions. The United Arab Emirates Central Bank also provides anti-money-laundering training at the national and regional levels, in addition to implementing specific measures to address emerging challenges in terrorist financing. We have also launched the "goAML" anti-money-laundering programme to collect and analyse financial information to combat money-laundering and terrorist financing, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. These combined efforts have successfully disrupted the financing of extremist groups through the United Arab Emirates financial system and within its borders. Thirdly, we encourage greater cooperation at the local, regional and international levels. Transnational threats require collective efforts. For instance, the United Arab Emirates ensures close cooperation with the private sector and not-for- profit and charitable institutions in the country. On a regional level, the United Arab Emirates is one of the founding countries of the Financial Action Task Force for the Middle East and North Africa, the Egmont Group associate member that plays an important role in the exchange of information among financial intelligence units to combat the financing of terrorism in the region. On a global level, the United Arab Emirates worked with France and UNESCO to establish the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas to prevent the destruction and illegal trafficking of cultural property by terrorist groups. We emphasize that there is no one-size-fits-all solution. We encourage strategies that take into account the unique context of each country or region to effectively address the linkages between organized crime and terrorism. This requires extensive research and the involvement of regional stakeholders. In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates strongly supports continued efforts to understand the nature and scope of the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We will continue to work with our partners to tackle these joint threats and maintain international peace and security.
