Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We find Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno's briefing very useful, as
the President himself has mentioned, particularly in the
context of his visit to the region. Following the practice
that the President is trying to institute in these
meetings, I will pick some of the points that Mr.
Guehenno has mentioned and try to reflect on those.

The first point relates to the contact between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
think that the 5 April meeting between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, and President Kostunica is a milestone
meeting. I believe that it has made a remarkable
difference in the manner in which UNMIK operations
are being undertaken. I think that it will open up
opportunities for the resolution of many of the
outstanding issues. I will come back later to some of
the points that were discussed during that meeting on 5
April, including the issue of missing persons and
detainees.

Let me at this point also mention that the
information that we have received from Mr. Guehenno
on the preparations for the elections is very important.
Mr. Haekkerup briefed us last month on the
preparations, not only of the legal framework, but also
of the elections and the arrangements being made for
the elections. From Mr. Guehenno we have now heard
in particular about the call made by UNMIK to all
communities to register and participate in the elections.
We believe that this is a very key aspect of holding free
and fair elections with the participation of all
communities. I believe that very closely linked with
this process is the return of the Kosovars to Kosovo
and their being able to participate. In particular we
underline the importance of the return of the Kosovo
Serbs.

We would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the civil administration and institution-
building pillars of UNMIK for doing their best to
organize the elections in an effective manner. We
would like to also mention that the legal framework for
the provisional self-government that is being prepared
should also be drafted with the participation of all
communities. We believe that this is an important
element that should not be missed.
We would also like to mention that, as has been
reiterated by UNMIK, the rights and interests of all
communities need to be reflected in that legal
framework. We believe that the support extended by
President Kostunica for the establishment of the legal
framework and his call on the Kosovo Serbs to
participate in the process are very important and will
contribute towards an effective preparation of that
document.

I will now talk about the point relating to the
missing persons. There are about 3,000 Kosovars
missing, and one-third of them are Serbs. We believe
that the support that President Kostunica has given in
this regard to Mr. Haekkerup is very important. The
idea of a joint committee needs to be pursued and, we
believe, should be established as soon as possible. We
would like to make a request to the Council that it
support this idea of a joint committee, which is to be
established to look into the issue of missing persons
and detainees.

We welcome, as I said, the efforts being made for
the return of the Kosovo Serbs. We would also like to
mention here that we had requested earlier a report on
the completion of mandate by Ambassador Henrik
Amneus. We had made that request both in informal
consultations and in formal meetings, and we have not
received any response, either from Ambassador
Amneus or from the Secretariat in this regard. We
would therefore like to reiterate that request through
you, Sir, so that action may be taken on the
presentation of that report to us.

Finally, we would like to mention that we are
encouraged to hear the information about the economic
reconstruction efforts, particularly on tax collection
and infrastructure-building. We believe that these are
very positive developments and should be welcomed
by all of us.

Let me conclude by joining Ambassador Lavrov
and Ambassador Shen in proposing that a mission of
the Security Council be undertaken to Kosovo with an
appropriate mandate to look into the developments that
have been undertaken and those that are expected in the
coming months.

