The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I thank Special Representative Honore Braithwaite
for her briefing.

Currently, Haiti's overall situation is stable. The
new Government has formulated a roadmap for national
development and is committed to speeding up economic
and social reform and to improving people's lives. The
Haitian National Police has become stronger and is
gradually taking over the responsibility of maintaining
national security and stability. That has presented a
new opportunity for the development of Haiti. China
hopes that the parties concerned in Haiti will seize this
opportunity to keep the current positive momentum,
expedite the development of areas such as energy,
education, health and agriculture, improve people's
livelihoods, strengthen the rule of law, comprehensively
implement the strategic plan for developing the National
Police in order to reach its planned strength of 15,000
as soon as possible, thereby creating conditions that are
conducive to improving the situation in Haiti.

China welcomes the recent unanimous adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 71/161 B in
response to the cholera epidemic in Haiti. We hope that
the international community will respond actively to
the United Nations new approach to cholera in Haiti
in order to help the country eliminate the epidemic
as soon as possible. At the same time, there is a need
to increase humanitarian assistance, support Haiti
in enhancing its capacity in disaster risk reduction
and prevention, safeguard food security and provide
greater support to Haiti in its efforts to consolidate
peace and stability, and implement the Sustainable
Development Goals, as contained in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

China appreciates the contribution made by
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and Special Representative Honore
Braithwaite in promoting peace and development in
Haiti. With the mandate of the Mission expiring on
15 October, the current priority should be a smooth
transition so as to achieve an orderly withdrawal of
MINUSTAH on the basis of maintaining stability Haiti
and to ensure the successful deployment of the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support after 15 October.
China hopes that the Secretariat, MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team in Haiti will
maintain coordination among themselves and enhance
communication with the Government of Haiti so as to
ensure the success of the transitional process.

Once again, the recent successful visit by the
Security Council mission to Haiti sends a strong signal
of the Council's attention to addressing the problem in
the country. China is ready to work with other Council
members towards a speedy realization of long-term
peace, stability and sustainable development in Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

