Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation views with great concern the
escalation of hostilities along the Lebanon-Israeli border
and within Lebanon, which continues to cause human and
material losses among the civilian population and which
threatens the peace process in the Middle East and,
consequently, international peace and security.

The military actions against Lebanon constitute a
violation of its territorial integrity, its sovereignty and its
political independence within its internationally
recognized borders, and are a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter, of international law, of relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 425
(1978), and of the 1949 armistice agreement between
Lebanon and Israel.

These hostilities must cease immediately. The
continued bombardments causing destruction and death in
Lebanon are contrary to international humanitarian law
and to the Fourth Geneva Convention. Their effect is to
further deteriorate the situation in the Middle East, and to
hamper the negotiations towards achieving a just and
lasting peace. My delegation therefore attaches the
greatest importance to the ongoing diplomatic efforts for
the achievement of a cease-fire.

My delegation is justly concerned by the
humanitarian crisis caused by the hostilities. The hundreds
of thousands of persons fleeing the conflict are creating
a real humanitarian emergency that must be attended to
immediately.

Similarly, my delegation is concerned for the safety
of the United Nations Interim Forces in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). Actions against UNIFIL affect the fulfilment
of its mandate. We regret that as a result of today's
bombardment in their area, innocent civilians have died.
We appeal to all parties to ensure the safety of UNIFIL
and to allow for its freedom of movement.

Therefore, my delegation feels that the text of the
resolution, which we co-sponsored and which has been
unanimously adopted, is the appropriate response by the
Security Council in order to alleviate this crisis.

