Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the pleasure to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway members of the European
Economic Area and Moldova align themselves with
this declaration.

Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Joachim Riicker, for his clear
presentation. I would like once again to underline the
European Union's continued support for the Special
Representative, Mr. Riicker, in his efforts to implement
resolution 1244 (1999) and to prepare for the transition
between UNMIK and the future international presence

06-6573]
in Kosovo once the status of Kosovo has been
determined.

As the Secretary-General notes, the status
negotiations and initial preparations for the end of
UNMIK's mandate and for the transition period have
indeed characterized the past months. Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari has since the beginning of this year
actively pursued engagement with both Belgrade and
Pristina through direct talks and expert consultations in
such key areas as community rights, decentralization,
the protection of cultural and religious heritage, as well
as the economy.

Regarding the future status of Kosovo, Belgrade
and Pristina have, unfortunately, continued to express
diametrically opposed positions. As the Secretary-
General remarks in paragraph 2 of his report, these
talks have enabled the two sides "to engage in a
substantial exchange of views without resulting,
however, in any major shifts of position".

The EU continues to encourage both Belgrade
and Pristina to engage constructively in the status
process. However, the process should not be open-
ended, and neither party should unilaterally block or
derail the process, for example, by resorting to
violence.

We fully share the View of the Secretary-General,
who noted with dismay that violent attacks continue to
be made by a few in an attempt to effect political
change. He also observed that the political process
cannot be dictated by the streets and that violence will
not be tolerated.

The EU continues to fully support the United
Nations Special Envoy, Martti Ahtisaari, and his
conduct of the political process to determine Kosovo's
future status. We welcome his intention to present a
proposal for a comprehensive status settlement to the
parties after the parliamentary elections in Serbia that
will be held on 21 January.

We share the Secretary-General's view of
generally positive developments in Kosovo. In its
annual progress reports for the Western Balkan
countries, and also for Kosovo, the Commission of the
European Union welcomes the progress in Kosovo in
the transfer of responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. At the same time, we
stress the crucial importance of further accelerated and
effective implementation of the standards, which are
equally essential for Kosovo's European perspective.

More efforts are needed to create an
administrative environment that will ensure further
approximation of European standards. We also stress
the need for further efforts for full respect of the rule of
law and independence of the judicial system. The
issues of combating organized crime and corruption,
macroeconomic stability and the protection of all
communities living in Kosovo also need the special
attention of the Kosovo authorities.

The future status settlement will be a challenging
task, not only for Serbia and Kosovo, but also for the
whole international community. It will require
coordinated and forward-looking action from all actors
involved. However, the status settlement alone will not
solve Kosovo's pressing economic and social
problems. Those challenges will remain and will need
to tackled with new vigour.

The future status settlement should safeguard a
future for all the citizens of Kosovo in a multi-ethnic
and democratic society and be conducive to economic
and social development.

The Western Balkan region, including Kosovo,
has been given a European perspective. The EU has a
major interest in a positive and clear outcome of the
status process. Its success will be essential, not only for
providing a clear perspective for the people in Kosovo,
but also for the overall stability of the region. In this
context, maintaining the European perspective of
Serbia is of great importance. Also, we would like to
make it clear that we see the question of Kosovo's
status as sui generis. The outcome of the status process
will not set a precedent for other regions because its
current status is exceptional, being based on Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

We regret the fact that the Kosovo Serbs still do
not participate in the work of the central institutions in
Kosovo, despite the international community's
repeated calls for them to do so. We once again urge
Belgrade to encourage Serbs in Kosovo to engage in
the work of the Kosovo institutions, where they can
most effectively advocate their own interests. It is
crucial to understand and to ensure that all
communities have a place in Kosovo, regardless of its
future status.

The EU continues its support for the Kosovo
institutions in their efforts to implement the reform
agenda. The EU is firmly committed to supporting
Kosovo's political and economic development, and we
are preparing our future presence in Kosovo with other
international actors. It is essential that UNMIK stays
with full powers until that future presence is
established. Well-coordinated action among various
international organizations and assistance from other
donors are vital to ensure effective implementation of
the status settlement and the sustainable development
of Kosovo. The EU will assume its role in that regard.

A long-term commitment of the donor community
will be indispensable to ensure a stable and secure
Kosovo for all its citizens. A strong post-status
international presence would also be needed to support
the Kosovo institutions so as to ensure security and
stability, as well as to safeguard the multi-ethnic
character of the new Kosovo.

