Mr. De Soto: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to say a few words by way
of introduction of the Secretary-General's report on his
mission of good offices in Cyprus, which is before the
Council in document S/2004/437, dated 28 May 2004.
I will be brief, since the report is largely self-
explanatory.

As the report makes clear, the renewed effort that
began on 10 February 2004 in New York and continued
in Cyprus from 19 February to 22 March 2004 and in
Switzerland from 24 to 29 March did not produce a
settlement fully agreed between the parties. Therefore,
as agreed between the parties with the support of
Greece and Turkey, the Secretary-General finalized the
plan on 31 March 2004.

The Foundation Agreement contained in the plan
was submitted to separate simultaneous referenda on
24 April 2004. It was rejected on the Greek Cypriot
side by a margin of three to one and approved on the
Turkish Cypriot side by a margin of two to one. The
plan, therefore, did not enter into force. The final
opportunity to ensure that Cyprus should accede to the
European Union as a united, rather than a divided,
country has thus been missed.

Throughout the effort that began in late 1999,
pursuant to Council resolution 1250 (1999), the goal
has been to bring about a settlement through a decision
of the people on each side. The people have at last
decided for themselves. Their decision, on each side,
must be respected.

While the ultimate outcome of the effort of the
past four and a half years has not been a success, a
great deal has nevertheless been achieved. Those
achievements should be built upon, and a number of
elements put in place, to keep alive the prospects of
reconciliation and reunification in the future. The
Security Council, which has so strongly backed the
Secretary-General's efforts, has an important role to
play in that regard.

The Secretary-General, for his part, has made a
number of observations in the concluding sections of
his report. He has made clear that, as long as the
current stand-off - as described in paragraph 91 -
remains, he does not see any basis for resuming his
active good offices.

A broad and fundamental reassessment of the full
range of United Nations peace activities in Cyprus -
both good offices and peacekeeping - is timely. In his
report on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/2004/427), he has therefore outlined his intention to
conduct a review, to be completed within three months,
of the mandate, force levels and concept of operations
of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP), in the light of the developments on the
ground, the positions of the parties and any views the
Security Council might have.

The Secretary-General has also indicated his hope
that Greek Cypriots will reflect on the outcome of this
process in the coming months. We need to better
understand the reasons for their strong rejection of the
plan - which was based on the Vision of the Security
Council as formulated over a quarter of a century - if
future efforts are to have any hope of bearing fruit, and

we need to know how the Greek Cypriot side sees the
way forward. In particular, we need to know if
questions of security and implementation were, indeed,
the main concern, and if so, what can be done by the
Security Council to address them. The Secretary-
General has encouraged the Council to stand ready to
do so if those concerns can be articulated with clarity
and finality.

I should like to take this opportunity to clarify the
meaning of the sentence in paragraph 83 of the
Secretary-General's report on his mission of good
offices in Cyprus (S/2004/437), which reads: "What
was rejected was the solution itself rather than a mere
blueprint". The sole purpose of that sentence was to
emphasize that what was rejected on 24 April was a
comprehensive plan for a settlement, ready for
implementation, with nothing further to be negotiated,
rather than a mere framework or set of principles for
future negotiations.

I should mention the fact that, late yesterday
afternoon, the Secretary-General received from the
Greek Cypriot side a letter outlining comments
regarding the Secretary-General's report on his mission
of good offices. I believe that has been conveyed also
to members of the Council pending its circulation as an
official document. It goes without saying that, given
that it is a rather lengthy letter, we have not had time to
study it, but, obviously, we stand ready to respond to
questions that members of the Council might have in
that regard, either here and now or in another forum.

The Secretary-General has also, in his report,
welcomed the fact that the Turkish Cypriots, in
approving the plan, have unequivocally signalled their
commitment to reunification. This is more than a mere
expression of goodwill for a solution to the Cyprus
problem; the Turkish Cypriot people have clearly
backed away from their search for a separate,
sovereign statehood. This is a fundamental turnabout in
the direction taken by the Turkish Cypriot side for
more than two decades.

The Secretary-General has therefore
recommended to the Council that it should encourage
the Turkish Cypriots, and Turkey, to remain committed
to that goal. The Secretary-General has called on the
Council to give a strong lead to all States to cooperate,
both bilaterally and in international bodies, to
eliminate unnecessary restrictions and barriers that
have the effect of isolating the Turkish Cypriots and
impeding their development. The Secretary-General
has chosen his words very carefully. The action that the
Secretary-General recommends, I should emphasize,
would be addressed to States. It is not meant to give
State rights, State functions or State institutions to the
so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
(TRNC). Its purpose would not be to afford recognition
or assist secession, but, rather, to promote reunification
and reconciliation. This is about assisting the people in
the north of Cyprus.

I wish to acknowledge the extensive and
consistent efforts of many Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots to reunify Cyprus. These have to continue.
Civil society must play its role, and, no doubt, the
European Union will give such efforts its support, as
should the United Nations.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the Secretary-General's praise for the efforts
made by nearly 300 Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots involved in the technical discussions, without
whom the settlement plan would not have been
complete. He is also grateful for the assistance of a
team of some 50 United Nations experts, many
seconded by the European Commission and other
Governments and institutions, notably Canada, the
Netherlands, Germany, Luxembourg, Switzerland and
the United States of America; and the European
Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, as well as the United Nations
Development Programme/ United Nations Office for
Project Services and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

