Mr. Velasquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
the comprehensive briefings by the briefers joining
us today.

Peru recognizes and supports the important work
that the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) has been doing in Central Africa. We
specifically welcome its significant contributions to the
resumption of the joint commission between the Central
African Republic and the Congo, the implementation
of the national dialogue processes by the Governments
of Cameroon and the Congo, and the relaunch of the
national framework for political dialogue in Chad.

Notwithstanding, we note with concern the
persistence of a dynamic of insecurity and instability
in the area, including incidents of intercommunal
Violence, the exacerbation of political tensions and
repression, extremism, the activities of armed groups,
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
human rights violations, especially, as was noted
earlier, in the north-western part of Cameroon.

We believe that the urgency of attending to those
problems requires regional organizations to play a
constructive and complementary role. We encourage the
timely strengthening of the cooperation that UNOCA
enjoys with the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, given the positive impact it can have
on combating terrorist organizations such as the Boko
Haram and armed groups like the Lord's Resistance
Army. We also underscore the synergies that UNOCA
can develop with the Economic Community of Central
African States in such areas as institutional reform and
combating the illicit trafficking in natural resources by
armed groups.

We are deeply concerned about the continuing
Violations of human rights committed not only by armed
groups, but also by security forces. We therefore call on
the Governments of the subregion to devote their efforts
and resources to the fight against impunity through
meaningful reforms of their justice systems and the
establishment of effective accountability mechanisms.
To that end, cooperation with organizations specializing
in the promotion of and respect for human rights is
very welcome.

We also stress the importance of the connections
that UNOCA can and must develop with civil society
in areas such as gender equity, human rights and
the supervision of electoral processes, as well as in
encouraging the private sector to contribute to the efforts
to build a stable, peaceful and prosperous subregion.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Peru's full support for
the work of UNOCA and stress the need for it to be
supported by the international community, in particular
those countries and regional bodies with special
influence on the region.

