The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Luxembourg.

Luxembourg deeply regrets that the draft resolution
(S/2104/189). proposed by the United States ofAmerica,
on the situation in Ukraine was not adopted because of
the vote against it by Russia, a permanent member of
the Council.

Luxembourg voted in favour of the draft resolution
and is also a sponsor of the text, as did many United
Nations States Members. Why? Because the draft
resolution was based on principles and dialogue.

First, with regard to the principles, the draft
resolution was intended to recall the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, as set out in particular
in Article 2 of the Charter. The draft resolution was
intended to reaffirm the Security Council's support for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and the territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. The Security Council should be
unanimous in upholding those principles. The Charter
ofthe United Nations states that in discharging its duties
the Security Council "shall act in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations". Today,
the Russian veto prevented the Security Council from
complying with that provision.

With regard to dialogue, in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, the
draft resolution under consideration by the Council
this morning was intended to urge all parties to seek
a peaceful settlement immediately through direct
political dialogue, to exercise restraint, to refrain
from any unilateral action and any inflammatory
rhetoric that might increase tension and to engage
fully in international mediation efforts. However,
the referendum organized for tomorrow in Crimea is
intended to change the status of the Ukrainian territory
against the will of Ukraine. If the referendum were to
take place, it would constitute a unilateral act that could
very seriously destabilize Ukraine and the entire the
region.

Pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations,
Member States have conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Today, the Russian
veto prevented the Security Council from assuming
that responsibility in the interest of peace and security
in Ukraine and Europe.

The referendum organized for tomorrow in
Crimea runs contrary to Ukraine's Constitution, which
stipulates that the territory of Ukraine is indivisible
and inviolable. The referendum is also contrary to the
Constitution of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
The international community can in no way recognize
its outcome.

The referendum of 16 March is part of a vicious
cycle. The decision taken on 1 March by the Council
of the Russian Federation to authorize the use of the
Russian armed forces on Ukrainian territory, and the
subsequent actions undertaken, constitute a flagrant
violation of international law. Those actions violate the
commitments Russia entered into with regard to Ukraine
within the framework of the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994 and the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and
Partnership Agreement between Russia and Ukraine,
signed in 1997. Had it been adopted, the draft resolution
would have helped to put an end to that vicious cycle
and the nationalist escalation that accompanies it.

Today's vote is a failure - a failure for the Security
Council and the United Nations, but also, and above all,
a failure for Russia.

Would it be naive to hope that, despite that failure,
we can still find a peaceful solution to the crisis that
Russia is imposing on Ukraine and the international
community? For its part, Luxembourg will not abandon
that hope. Even if diplomatic efforts have not yet borne
fruit, they must continue to achieve a solution that
respects the political independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in the interest of
peace, stability and prosperity in Europe.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

