Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
think this is an extremely important and timely debate.
The decisions that the Security Council will adopt in
the days and weeks ahead will involve issues related to
the maintenance of peace, the system of collective
security, the credibility and effectiveness of the
Council, and the role of the United Nations in the
international system during the twenty-first century.

The message ofthe international community must
be clear and unequivocal: the Government of Iraq must
fully comply with the obligations imposed by Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) adopted under chapter
VII of the Charter. This resolution established the
terms of the cease-fire and in particular, the obligations
of Iraq in the areas of nuclear, chemical and biological
disarmament, as well as in the area of ballistic missiles,
and created an international inspection regime. Several
Council resolutions demanded that Iraq submit a full,
final and complete disclosure of all aspects of its
programmes to develop weapons of mass destruction
and of all holdings of such weapons, their components,
production facilities and locations. Iraq has not
complied with these resolutions and has engaged in
delaying tactics for the past 11 years. This situation is
unacceptable.

The letter of the Iraqi Government of 16
September 2002 and the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq on that same date, accepting the
unconditional return of the inspectors of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), are positive steps.
Nevertheless, following the letter of 16 September,
other communications have given rise to some
misgivings. It is essential that the inspectors enjoy
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all
sites, including the so-called sensitive sites and
presidential sites. We support thorough and effective
inspections. We have confidence in the
professionalism, experience and diplomatic qualities of
the Executive Director of UNMOVIC, Hans Blix, and
of the Director General of IAEA, Mohamed ElBaradei,
in carrying out the inspections.

Taking into account the time elapsed since the
departure of UNSCOM. inspectors in late 1998 and the
experience gained between 1991 and 1998 revealing a
pattern of reiterated non-compliance and reluctance by
Iraq, we think that the Security Council must adopt
new measures strengthening the mandate of the
inspectors and establishing consequences in the case of
a new failure to comply.

In our opinion, clear rules must be set to guide
the work of the inspectors and it is for the Council
itself to determine what constitutes a serious violation
of the obligations imposed on Iraq. Iraq must also
comply with the other obligations established by
resolution 687 (1991), facilitating the return of Kuwaiti
property and the repatriation of Kuwaiti and third
country nationals.

On 2 August 1990, the Security Council adopted
resolution 660 (1990) condemning the invasion of
Kuwait by Iraq. Argentina participated in the
international coalition that, under the authority of
Security Council resolution 678 (1990), restored
Kuwait's independence and territorial integrity,
because Argentina strongly believes that the
acquisition of territory by force is an act contrary to
imperative rules of international law and can be neither
tolerated nor rewarded. That act of aggression by Iraq
is at the roots of the obligations imposed on that
country in 1991 with respect to disarmament. Eleven
years later, those obligations have not been fully
complied with. The authority of the United Nations,
exercised through the Security Council and the
resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter,
must be upheld.

It is the duty of the international community to
act with energy and decision. We hope that a peaceful
resolution is still possible. We urge the Government of
Iraq to act in good faith, to give the United Nations
inspectors a new opportunity and to give peace a
chance that might perhaps be the last for the
unfortunate Iraqi people.

The humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people
continues to be a cause of deep concern for the entire
international community. We hope that the Government
of Iraq's full compliance with its obligations will allow
for the eventual and gradual lifting of sanctions,
bringing relief to the civilian population ofIraq.

We are confident that the use of force can be
avoided. Nevertheless, if all negotiating mechanisms
are exhausted and, regrettably, force becomes the only
option, it must be exercised with the greatest caution
and moderation and avoid to the maximum possible
extent hurting the civilian population. The use of force
is the last resort and, to be legitimate, must be
exercised in accordance with the norms of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the
authorization ofthe Security Council.

At the beginning of our speech, we said that the
decisions to be adopted by the Security Council in the
days and weeks to come will be fundamental for the
peace and stability of the region. The outcome must be
the strengthening of the United Nations, multilateral
diplomacy and the legitimacy, credibility and
effectiveness of the Security Council as the custodian
of international peace and security appointed by the
Member States.

