Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for the
comprehensive concept paper you have submitted
(S/2011/408, annex), and in particular for the fifth and
final issue it raises for discussion concerning the need
to coordinate the other United Nations organs and
agencies working on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, including the Bureau for Crisis
Prevention and Recovery of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Post-Conflict and
Disaster Management Branch of the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Peacebuilding Commission. There must
be coordination among all these agencies in order to

 

counter the negative security dimensions of climate
change.

I should like to add my voice to those of the
representatives of Egypt, Argentina and Kuwait, who
spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Group of 77 and China, and the Group of Arab States,
respectively.

With regard to the subject under discussion, my
country has suffered a conflict in Darfur that is coming
to an end. I recall our previous statements to the
Council to the effect that drought and desertification in
that region are among the basic causes of that conflict,
and that they are the results of climate change. In 1985,
Darfur experienced severe desertification and drought,
which affected economic activity based on agriculture
and livestock. When the drought took hold, conflict
erupted that had nothing to do with the ethnicity of the
tribes involved, but was directly related to the
economic situation. Herdsmen encroached on
farmland, sparking the onset of conflict in Darfur.
There is a saying that the herdsman would sooner see
his son die before his eyes than his cow. We therefore
assert that the main cause of conflict in Darfur was
desertification and drought.

My second point is that if the international
community had helped the Sudan to address the basic
cause of conflict, which is lack of economic
development in the face of drought and desertification,
it would not have needed to spend all that money on
peacekeeping operations in Darfur. The money spent
every year on peacekeeping there amounts to some
$3 billion. Would it not have been preferable to spend
that money to address the fundamental problems
caused by desertification and drought in the region?
Had we done so, we could have ended the conflict.

Other, political causes followed desertification
and drought which some parties used to exploit the
situation in Darfur. In the Doha negotiations, the
Sudan, with the assistance of the United Nations and
the African Union, has drawn up a basic document that
has been accepted by all stakeholders in Darfur. We
hope that the document will put a rapid end to the
conflict in Darfur. At the same time, we have agreed to
establish a bank capitalized by the sisterly country of
Qatar. From this Chamber, we would like to thank
Qatar for addressing the root causes of conflict: the
lack of economic development, drought and
desertification.

 

In conclusion, if we, in all the agencies of the
United Nations, focus on the root causes of conflict, we
could achieve peace and security. If we delay, we will
be helpless to prevent conflict, and will have to spend
much money on peacekeeping operations that do not
address its root causes.

