Mr. Zebari (Iraq): I thank the members of the
Security Council for allowing me the privilege of
addressing the Council today. In accordance with
Security Council resolution 1637 (2005), and pursuant
to Iraq's request in a letter to the Security Council
dated 27 October 2005 (S/2005/687, annex), the
mandate of the Multinational Force in Iraq is now due
for review.

Over the previous 12 months, despite formidable
challenges, the people of Iraq have realized historic
progress towards a pluralistic, federal and united
democracy. The Transitional National Assembly
drafted a new permanent constitution, which was
successfully ratified through public referendum on
15 October 2005. In December, over 70 per cent of the
eligible electorate voted for Iraq's first constitutional
Government, in the third internationally approved
election of 2005. This inspiring exercise of our
democratic rights is a credit to the determination and
courage of the Iraqi people to secure their future and
their country.

Our first permanent national unity Government
has now assumed office for a four-year term, in
accordance with the constitution, and is held
accountable by the 275 men and women of the freely
elected Council of Representatives. These
achievements mark the completion of our timely

compliance with our obligations under the political
process mandated in Iraq's transitional administrative
law and endorsed in resolution 1546 (2004).

However, as we have enjoyed this political
progress, a difficult and destructive security situation
persists. We continue to fight an insurgency, crime,
incidents of sectarian violence and foreign terrorists
trying to incite civil war and prevent the consolidation
of our democratic gains. The continued cooperation
between Iraqi forces and the Multinational Force
remains necessary for our security and critical to
attaining the goal of self-sufficiency in defending our
country and securing peace.

In reference to my letter to the President of the
Security Council of 9 June (S/2006/377, annex), the
Government of Iraq therefore requests, and welcomes,
the continued presence of the Multinational Force in
our country. We thank those forces, and the coalition
countries, for their vital contribution and commitment
to the people of Iraq.

With the formation of a new full-term
Government, and the recent elimination of the most
notorious terrorist, Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, who was
responsible for the bombing of the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad in August 2003, we sense a
great momentum among the Iraqi people and a very
real chance to turn our situation around.

But we remain realistic. We do not underestimate
the challenge of getting a tight grip on the insurgency
and uniting the country behind the new Government.
Our agenda includes security as our immediate priority
and the critical prerequisite to progress on national
reconciliation, Government performance and economic
development. In cooperation with the MNF, NATO
training missions and protection forces of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), we are
building up the capacity, training, professionalism and
equipment of Iraqi forces. We share the same end goal
as our coalition allies: for our forces to reach self-
sufficiency as soon as possible so that the multinational
troops can return home with our great gratitude.

Volunteer recruits represent a cross-section of
Iraqi society under the banner of Iraqi national identity.
The Government of Iraq, as the sole legitimate
administrator of armed forces, will activate its policy
to demobilize militia members and integrate them into
society.

Our forces are gradually assuming responsibility
for significant areas of the country and are leading
independent offensive operations with visible success.
As the ongoing process of handing over security
responsibilities from the MNF to Iraqi forces
continues, more provinces will come under our control.
Eliminating Zarqawi was a major blow to the Al-Qaida
terrorist network and a victory for the MNF and the
Iraqi forces and people, and for our intelligence
gathering operations, a key weapon in the fight against
terror networks and insurgency. As I speak today, a
large security operation is under way in Baghdad,
conducted jointly by Iraqi forces and the Multinational
Force, to secure the political and economic heart of
Iraq. This security plan will be extended to the rest of
the country.

My Government understands that security
operations must go hand in hand with a series of
initiatives to promote national consensus, tolerance,
justice and respect for human rights. Already our
Government has, in a goodwill gesture of amnesty,
released hundreds of detainees and prisoners. We
continue to pursue political dialogue to broaden the
political process. Despite intimidation, Sunni leaders
joined us at the negotiating table. Last year, they
boycotted elections; today they are an essential part of
the national unity Government and hold top cabinet
positions.

Recently, Iraq and the Arab League jointly agreed
to hold a reconciliation conference in Baghdad in early
August. Under this umbrella, all those who believe in
the political process and who are ready to abandon
terrorism and violence as a means to an end will have
the opportunity to participate, along with other Arab
countries, a number of other friendly countries and the
United Nations.

Contrary to media portrayals and despite the
terrorist tactics, civil war is not taking place in Iraq.
However, there are increased incidents of sectarian
violence. But Iraqis have a long history of peaceful
coexistence. We have explicitly rejected attempts to
stoke sectarian strife by exercising remarkable unity
and restraint and by voting for a sovereign National
Unity Government. That Government is broadly
representative of, and is governing by the consent of,
Iraq's multiethnic religious and political society. It
assumes its legitimacy and authority from the
constitution, which itself is a product of an inclusive
process of consultation and compromise.

06-3890]

Our next political challenge is the review of the

constitution within agreed mechanisms stipulated in its

charter. Successfully identifying necessary revisions

and accommodating competing interests will further
strengthen national consensus.

For us to consolidate political stability we must
also expedite socio-economic development and
reconstruction. My Government is acting fast to restore
public confidence by giving high priority to the
provision of basic services and strengthening the
Commission for Public Integrity to eradicate
corruption and improve accountability. We are
undertaking broad ministerial reform, capacity-
building and modernizing of institutions within a core
framework of democracy, human rights and the rule of
law. At the same time, we plan to accelerate the pace of
reconstruction and lay the foundations of a sustainable
economy to generate employment, stimulate the private
sector and capitalize on Iraq's wealth of natural
resources. Whereas over the previous three years
development has been frustrated, mainly by lack of
security but also by transnational administration, we
can now benefit from continuity in long-term planning
in line with Iraq's national development strategy. As
the mandates of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI)
and of the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board are also due for review, the Government of Iraq
proposes to continue the present arrangements
according to resolution 1637 (2005). These bodies play
a crucial role in promoting transparency in the
disbursements of Iraq's resources for the benefit of the
Iraqi people.

We also note the support of UNAMI in the
constitutional process, humanitarian assistance, donor
coordination and electoral assistance. We ask that the
United Nations continue to offer its unique expertise
for the forthcoming provincial elections throughout
Iraq. We commend the work of the Special
Representative, Ambassador Ashraf Qazi, and welcome
UNAMI's proposal for the Baghdad peace initiative to
help bridge communal differences. We also note the
Secretary-General's concerns regarding human rights
in his quarterly report to the Security Council. While
the primary perpetrators of human rights abuses in Iraq
are the insurgents, terrorists and criminals, we as a
Government acknowledge our ongoing obligation to
uphold and protect human rights as enshrined in our
constitution. The Government of Iraq is committed to
meeting violations with justice and reaffirms its

06-3890]
commitment to establishing an independent human
rights commission in Iraq.

We continue to need the United Nations to
engage in Iraq to its maximum capacity. We call upon
Member States to step up the provision of funds and
operational support, and my Government pledges to
provide any assistance necessary to enhance the United
Nations mission. As security in Iraq improves, we
request that the United Nations reinforce its staff and
increase its role throughout the country. We must not
underestimate the positive impact of a sovereign,
united and stable Iraq at the strategic and geographical
heart of the Middle East. We have demonstrated that
our progress does not contradict the interests of our
neighbours. We continue to pursue regional
cooperation on economic exchanges, political dialogue
and border security in order to promote peaceful
coexistence with our neighbours. Furthermore, we
expect our neighbours to demonstrate genuine support
for the new Government and goodwill in securing
borders and preventing arms, foreign elements and
terrorists from crossing into Iraq to undermine the
stability of the new Government.

We believe that the formation of an international
contact group, involving Iraq's neighbours, the five
permanent members of the Council, the United Nations
and the Arab League, would be a fair and useful means
to build international support for regional security and
to enhance reconstruction plans for the country.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
point out that the time is now ripe for the Security
Council to review the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission mandate with
a view to terminating it, since the circumstances that
led to its creation no longer exist.

The Government of Iraq thanks the United
Nations for its expressed support as we begin our
challenging mandate. We ask that the international
community take this opportunity to revitalize its
assistance and support to Iraq and fulfil donor pledges
already made at Madrid, Amman and Tokyo so as to
help my Government to accomplish its responsibilities
to our people.
This is the beginning of a new chapter in Iraq's
transformation from dictatorship to a sovereign,
peaceful and prosperous federal democracy, as voted
for by the Iraqi people. My Government recognizes
that we have a critical window of opportunity to break
with the past. The future of the country is up to us, and
we are seizing the initiative. We have paid dearly -
along with the sacrifices of the sons and daughters of
our allies - and we will not let our losses be in vain.
The more help we receive now, the sooner we can
succeed in our common cause.
10

