Mr. Maruyama (Japan): On behalf of my
Government, I should like to express my deepest
appreciation for the expressions of sympathy and
condolence offered by you, Mr. President, the Council
members and other Member States to the people and
Government of Japan in connection with the recent
earthquake. I shall certainly convey those messages to my
Government.

At the outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. I am sure that under your able
guidance the Council will conduct its work most
effectively. Our thanks go also to Ambassador
Bakuramutsa of Rwanda for the skilful manner in which
he guided the work of the Council last December.

The "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace: Position
Paper of the Secretary-Genera " offers new suggestions

 

for enhancing United Nations peace-keeping and
peacemaking functions in the light of recent changes in the
international situation and the successes and failures of
recent peace-keeping efforts. It highlights certain areas
where unforeseen difficulties have arisen since June 1992,
when the Secretary-General's "An Agenda for Peace" was
issued. Japan appreciates the generally more realistic
approach it takes to the issue of peace and security,
building on past lessons and experiences. That this paper
was presented to us as we prepare for the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations makes it quite timely,
and we look forward to participating in the active
discussions that it will surely stimulate.

Permit me to offer Japan's comments on major points
contained in the "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace".

The Secretary-General indicates that, in addition to a
dramatic quantitative increase in United Nations activities
relating to the maintenance of peace and security, there
have been qualitative changes that are of even greater
significance. As the paper points out, so many of today's
conflicts occur within the boundaries of a State rather than
between States. The collapse of State institutions is a
common feature of such conflicts. The use of United
Nations forces to protect humanitarian operations is another
growing trend. Japan agrees with the Secretary-General in
his analysis and the importance he attaches to this trend.
Indeed, such qualitative changes must be taken into account
in the effort to devise more appropriate means of enhancing
international peace and security.

Among United Nations activities, those relating to
preventive diplomacy and peacemaking deserve to be given
greater priority. I note that an effort has been made to find
persons with the requisite diplomatic skills and experience
to serve as mediators, special representatives or special
envoys of the Secretary-General. That effort should be
reinforced, for example, through the preparation of a list of
the persons so identified. In cases where such persons lack
sufficient experience and understanding with respect to the
United Nations, it is important that training be provided for
them in order to ensure that they discharge their tasks as
effectively as possible.

We share with the Secretary-General the recognition
of the need to establish and dispatch small field missions to
engage in preventive diplomacy and peacemaking efforts in
a timely manner and for a sufficient period of time. In an
effort to conserve budgetary resources, cooperation with
regional organizations and the use of their skilled personnel
should be pursued and encouraged.

Japan is of the view that in cases where coercive
action is necessary, the mandate must clearly define the
action as exceptional and specify its duration, since a
coercive peace-keeping operation is likely to result in the
United Nations becoming a party to the conflict and thus
deviate from the principle of impartiality. We note with
appreciation that the Secretary-General takes a cautious
approach to peace enforcement.

As recent experience has demonstrated, adherence to
the traditional principles of peace-keeping - particularly
the consent of the conflicting parties, impartiality, the
non-use of force except in self-defence, and the
commitment by the parties to a cease-fire and peace
agreement - is essential to the success of any
peace-keeping operation. Japan is pleased to note the
similar analysis offered by the Secretary-General. At the
same time, comprehensive peace-keeping operations such
as the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia
(UNTAC) are relevant to today's world and will remain
a valid and effective approach. Furthermore, in order for
a peacekeeping operation to be truly successful it is
essential that it be integrated into an overall political
process from the beginning.

Whenever the Council decides to establish a new
peace-keeping operation, it is imperative that its mandate
be defined in detail and its time-frame clearly stipulated
in a so-called sunset clause. It is unacceptable and
financially irresponsible to prolong a peace-keeping
operation while its specific goals and timetable remain
vague.

Once a decision has been made to establish a
peace-keeping operation, it is essential that it be deployed
in a timely manner. Towards this end, possible personnel-
and equipment-contributors could be identified even
before the Council took a final decision. It is also crucial
that the personnel deployed be provided with the
necessary training. In particular, in the light of the
increasing role of the civilian component in recent
peace-keeping efforts, unified training programmes and
manuals for use by civilian personnel, such as civilian
police, as well as by military personnel are urgently
required.

With respect to the Secretary-General's idea of a
"rapid reaction force" Japan joins others in stressing the
importance of developing a level of preparedness for the
timely deployment of peace-keeping operations, and
commends the Secretary-General's initiative. On the other
hand, further clarification of the following points is

 

required: If it is expected that the force may be dispatched
to any region of conflict solely by a decision of the
Council, will there be any Member State willing to provide
troops for such a force? Does the anticipated effectiveness
of this force override considerations of the cost involved?

Clarification will also be needed as to how to avoid
the facile and unrestrained dispatch and deployment of
peace-keeping operations as a result of the materialization
of this idea. Concerning the concept of "a reserve stock of
standard peace-keeping equipment", it may be necessary to
give further thought as to the ability of each national
contingent to make full use of unfamiliar equipment, and as
to the maintenance of such equipment.

As described in the Secretary-General's paper, as the
peace-keeping stage of a United Nations effort comes to an
end it is important to arrange for the smooth transfer of
responsibility from the Council to the General Assembly or
to a small support group chaired by the Secretary-General
to promote peace-building. This will require greater
coordination between the two bodies. But it is also useful
to start discussing post-conflict peace-building and
reconstruction even before a conflict is settled, as this could
serve as an incentive for the parties to expedite an early
conclusion of the conflict. In Cambodia, for instance, Japan
took the initiative of calling for the convening of a
reconstruction conference before there was a cessation of
hostilities. This was a part of our efforts toward
post-conflict peacebuilding there, and contributed to the
eventual settlement of the conflict.

The Secretary-General does not discuss in detail the
issue of, in his words, "macro disarmament". My delegation
would like to stress, however, that 1995 is important as the
year in which the Conference on the review and extension
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) will be held. Let me simply reiterate here that Japan
supports the unlimited extension of the NPT in order to
enhance the stability of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Similarly, it is also important to promote nuclear
disarmament, and Japan hopes that further efforts in this
regard will be made by the nuclear-weapon States.

At the same time, the importance of an early
conclusion of the negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban
treaty cannot be overemphasized. With respect to what the
Secretary-General calls "micro-disarmament," as Foreign
Minister Kono stressed in his statement at the forty-ninth
session of the General Assembly the easy transfer of
conventional arms and their excessive accumulation are a
destabilizing factor in various regions of the world. It is
therefore an issue that demands the serious attention of
the international community. Moreover, my delegation
wishes to associate itself with the Secretary-General in
emphasizing the importance of regulating anti-personnel
mines and of strengthening the Register of Conventional
Arms, as well as of promoting regional disarmament.

In his paper, the Secretary-General addresses the
complicated issue of sanctions, and suggests that a
mechanism be established to improve their effectiveness
and reduce unintended collateral damage. This is certainly
a controversial and sensitive issue. While noting the
points made in the paper, we must not forget that
sanctions are one of the few effective instruments at our
disposal that can be used to convey the will and
determination of the international community without
resorting to the ultimate instrument, the use of force. It is
also important to keep in mind that the purpose of
sanctions is to modify the policy and behaviour of a party
that is threatening international peace and security, and
that the use of sanctions is clearly defined by the Charter
of the United Nations.

Having said this, I acknowledge that it may be
increasingly necessary to take into account the question of
the impact sanctions can have on the economies of
neighbouring countries in extending bilateral and
multilateral cooperation to those countries. Japan, for its
part, is ready to consider the impact of sanctions as it
formulates its aid policy. It is desirable that appropriate
humanitarian assistance activities are guaranteed even in
the target country. We would suggest that there may be
room for improvement in the actual practice of the
sanctions committees and humanitarian agencies in more
accurately assessing humanitarian needs and removing
various factors impeding the activities of the humanitarian
agencies in the target country.

Japan shares the View of the Secretary-General that
improved coordination with the United Nations system as
a whole is necessary.

In closing, my delegation wishes to stress that in
order to enhance the peace-keeping and peacemaking
functions of the United Nations in line with some of the
suggestions made by the Secretary-General, it is essential
that each Member State pay its assessed contributions in
full and on time. At the same time, we would urge the
Secretariat to strive to conduct its work more efficiently.
While we understand that new initiatives require a certain
amount of financial backing, we would encourage both
the Council and the Secretariat, with the cooperation of

 

Member States. to be brave enough to Cut financial
allocations where appropriate and necessary. We should not
even shy away from the difficult decision of bringing to an
end any United Nations activity that has largely achieved its
original objective.

The United Nations is faced with ever-increasing
challenges and expectations: its capacity and resources,

however, remain limited. This requires that we embark
upon a serious discussion as to how to establish priorities
among the many important issues which the United
Nations is called upon to address.

