Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): In response
to my Russian colleague's comments, I would like to
make a couple of points. First, I would like to address
his point about the legitimacy of President Yanukovych
and his point about the February 21 agreement, which
he has made several times.

To be clear, we commend the work done by France,
Germany and Poland to mediate and negotiate that
agreement, with Russia very much in observance. We
would have been prepared to support the completion of
that agreement. Under its terms, President Yanukovych
had 24 hours to sign the first piece of action pursued
in the Rada: the changing of the Constitution pursuant
to the 21 February agreement. Not only did President
Yanukovych not sign it but, as my Russian colleague
reminds us, he left the city. Indeed he fled the city. He
packed up himself and his family and he left the seat of
the presidency vacant for two days while his country
was in crisis. He also left vast evidence of corruption
and vast evidence of the amounts that he had stolen from
the Ukrainian people. In that context, with 371 votes,
the democratically elected Rada voted Yanukovych out
of office, with his own party turning against him. That
is the history.

With respect to the present, what we have heard
today - with the exception of one member of the
Security Council, namely, the Russian Federation - is
overwhelming support for the territorial integrity of
Ukraine and for peaceful dialogue. There are so many
options available to Russia to safeguard the rights of
ethnic Russians and to address the concerns that have
been raised: so many options short of military action.
Therefore, the very simple questions for Russia today
are the following. Why not support international
mediation? Why is that not part of their remarks today?
Why not support an observer mission? Why not engage
directly with the Ukrainian authorities who want to
resolve the crisis peacefully? Why not pull back their
forces instead of sending more? Why not?

When military intervention in the face of a crisis
like this is the first resort, it is hard to avoid concluding
that Russia does not want peace and does not want a
diplomatic solution. Why choose military action when
the consequences could be devastating? Only someone
who fears the truth would be fearful of monitors who
are deployed for the specific purpose of identifying and
reporting the truth. That is all.

