Mr. Kerry (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for this chance to address my
colleagues on the Security Council. I appreciate the
fact that Russia's presidency has chosen to focus on
this issue. I welcome the opportunity to talk about the
urgent challenge of countering terrorism in the Middle
East, North Africa and elsewhere.

This is a topic that the Council has explored many
times. Going back to the attacks of 11 September 2001,
and even prior to that, we have come together fairly
often to condemn terrorism and to take concerted action
to counter violent extremist organizations. Therefore,
this is not a debate about goals - I do not think. We all
oppose the aggressive ambitions of organizations such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
FAl-Qaida, as well as well as groups that imitate them
or are affiliated with them. We all oppose the atrocities
that they commit, and we all want to end the suffering
that they continue to inflict. There is no debate about
that. The question that we face is how one best does
that. There are basic principles that we believe should
guide our strategy.

First, in confronting terrorism, we have to take a
comprehensive approach. That was quite eloquently
spoken about by our Heads of State at the summit on
countering violent extremism that President Obama
hosted. There was a great deal of discussion. I thought
that there were some very articulate statements about
how one should approach the root causes. We have to
deny safehavens, disrupt the flow of foreign fighters,
block access to financing and expose the lies that
terrorist groups propagate. The latter is particularly
challenging in this world ofconstant media and non-stop
access, 24/7/365. We are living in a very different
world, and terrorists have learned how to exploit media
in all kinds of ways.

We also need to exert pressure in support of peace,
perhaps one of the most important components of our
responsibility, in places such as Libya, for instance,
where instability fuels the kind of chaos and fear in
which extremist organizations thrive. We see that now
with the presence of ISIL in Libya. Accordingly, that
is the fundamental strategy that we have laid out for
countering violent extremism. We have adopted that
strategy. We are strongly engaged in implementing it.
We welcome the large number of nations that have joined
as international actors in thecounter-ISIL coalition, the
Global Counterterrorism Forum and other regional
organizations. But, obviously, more needs to be done.

We have been able to counter some foreign fighters
and keep them from travelling, but still too many of them
have been able to travel and reach their destinations. We
have been able to slow down and stop some elements of
the financing, but too much money is still able to reach
terrorist activities and actors. Our goal is to take urgent
actions against immediate threats, while also facing up
to longer-term measures that prevent the recruitment of
future generations of terrorists, improve governance and
enhance economic opportunities so that radicalization
is less likely. That is an enormous challenge for all of
us; we know it. There are countless countries in which
60 to 65 per cent of the population are under the age
of 30 or 25, and in other cases under the age of 18.
Unless they find opportunities and options, their minds
will be stolen and their opportunities will be robbed
forever by bad actors who grab them in that vacuum.
We also need to improve governance and enhance
economic opportunities so that radicalization is less
likely. Too many places still see too much corruption,
and corruption robs the populations of their due and
possibilities.

In each of those areas, we intend to work hard with
all members of the Security Council and with others not
present to improve our chance for success by working
with the concerned elements of civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, religious leaders and
the private sector. Meanwhile, we have to continue our
efforts to alleviate the immediate hardships that terrorist
are causing. While we have been pushing humanitarian
relief into areas, the international community absolutely
has to do more. We are staring at a humanitarian
catastrophe unfolding not in one or two places, but
simultaneously in multiple places. The humanitarian
disaster that we are witnessing, in and of itself, should
be enough reason to take on ISIL. Over the past several
days, that has been a major topic of our discussions
here. But it has to remain a core concern for all of us
in the weeks to come. Every Nation can do more. Both
resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) - everyone
around this table voted for them - clearly require
humanitarian access to besieged areas and specifically
call for an end to barrel bombs and the use of starvation
as a weapon of war.

I would now like to add a few thoughts specifically
pertaining to Syria, ISIL and Russia. The United States
supports any genuine effort to fight ISIL and Al-Qaida-
affiliated groups, especially the Al-Nusra Front. If
Russia's recent actions, and those now ongoing, reflect
a genuine commitment to defeat that organization, then
we are prepared to welcome those efforts and find a
way to de-conflict our operations, thereby multiplying
the military pressure on ISIL and affiliated groups.
But we must not and will not be confused in our fight
against ISIL with support for Al-Assad. Moreover, we
have also made clear that we would have grave concerns
should Russia strike areas where ISIL- and Al-Qaida-
affiliated targets are not operating. Strikes of that kind
would bring into question Russia's real intentions in
fighting ISIL or protecting the Al-Assad regime.

We have informed Russia that we are prepared to
hold these de-confliction talks as early as possible this
week. But let me be clear: the United States and the
coalition will continue our ongoing air operations, as
we have from the very beginning. We have conducted
a number of strikes against ISIL targets in Syria over
the past 24 hours, including just an hour ago, and these
strikes will continue.

Let me be clear: the coalition that we have built,
more than 60 countries strong, has been taking on ISIL
for more than a year by liberating Sinjar mountain,
liberating Kobani, liberating Tikrit, where now more
than 100,000 residents have been able to return to
their homes and resume their lives, defending Mosul
dam, defending Haditha, protecting Baghdad, rescuing
endangered minorities, killing ISIL leaders and
facilitators, and taking away the entire northern border
of Syria for ISIL east of the Euphrates River.

At the same time, we have mounted a comprehensive
campaign to cut terrorist financing, curb the recruitment
of foreign fighters and expose the lies that ISIL has
perpetrated. Today, even as we speak, south of Kirkuk,
Kurdish peshmerga are heroically liberating villages
from ISIL under the cover of coalition airstrikes. In
addition, we continue to admire the courage and the
resilience that has been demonstrated for four long years
of struggle by the legitimate opposition to Al-Assad.

Let me remind the Council that coalition air
operations are grounded in well-established military
procedures firmly based in international law and the
requests of neighbouring States for collective self-
defence under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
The foundation has not changed, and we will continue
our mission with the full sanction of international law.
Pursuant to these procedures in Syria over the past year,
the coalition has now conducted nearly 3,000 airstrikes
against ISIL targets, and we are now in position, with
France, Australia, Canada, Turkey and other coalition
partners joining the campaign, to dramatically
accelerate our efforts. That is what we will do.

Over the coming weeks, we will be continuing our
flights out of Incirlik base in Turkey to apply constant
pressure on strategic areas held by ISIL in north-
west Syria. We will also be sustaining our support to
anti-ISIL fighters in north-east Syria. These efforts
will put greater pressure on ISIL's operational areas,
and we will ensure, through precision airstrikes, that
ISIL leaders do not have any sanctuary anywhere on
the ground in Syria.

So ISIL will soon face increasing pressure from
multiple directions across the battlefield in Syria and
Iraq. But as we have said from the start, and as the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) codifies,
this fight cannot be won in the military sphere. It will
require a political solution to the crisis of Syria.

One thing is certain: the vast majority of States
represented around this table know that the ISIL forces
and ISIL itself cannot be defeated as long as Bashar
Al-Assad remains president of Syria. It cannot happen
by definition of the lines of this battle. It cannot happen
because of who has lined up with whom and because
of the nature of these protagonists. The reason for that
is defined in the beginning by how this fight itself
began. This fight began when young people, young
Syrians looking for a future, wanting nothing more
than opportunity in jobs and education, went out to
demonstrate for the future and to claim the aspirations
of young people, and Al-Assad sent his thugs out to
beat them up. The parents were outraged by the fact
that their children, demonstrating peacefully, had been
beaten up, and they went out with their kids, and they
were met with bullets. That is how this whole thing
began 4 people in a country looking for a future who
are instead met with repression, with torture, with
gassing, with barrel bombs. Al-Assad will never be
accepted by those whom he has harmed; it will never
be possible for him to become a legitimate leader in
future or to lead a reconciliation or unification of the
country. That cannot happen until he makes clear his
willingness to actually heal the nation, end the war and
decline to be part of the long-term future.

Today we must be focused on finding a solution
that will stop the killing and lay the groundwork for
a Government that the Syrian people themselves can
support. We know that the terrorists can neither unite
the country nor govern it. We know that Al-Assad can
neither unite the country nor govern it. Neither extreme
offers the solution that we need and want. What is more,
our ability to develop a credible international political
process would be a farce from the beginning, incredible
enough that it would not stop people from fighting,
if it were perceived as a way to extend or strengthen
Al-Assad's hold on power.

As President Obama said on Monday, the United
States is prepared to work with any nation, including
Russia and Iran, to resolve the conflict, but we must
recognize that there cannot be, after so much bloodshed,
so much carnage, a simple return to the prewar status
quo. My colleagues from the Government of Russia
have argued that we must support Al-Assad in order
to defeat ISIL. But the reality is that Al-Assad has
rarely chosen himself to fight ISIL. As the terrorists
made inroads throughout large swathes of Syria and
Iraq, raping, enslaving and murdering civilians along
the way, the Syrian regime did not try to stop them.
Instead, it focused all of its military power on moderate
opposition groups that were fighting for a voice in
Syria.

Make no mistake: the answer to the Syrian civil war
cannot be found in a military alliance with Al-Assad.
But I am convinced that it can be found through a
broadly supported diplomatic initiative aimed at a
negotiated political transition, a transition that has been
accepted by the Security Council and by participants
of the Permanent Five, consistent with the Geneva
communique, which would unite all Syrians who reject
dictatorship and terrorism and want to build a stable
and united society.

So, in conclusion, I call on all Governments
concerned, including Russia and Syria, to support a
United Nations initiative to broker a political transition.
Further delay is unconscionable. The opportunity is
before us, and if we can succeed in marginalizing the
terrorists in Syria and in bringing the country together,
we can all of us together do exactly what this was set
up to do - the Security Council and this institution.
We could strike a huge blow against violent extremism,
not only in Syria but also in Iraq, across the Middle
East and around the world. Nothing would be more in
keeping with the high purpose for which the Council
was created 70 years ago, and nothing would better
serve the interests of the people that all of us represent.
I hope that we can achieve that.

