Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French):
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which is aimed at the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and the maintenance of
international peace and security, is more important
today than ever before. The establishment of the
African Union fully conforms with the objective of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. It signals a
new commitment by the heads of State and
Government of the continent to assume a greater role
in the international community's efforts to find
appropriate solutions for the many conflicts afflicting
several African countries at a time when Africa needs
all its resources to promote sustainable development.

The African Union's mandate in the area of
international peace and security fits perfectly with the
spirit and the letter of the Charter, which in paragraph
2 of Article 52 states that Member States entering into
arrangements or constituting agencies shall make every
effort to achieve pacific settlement of local disputes
before referring them to the Security Council.

The creation of the Peace and Security Council
and the decision to establish an African rapid reaction
stand-by force and an early-warning system have
created a new structural dynamic, making the African
Union a partner of the United Nations in resolving the
problems faced by Africa in matters of international
peace and security. In light of the fact that there are a
number of African issues before the Security Council,
the appearance of a new actor on the African continent
as effective as the African Union constitutes an
important asset, of which the Council should fully take
advantage to advance peace processes in Africa.

In the draft presidential statement on the
Council's institutional relationship with the African
Union, the Council takes that situation into account and
draws the correct conclusions. It is completely right
that the Council should reinforce cooperation with the
African Union in order to optimize interventions on the
ground by means of efforts to rapidly counter the new
threats to peace and security through rapid responses to
crisis situations, as was the case in Darfur.

Darfur has demonstrated that peacekeeping
operations are a particularly complex and burdensome
undertaking for the African Union and should receive
logistic and financial support. That is why we believe
that Darfur - which has been for the African Union a
first test case for large-scale operations - provides an
opportunity to help the African Union to develop a
critical mass of technical and logistic capacities,
including with respect to military planning.

The draft presidential statement stresses the need
for the United Nations and the African Union to find
new ways to strengthen cooperation. We therefore
urgently call on the international community to
contribute to strengthening the operational and
management capacities of the African Union in the
areas of conflict prevention and peacekeeping. We
invite the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
President of the African Union Commission, to explore
new ways of cooperation with the African Union,
taking into account the broadest mandate and the new
organs of the African Union.

