Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Allow me to begin by commending the energy
and effectiveness with which you, Mr. President, have
led our work throughout this month, which has been a
particularly testing and difficult month. Thanks to your
skill, your consummate art of contact and your great
sense of moderation, you have been able to lay the
foundation for harmonious discussion in the Council.
We are grateful for this, and we congratulate you.

We welcome the presence and participation at this
meeting of the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Economic
and Social Council. We thank them for their important
statements.

In the course of your presidency, Sir, the Security
Council has had to consider a wide range of situations
in which peace was in peril either because of the threat

of breakdown or because it was still fragile. I am
thinking of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Iraq, to mention only some. It is natural
that the last meeting of the Council under your
presidency is devoted to the important topic of the role
of the United Nations in post-conflict situations.

We are all aware that the nature of war, beyond
the loss of human life, is to destroy the socio-economic
and political infrastructure of the countries affected.
Therefore, the first task - I was going to say the sole
task - in the post-conflict period is to build and
rebuild. Life must be rebuilt, first by giving the
afflicted population a renewed taste and desire for life
by restoring their dignity as autonomous human beings
and as masters of their own destiny, as the Secretary-
General has just recalled. Rebuilding life also means
giving countries structures and institutions that will
enable people to develop and to live a different kind of
life.

Over time, the United Nations has acquired
unique experience in this area and in recent years has
considerably expanded its capacities. The integrated
and multisectoral approach taken by the Organization,
as well as the valuable support of its partners, today
enable it to achieve ever greater success in peace-
building and reconstruction operations on all
continents.

Africa requires particular attention here. The
extreme poverty of its population, the major
pandemics, the fragile nature of State structures and the
covetous ambitions of external parties render the
conflicts even more complicated and disastrous. If we
are not careful, conflicts are likely to lead to further
conflicts.

In that regard, the efforts of the United Nations
should as a matter of priority focus on financing, with
the support of funds and donors for the coordination of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, holding and monitoring elections,
rebuilding State structures, promoting confidence-
building measures, human rights for men, women and
children, and economic recovery. In Mozambique,
Sierra Leone and Angola, the application of that
approach, in everyone's opinion, has achieved
considerable success, and we welcome that.

We note with great satisfaction last year's
creation in the Security Council of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa and, within the Economic and Social Council,
the establishment of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
African Countries Emerging from Conflicts. The close
cooperation between these two entities in the case of
Guinea-Bissau at the start of this year made it possible
to carry out a simultaneous assessment of that
country's socio-economic and security problems. That
assessment will make it possible to address the overall
situation in the country in a comprehensive and
consistent fashion and will likely make it possible to
eliminate the risk of a resurgence of conflict.

We believe that it is right for the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council to intensify this
cooperation and to extend it to other, similar situations.
In Somalia, where hostilities have been going on for
more than a decade, the Secretary-General is working
to set up a programme of preparatory activities for
peace-building and recovery. That anticipatory and
progressive approach could equally be applied to
situations in which the crises tend to be endlessly
protracted, such as in Central Africa.

Moreover, we believe that the United Nations
should strengthen its role in the implementation and
follow-up of measures taken to restore and strengthen
peace by its organs, in particular the Security Council
and the International Court of Justice.

In this regard, the support given by the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea for the
implementation of the decision take on 13 April 2003
by the Commission charged with demarcating the
boundary between the two countries is a good example,
which should be emulated in similar cases.

However, the major challenge for the United
Nations remains mobilizing funding for peace-building
and reconstruction efforts in countries that are
weakened by years of war and unable to meet the
customary conditions set out by international donors.
The United Nations should convince such donors to
institute innovative methods and more flexible
conditions.

In this connection, I would like to recall the
commitment undertaken by heads of State or
Government at the Millennium Summit, as set out in
the Millennium Declaration,

"To make the United Nations more effective in
maintaining peace and security by giving it the
resources and tools it needs for conflict
prevention, peaceful resolution of disputes,
peacekeeping, post-conflict peace-building and
reconstruction". (General Assembly resolution 55/2, para. 9)

All in all, the United Nations plays a vital,
positive and effective role in post-conflict situations.
However, given recent instructive events, the
international community should reflect further on the
role of the United Nations in certain specific post-
conflict situations. In that regard, Cameroon endorses
the Secretary-General's appeal to the Security Council
to take the opportunity to set aside the differences of
the past and unite around shared principles and actions
that are to the benefit of the Iraqis, who now need to
take charge of their own destiny.

