Mr. Feith: Let me first mention the overall
context in which the European Union wishes to operate
in the stabilization processes: the European security
strategy. That strategy was born when Europeans
acknowledged that we are more capable and more
effective when we have a common perception of the
threats and risks and of how to deal with them. That is
true not only for Europe, but also for the international
community as a whole. Threats and risks are never
more dangerous than when the international
community is divided.

Europe's security strategy rests mainly on two
pillars: preventive engagement and effective
multilateralism.

Let me start with preventive engagement, which
is at the heart of our approach. Today's threats are
dynamic: left alone, they will grow. We need to be able
to act at the first signs of trouble. That requires a
strategic culture that fosters early, rapid and, when
necessary, robust intervention. It is to be hoped that we
have learned lessons from the past, when inaction bred
further violence.

The EU wants to become more active and more
effective in conflict prevention. That is why Javier
Solana is now in the Middle East to provide a European
contribution, to facilitate and to help contain the
violence and tensions that have once again unfolded as
part of the Palestinian conflict.
Permit me to recall the efforts of your own
country, Mr. President, as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in the person of Foreign Minister Geoana, in
preventive engagement, together with NATO and the
European Union, in the Balkans in 2001. The European
Union is strongly committed to enhancing dialogue
with all actors involved in conflict prevention through
more structured dialogue and closer joint work in
addressing security challenges.

The second pillar on which our security strategy
rests is effective multilateralism. Europe's security will
depend more - not less - on an effective multilateral
system, on a rule-based international order and on
well-functioning international institutions. Those are
the refuge not of the weak, but of the wise. Acting
collectively before crises erupt, supporting the central
role of the Security Council and defending and
developing international law are principles that from
the outset have underpinned the Union's external
actions and that are now more formally laid down in
the European Security Strategy.

The Strategy also reflects a clear European
consensus that military power is to be seen as one
means among others, to be used on the international
scene: neither the only one nor the first. As the
document says, "none of the new threats is purely
military; nor can any be tackled by purely military
means". Accordingly, the Union is uniquely
encompassing a complete set of instruments for
international crisis management. The political solution
of regional crises, development aid and support for
democratic forces in all crises form part of the wide
range of instruments that, together with the means for
applying coercion by force, are available. And civil
instruments such as police and expertise in the rule of
law, civil administration and civil protection are key
elements in the post-conflict stabilization phase.

I should now like to refer briefly to the current
operational engagement of the European Union in
stabilization processes. We are currently running three
operations - all of them civilian - in the Balkans and
in Georgia, and we are now well advanced in preparing
to take over responsibilities for implementing the
Dayton provisions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
recently recognized by the Council in resolution 1551
(2004).

Last year, at the request of the Secretary-General,
we conducted an autonomous military operation called
Operation Artemis, intervening in a timely manner in
the area of Bunia in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The lessons we drew from that operation are
the following. We need the political will and the
flexible mechanisms to reach decisions quickly; we
need to be prepared to use diplomatic instruments in
support of military action; we should use the
Community Rapid Reaction Mechanism for immediate
relief of the population and for rehabilitation; and we
must use civilian crisis-management instruments to
help train and equip the local police. But, above all, we
saw the need to further develop our arrangements for
early warning and cooperation in peacekeeping with
the United Nations, including the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

But we also concluded that the Union is not to
intervene in every potential crisis area. For example,
work is in hand with a view to developing a coherent
and comprehensive EU response to peace-building in
Africa and support for the development of African
capabilities in order to better allow the African Union
and subregional organizations to deal with conflict on
the continent. Central to that is the principle of African
ownership. In that context, I should mention the
support that the EU, together with the United States,
provides to the African Union-led ceasefire monitoring
mission in Darfur.

I should now like to say a few words on our
cooperation with the United Nations. Cooperation with
the United Nations is essential, and we are developing
a structured dialogue based on the direct exchange of
information and frequent contacts at the political and
working levels. Building on the Joint Declaration on
United Nations-EU cooperation In Crisis Management,
of 24 September 2003, four priority areas have been
identified: planning, lessons learned, training and
exercises, and communication.

The conceptual thinking behind our cooperation
with the United Nations is also evolving. The European
Council recently endorsed proposals for broadening EU
support for the United Nations in conducting crisis
management operations. Arrangements - which have
been the subject of consultation with DPKO - include
the availability of rapid-response battle group units and
concepts such as the EU establishing a clearing house
mechanism to assist force generation or bridging
operations in support of United Nations operations.
Similarly, we are developing our thinking with regard
to supporting the United Nations with rapidly
deployable civilian instruments.

In conclusion, the Council may ask: will these
arrangements come at the expense of traditional
contributions by European Union member States to
United Nations-led operations? Let me recall the long-
standing and distinguished record of European service
under United Nations command and the firm intention
to continue that tradition. But, with continuing low and
stagnant defence budgets, the number of deployable,
usable military forces and police ready for crisis-
management duties is still too limited given the
steadily increasing demand. That is a problem that all
of us - the United Nations and organizations
supporting the United Nations in crisis management -
are grappling with. However, if the political will exists,
they can be overcome.

