Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
debate and for having circulated an informative
concept paper (S/2008/29l, annex).

More than 11 years have passed since the
Guatemalan peace accords were signed. Notable
progress has been achieved, to such an extent that it is
a matter of pride for us that the standing item on the
situation in Central America no longer appears on the
agenda of the General Assembly. However, some
effects of the conflict persist to the present day and, at
any rate, the peace process in Guatemala offers some
lessons that, in our opinion, can enrich today's debate.
I would like to refer very briefly to four characteristics
of our peace process, which, in turn, support four
conclusions. These address some of the questions
posed in the concept paper.

First, it was the national stakeholders, in
particular the Government and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca, that led the
peace process. The United Nations and the Group of
Friends of the process were invited by both sides to
support the negotiations and, subsequently, the
implementation of the peace agreement. At no time did
Guatemalans in general perceive external actors as
intrusive elements. Rather, they were present at the
express request of the parties. I mention this only
because the concept paper circulated today to orient
our debate emphasizes the role of the United Nations in
post-conflict situations. But before the Organization
gets involved, however obvious this may seem, it is
indispensable for national stakeholders to bear the
primary responsibility for peacebuilding. That
underlines the role that the United Nations can play in
domestic capacity-building.

Secondly, the United Nations has played a
uniquely important role in Guatemala, the scope of
which has changed over time. The Organization was
perceived as an objective facilitator without an agenda
of its own. First, it supported the negotiations between
the parties. Then it played a verification role with
respect to human rights. In 1997, that verification role
was augmented to cover all aspects of the peace
accords. In 2004, as proof of the progress achieved, the
United Nations Verification Mission left Guatemala.
But the United Nations presence has continued and is
now manifested through an office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is also interesting to note that, except for a
brief Security Council mandate to send a contingent of
military observers to Guatemala for three months, the
United Nations presence was always under the
authority of the General Assembly.

Thirdly, during the existence of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala, the
United Nations had two presences in Guatemala: the
director of the Verification Mission and the Resident
Coordinator of the United Nations system. While that
situation at times led to overlap and a certain amount
of tension, it did not in general impede an acceptable
level of coherence in the Organization's activities in
Guatemala. That was due to two elements. On the one
hand, it was the Government that set the priorities and
guidelines for action for such activities, and on the
other hand, the two heads of mission made deliberate
efforts to act in a coordinated manner. In that respect,
although the recommendation contained in the concept
paper prepared by the United Kingdom on placing all
United Nations activities under the responsibility of a
single person is noteworthy, our experience also
suggests that alternative pragmatic solutions that can
be acceptable from the point of view of coherency.

Finally, I mentioned at the outset that some
effects of the conflict persist, which is another way of
saying that the phase of peacebuilding and
reconciliation can be protracted. That is especially true
when a change of attitude is needed so that a culture of
tolerance and dialogue can blossom where it did not
exist before.

The concept paper to which I have referred
several times correctly emphasizes the near term, but
our experience indicates that we must persist for a very
long time if we wish the rule of law and democratic
institutions to take root. It is for that reason, and to
combat the important islands of impunity that still
persist in my country, that last year Guatemala again
partnered with the United Nations in a creative
exercise to strengthen penal prosecution through the
creation of the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala.

Those are the points we wished to bring to the
attention of this Chamber.
