Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Le Roy for his comprehensive briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 127)
highlights some important areas of progress in
international and Afghan efforts over the past three
months, but it also recognizes that much more remains
to be achieved with the proper management of the
important events that will take place in the next few
months.

We strongly support the overall effort made
during the reporting period to improve governance, the
rule of law, the fight against corruption and impunity,
and respect for human rights in Afghanistan. Building
strong institutions remains critical to that effort, and it
is the responsibility of the new Afghan Government to
demonstrate leadership on these national priorities.

Significant reforms to the electoral system are
necessary if future elections are to be more transparent
and accountable. In this regard, the postponement of
the parliamentary elections to 18 September offers a
window of opportunity for electoral reform that will
further contribute to the consolidation of democracy in
Afghanistan.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains of
major concern to the international community. We note
with great concern that the situation worsened during
the reporting period as a result of a combination of
factors. We are encouraged, however, by the efforts to
reinforce security arrangements in the main cities, as
well as by ongoing security operations that have
resulted in a significant decrease in suicide attacks.

Of additional concern beyond the loss of life and
serious injuries is the mine contamination that has
hampered livelihood activities, including access to
agricultural land, water, health care and education.
While we note the achievements to date in the
implementation of the mine-action programme, we
encourage the Government, with the support of the
international community, to increase resources for
addressing the impact on the population of mines and
explosive remnants of war. We urge the early
completion of the development of the National
Security Strategy, followed by its immediate
implementation, in line with the objective of
transferring security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces within five years.

We recognize that the primary responsibility for
the development of the country lies with the Afghan
Government and the people themselves, but we call on
the international community to continue to promote
and strengthen Afghan ownership by increasing efforts
to enhance the Afghans' capacity to take the lead on
key priorities that are critical in moving the country
forward. We agree with the Secretary-General that that
requires a good balance between military and civilian
efforts. Increased efforts must be made to establish a
reinforced and dedicated civilian coordination structure
that ensures strong Afghan ownership and the
involvement of all major stakeholders in Afghanistan.

We welcome the continued commitment of the
international community to supporting the stability and
development of Afghanistan, in particular the London
Conference communique, which set a clear agenda and
good priorities for the way forward on Afghanistan.
The consensus generated on Afghan-led reconciliation
and reintegration is very significant and is also critical
to sustainable peace in Afghanistan and the entire
region.

Stability, security and development in
Afghanistan are closely linked to the overall situation
in the region. A coordinated approach at the regional
level and enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours are essential in dealing with the
common challenges that cut across national borders,
while they also generate momentum for economic
growth.

The fight against insurgency, and the trade in
narcotics in particular, can be greatly boosted by joint
efforts at the regional level. We take note of the recent
progress in addressing opium production, but we
remain concerned at the serious harm that opium
cultivation, production and trafficking continue to
cause to the security, development and governance of
Afghanistan, as well as the region and internationally.
We call on the Afghan Government to accelerate, with
the assistance of the international community, the
implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy.

We note with appreciation the ongoing efforts by
the Secretary-General, his newly appointed Special
Representative for Afghanistan and, in particular, the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission to
Afghanistan (UNAMA), who are serving in very
difficult conditions to lead the efforts of the
international community. We therefore support the
Secretary-General's call for the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate for an additional period of 12 months.

As the Secretary-General has noted, the next few
months will be complex and very critical for
Afghanistan's future stability and progress. The
positive momentum that has emerged in spite of the
difficult security situation must be maintained. The
increased support of the international community is
essential to maintain that momentum.

