Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is a pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your initiative of resuming the Council's discussion of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This is
undoubtedly one of the most important issues before
us, as Ambassador Levitte said in his statement and as
we see from the statistics he provided. This issue is
intimately bound up with the question of international
humanitarian law in armed conflicts. I greatly
appreciate the aide-memoire annexed to the draft
presidential statement; it is truly a road map for our
future work.

I would also like to join those who preceded me
in thanking Mr. Oshima, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing to the
Council this morning. It demonstrated once again that
he possesses true humanitarian spirit in his work of
coordination and in organizing round tables on this
issue. Last year, I had the honour of being in the
Economic and Social Council when he discussed
humanitarian issues.

What distinguishes today's discussion is that it
complements previous debates in the Council, now that
the Council has decided to focus on the question of
protecting civilians in armed conflicts as an early
warning element of the maintenance of international
peace and security. We must recall that wars have taken
a high toll of civilian victims - approximately 5
million during the past decade. As Ambassador Levitte
said, civilians now make up 95 per cent of the victims
of armed conflict.

The Secretary-General has submitted numerous
reports providing information on the victims of armed
conflicts and on grave violations of human rights. The
Council bears a special responsibility to encourage
Member States to fulfil their obligations with respect to
the protection of civilians. Ways must be found to
improve cooperation among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, each according to its mandate. We must also
work for coordination among the various agencies and
partners of the United Nations to ensure the necessary
effectiveness through a comprehensive methodology.

More than half a century has passed since the
adoption of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Even though the majority of States have ratified the
Convention, its provisions remain largely
unimplemented in armed conflicts. The international
community must therefore accelerate implementation
of international instruments in a serious manner, to
provide the civil and legal protection demanded by
international humanitarian law.

We have carefully listened to the statements made
in this meeting. They primarily expressed the
international community's concern for protecting
civilians in armed conflict and for ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian law. These statements
have been impassioned calls to put an end to the
hysteria the world has witnessed during the past few
months and years. In these many conflicts, particularly
those in Africa, Central Europe, the Middle East and
Afghanistan, millions of civilians have been killed
without justification. The world has been thoroughly
confounded. However, too often, the Council's
repeated appeals have not gone beyond the walls of this
Chamber. Even worse, they have not prevented
numerous instances of carnage in full view of the
world.

That in no way means that we are blaming any
party. It is only an attempt to spur our collective efforts
so that we can address and resolve the essential
problem. The positive effect of preventing the death of
one single civilian in an armed conflict would
undoubtedly exceed that of thousands of words,
statements and resolutions.

Let us be more frank. Let us ask some questions
that shed light on this question. As a practical example
of what is happening in the Middle East, do you not see
as I do, Sir, the gravity of what is occurring in the
occupied Palestinian territories and all the other
occupied Arab territories? The Palestinian people is
suffering, as Mr. Oshima stated in his intervention.
Have not the forces of Israeli occupation killed more
than 1,000 Palestinian civilians in the past few months
alone? What did we, the Security Council, do to stop
the advance of the Israeli tanks into Palestinian refugee
camps, where they crushed the bones of scores of
Palestinians? Even after yesterday's adoption of
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), the Israeli
Prime Minister ordered the tanks to reoccupy
Ramallah, where the headquarters of Chairman Arafat
are located. Did not Israeli forces mutilate the bodies
of those killed in the conflict? Were their bodies not
thrown in the alleys? Were not Red Cross and Red
Crescent ambulances prevented from transporting
injured Palestinians, including many pregnant women,
many of whom died at the checkpoints set up by the
Israeli army? Did they not prevent many women in
labour from reaching hospitals? Many of them gave
birth at those checkpoints. Are they not human beings?
Does international humanitarian law no longer apply
when the subject is Palestinian citizens and Arabs who
are defending on their own land their right to life,
liberty and dignity? Palestinian civilians are
unjustifiably being killed at the very moment when the
Council is discussing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Why does the Council not send a letter
to the occupying force, telling Israel to stop the killing
and destruction, to put an end to the carnage and to
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories, as
called for in the relevant Security Council resolutions?

The Syrian Arab Republic supports safe and
unimpeded access to civilian populations in need of
assistance. However, it is necessary to stress the need
for the organizations providing international assistance
to be unbiased and objective. We would like to
congratulate the International Organization of the Red
Cross and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which are
making every effort to meet that goal.

We must commit ourselves to the Charter and to
other international instruments, including General
Assembly resolution 46/182, in a way that
demonstrates respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, their political independence and
their national laws. Such instruments should not be
used for political purposes.

Syria supports the bringing to trial of those who
commit the crime of forcibly transferring peoples under
occupation from their land and replacing them with
others, which is a grave violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. People - including those under foreign
occupation - particularly civilians suffering from the
scourge of war and armed conflict attach great
importance to our continued deliberations in this
respect and to our determination to ensure the
implementation of agreements, recommendations and
international instruments to protect them and to ensure
that conditions are in place to enable them to live a
dignified life until such a time as their suffering can be
ended. However, sincere political will is essential to
ensure respect for these international laws, resolutions
and instruments, in particular the principles of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which is applicable to the
protection of civilians under occupation. It is both
important and necessary for us to stress this fact in
Security Council resolutions that relate to armed
conflict in all parts of the world. How can the Council
fail to stress the importance of the implementation of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War?

The aide-memoire annexed to the draft
presidential statement refers to 30 resolutions and six
presidential statements relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security and the protection of
civilians, including women and children, and others in
armed conflict. But what about the practical
implementation of those resolutions and presidential
statements? Hence my comment that our appeals are
confined merely to this Chamber.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
Governments of Norway and of Canada for their efforts
to sensitize public opinion to the importance of the
protection of civilians in time of war. I would also like
to pay tribute to you personally, Mr. President, and to
the other members of your delegation for the
humanitarian qualities you demonstrated in preparing
so well for our discussion of this matter.

