I would like to thank the South African presidency for arranging this important discussion today. I would also like to thank President Yusuf for his enlightening briefing. Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations makes clear that the first purpose of the Organization is the maintenance of international peace and security. And it further provides that this purpose is to be achieved through both the Organization's system of collective security and the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the principles of justice and international law. The International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, has a key role in the peaceful settlement of disputes between States. The basis of the Court's jurisdiction in contentious cases is the consent of the parties. The new cases initiated by States before the Court in recent years underline both the confidence that States have in the Court as a forum for dispute resolution and support for the Court as the venue in which the legal aspects of difficult political issues can be adjudicated. The range of current cases also illustrates that the International Court of Justice is truly a world court dealing with a diverse geographical spread of cases and with a wide variety of subjects, including maritime disputes, diplomatic and consular matters, interpretation and application of international treaties and environmental protection. Several of the cases currently on the Court's docket have an impact on issues of peace and security and underscore the importance of the Court's role in assisting States in resolving their disputes peacefully, in accordance with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter, potentially avoiding altogether the need for the Security Council to become engaged. However, the rule of law at the international level and the role played by the Court would be further enhanced if more States were to accept its compulsory jurisdiction. The United Kingdom continues to be one of the Court's strongest supporters. We have accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court and its predecessor, the Permanent Court of International Justice, since 1929. We continue to hope that more States will accept the Court's jurisdiction as compulsory, further enhancing the Court's standing and effectiveness. The United Kingdom welcomes the annual closed meeting between the Security Council and the Court, held only six weeks ago, as a forum for discussion and an example of the cooperation between the Council and the Court. We look forward to further exchanges.
