The Secretary-General: Mr. Prime Minister, it is
a great pleasure to welcome you to the United Nations.
As this is your first visit to the United Nations in your
capacity as Prime Minister of Lebanon, I wish you
great success and hope for peace and stability under
your leadership. I also welcome Parliamentary Under-
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. Alistair Burt, to
the Security Council.

I thank you, Sir, for using Lebanon's presidency
of the Security Council to have this discussion on
intercultural dialogue. This is an important topic for
Lebanon and for all Member States. It is especially
relevant now on the eve of the third Forum of the
Alliance of Civilizations, which will begin Friday in
Rio de Janeiro and to which I will travel directly from
this meeting. I once again salute the leadership of the
original sponsors of the Alliance, Turkey and Spain,
and thank the Government of Brazil for hosting the
meeting.

Support for the Alliance keeps growing. We just
welcomed the one-hundredth member, the United
States. I hope that the Alliance's membership and work
will expand further still. It is the right initiative at the
right time. Our world is changing rapidly, and it is
changing in unpredictable ways. We are growing more
connected through migration, trade and technology, yet
in some ways we are also moving further apart. Not
only are countries coming into more frequent contact
with each other, but many are themselves becoming
more multicultural and diverse.
To many, this enrichment is a matter of
celebration; yet to others, it can be confusing and
intimidating. Local challenges can easily spill over
national and regional borders. In the same way, local
solutions can be shared and inspire change elsewhere.
This underscores the need to build space for
cooperation and to strengthen mutual understanding
and respect. This should not be done as a feel-good
exercise, but because it is essential for achieving peace
and security in the broadest sense.

Dialogue can defuse tensions and keep situations
from escalating. It can promote reconciliation in the
aftermath of conflict. It can introduce moderate voices
into polarized debates. At a time when prejudice and
hatred are all too common, extremists seek new
recruits through incitement and identity-based appeals,
and politicians use divisiveness as a strategy to win
elections, dialogue can be an antidote. Dialogue is a
force for conflict prevention, management and
resolution. It can contribute to peacebuilding. It can
move us towards peaceful coexistence - the
fundamental human project.

But this work requires action on many levels.
There is a need to protect cultural diversity. That is a
basic human right, enshrined in many legally binding
instruments. Just five days ago, to mark the World Day
for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development,
seven human rights rapporteurs released a joint
statement calling on States to uphold their
responsibility under international law to create an
environment conducive to the enjoyment of cultural
rights, including the rights of ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities and indigenous peoples.

Education must also be a priority. It has been said
that knowledge is power. We need to strengthen
education systems so that young people can benefit
from cultural diversity and not be victimized by those
who exploit differences. Increased exposure to
information and communications technology makes
this more critical. We must also cast a wide net of
engagement. Solutions will require the active
partnership of local Governments, civil society, the
media, young leaders and many others. This is our
common responsibility.

The General Assembly proclaimed 2010 to be the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures.
Many summits and commendable efforts have likewise
sought to bridge the world's dividing lines. We all
10-37690
recall the General Assembly's high-level meeting on
the culture of peace two years ago, held at the initiative
of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia. We
all agree on the importance of intercultural dialogue
and shared values for peace and security.

The challenge now, for the Security Council in
particular, is to follow up on today's discussion by
incorporating intercultural dialogue more fully into its
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Many members of the Council have ample experience
in the problems that can ensue from cross-cultural
tensions and perceptions of injustice, but they are also
well versed in the benefits of dialogue and the great
strength to be found in diversity. I urge the members of
the Council to draw more on these experiences and
share the lessons they have learned. Intercultural
dialogue is an important tool in the diplomat's toolkit. I
urge Council members to make greater use of it.

I thank Prime Minister Hariri once again for
focusing our minds on strengthening this important
work.

