Mr. Fowler (Canada): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting in this format. We join others who
have already spoken in welcoming the Secretary-General's
appointment of his new Special Representative in Sierra
Leone, Mr. Adeniji, under whose direction we had the
privilege of working in Bangui. We also join others in
thanking Mr. Okelo for his efforts to restore peace in Sierra
Leone.

The first troops of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) arrived in Sierra Leone only two
weeks ago. We very much hope that the deployment of the
civilian component of UNAMSIL will keep pace with that
of the military contingent, for we believe this is vital in
order to ensure that the implementation of the rehabilitation
programme proceeds smoothly and rapidly.

We welcome the establishment of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) as a political party and expect Foday
Sankoh to participate fully and constructively in the
Government of National Unity. Mr. Sankoh should, we
believe, present early proposals for the operations of the
Commission for the Management of Strategic Resources,
National Reconstruction and Development, just as Johnny
Paul Koroma has done for the Commission for the
Consolidation of Peace.

Although progress has been made in the
implementation of the Lorne Agreement, we remain deeply
concerned at continuing evidence of the fragility of the
peace process in Sierra Leone. Clashes between former
elements of the RUF and of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC), continuing troop
movements and attacks on the personnel of the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) - all of these represent serious breaches of
the ceasefire agreement. This Organization, individually
and collectively, must continue to remind all former rebel
leaders of the importance of abiding by both the spirit and
the letter of the Lorne Agreement.

We are deeply concerned by attacks and harassment
by rebel elements directed at humanitarian personnel. The
kidnapping this week of two representatives of Medecins
sans Frontieres is a bitter reminder of the dangers
humanitarian workers still face in Sierra Leone. All
parties to the Lome accord are obliged to allow safe and
unhindered access to all humanitarian personnel. As a
result of prevailing insecurity, especially in the northern
and eastern sections of the country, the delivery of much-
needed humanitarian assistance remains extremely
difficult. Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma should take action
to ensure that their commitments to the relevant
provisions of the Lorne" accord are translated into effective
action. We expect that the deployment of UNAMSIL
ought to facilitate greater access for humanitarian
organizations and under safer conditions.

With reference to the safety of humanitarian
personnel, and of course in order to enhance the security
of the people of Sierra Leone and the prospect that they
might soon be allowed a fair measure of stability and to
resume their normal economic activity, I would ask
Mr. Miyet if he could let us know to what extent the
presence of anti-personnel landmines is hampering United
Nations and other humanitarian work in the country.

The deteriorating human rights situation in Sierra
Leone is indeed troubling. As just noted by Ambassadors
Van Walsum and Petrella, while Canada supports the
establishment of the Human Rights and Truth and
Reconciliation Commissions, would-be human rights
violators are warned that the amnesty provided for in the
Lome accord applies only to events which took place
prior to 7 July 1999. Those who violate humanitarian law
after that date should be brought to justice. The initiative
to study the nexus between the work of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and a possible international
inquiry into past human rights violations is, in this
context, most welcome.

Canada deplores the continued acts of violence and
intimidation perpetrated by rebel elements against the
civilian population. The deployment of UNAMSIL
elements to all areas of the country ought to provide
civilians with a measure of protection from these
continuing depredations. Rebel elements should be

 

reminded that, in addition to the important role played by
ECOMOG in ensuring the security of the population,
UNAMSIL also has a robust mandate to take necessary
action to protect civilians under immediate threat.

To date, the pace of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme has been disappointing, with
only 10 per cent of ex-combatants currently registered and
a few serviceable weapons collected. We are, however,
encouraged by the recent increase in the number of ex-
combatants entering the programme. Foday Sankoh and
Johnny Paul Koroma should take further action to
encourage their troops to participate fully in the process.

In conclusion, Canada hopes the international
community will be attentive to the Secretary-General's call
for further support.

