Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me add our
voice to those of others who have welcomed the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) back to the Security Council. I thank them for
their latest reports on the implementation of their
completion strategies. 1 want to extend a particular
welcome to Serge Brammertz, who is no stranger to the
Security Council but who is here for the first time in
his capacity as Prosecutor of the ICTY.

My Government recognizes the progress which
has been made over the past six months in completing
the caseload of the two Tribunals, and we greatly value
the commitment and hard work of all staff, led by the
Presidents and Prosecutors, who have joined us today,
in taking steps to expedite trials and appeals. I would
be grateful if they would pass on our thanks to the
teams who work with them.

Let me also urge both Tribunals to continue their
efforts to avoid further slippage in the completion
timetables. In that regard, we welcome the commitment
to identifying further reforms in working practices. It is
important that both Tribunals operate as efficiently as
possible.

In the case of the ICTR, the recent decision of
Trial Chamber III to reject the Prosecutor's request to
refer the Munyakazi case for trial in Rwanda may have
a significant impact on that Tribunal's ability to meet
its completion deadlines. We look forward to hearing,
over the coming months, how these issues are to be
addressed.

The United Kingdom has repeatedly made clear
through previous statements in the Security Council -
and I do so again today - that the capture and transfer
of the remaining ICTY and ICTR fugitive indictees
remains an urgent priority of the highest order. It is
unacceptable that so many fugitives - 17 individuals
accused of the most serious crimes - remain at large.

The work of the Tribunals will not be complete
until they are brought to justice in The Hague or in
Arusha. In the case of the ICTY, all four fugitive
indictees, including Karadzic and Mladic, must face
international justice. In the case of the ICTR, we note
that several of the fugitives' cases have been identified
by the Prosecutor as suitable for referral for trial at the
national level. In all cases, it is vital to secure full
international cooperation to secure the arrest of those
individuals so that justice can take its course.
We would recall that all States are under a
continuing obligation, as underlined in resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), to cooperate with the
ICTY and ICTR, including in locating and transferring
indictees. The United Kingdom itself stands ready to
provide the Tribunals with any necessary assistance,
but inevitably and naturally, a particular and primary
responsibility in that regard lies with the States of the
region.

We note Mr. Brammertz's assessment that a
constructive relationship between the ICTY and
regional authorities has resulted in satisfactory levels
of cooperation from Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, in particular in such areas as access to
archives and documents. We also note, however, that
Mr. Brammertz has assessed cooperation with Croatia
and Serbia as only partially satisfactory. We
acknowledge the recent unsuccessful attempt by the
Serb authorities to capture fugitive indictee Stojan
Zupljanin, but that is not enough. We strongly urge all
countries in the region, especially Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to maximize and sustain efforts to
capture all fugitive indictees and to transfer them to
The Hague.

I associate myself with the statement that will
later be made in the Chamber on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union (EU). The United
Kingdom welcomes the signature of Serbia's
Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU,
but full cooperation with the ICTY remains firmly
embedded in the EU accession process. The
conclusions of EU foreign ministers make it clear that
the implementation of the interim agreement and the
ratification of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement will only take place once the Council has
decided that Serbia is fully cooperating with the ICTY.

On ICTR cooperation, we are concerned by the
recent letter to the Secretary-General from the
Prosecutor addressing cooperation by Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to the
arrest of certain fugitives, notably Mr. Kabuga, who are
believed to the hiding out in those countries. We urge
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya
in particular to provide full and prompt cooperation
with regard to the ICTR Prosecutor's efforts to locate
and arrest ICTR fugitives.

We welcome the steady progress made by the
Council's working group in examining the residual
functions of the Tribunals that will remain after
completion. We are grateful for the continued
assistance and cooperation provided to the two
Tribunals in that work, and pay tribute to the Belgian
mission for its work in the working group. It is clear
that decisions are now required on key issues so that
the Security Council can decide in a timely manner on
a coherent plan for the residual arrangements. We look
forward to continued cooperation with both Presidents
and Prosecutors on those issues over the coming
weeks.

I would like, ifI may, to respond to some of the
things we have heard in the Chamber this morning. I
have listened carefully to what other representatives
have said, and I would like to say that we in the United
Kingdom do not share the Russian Ambassador's
assessment of the ICTY's activities or role. The ICTY
is an independent judicial body and its judgements are
based on the evidence presented to it. The United
Kingdom has full confidence in the Tribunal's
impartiality and its decision-making processes. I would
like to stress that the ICTY and the ICTR are the sole
authorities established by the international community,
and in particular by the Council, to assess cooperation
on war crimes and crimes against humanity in all the
territory of the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. It is
their assessment that counts and it is their assessment
that the Council should support. States should not seek
to compete with the Tribunals' assessments, but should
instead give them all possible access to information
and cooperation.

The issue of protection for witnesses has also
been raised today. Securing adequate protection for
witnesses is a critical issue in ensuring that all
evidence is made available to the Tribunal. Previous
reports from the ICTY Prosecutor have illustrated that
witness protection has been a challenge across the
region in a number of cases in Kosovo, but there have
also been difficulties in protecting witnesses in Serbia.
Full cooperation from all Governments on those issues
is vital. We welcome the commitments of the Kosovo
Government to do all it can to meet its obligations. We
expect those commitments to be fulfilled.

On the Haradinaj case itself, we note that the
Prosecutor has filed a notice of appeal. We look to due
process to take its course.

Could I end by just reiterating the need for the
most senior fugitives to face international justice.
Some 13 years after the massacre at Srebrenica, I think
it is important that we recall exactly what that
massacre was about and the people who have been
indicted as being responsible for it, namely, Karadzic
and Mladic. Srebrenica was the worst massacre in
Europe since the end of the Second World War. It saw
the slaughter of 7,000 Muslim men and boys. The
victims of that awful crime deserve to have the people
who were responsible for perpetrating it face justice in
an international court.

