Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor in my capacity as Coordinator ofthe Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) Group.

As you mentioned, Mr. President, it has been
10 years since the adoption of presidential note
S/2006/507. I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
improvements in the Council's working methods that we
have seen since then, and in particular Japan's efforts
and contributions, which have added to that positive
development. At the same time, we must recognize
that the world's expectations vis-a-vis the Council have
certainly not decreased, but rather increased, over the
past 10 years. We therefore insist that our common
efforts to improve the accountability, coherence,
transparency and, ultimately, the effectiveness of the
Council must continue. Let me make some specific
points in that connection.

The ongoing process to select the next Secretary-
General is just one example of the strong interest of
the general membership in a more transparent Security
Council. For the first time in history, 12 individuals
have taken part in informal dialogues organized by the
President of the General Assembly, after they submitted
their curriculums vitae and vision statements. The ACT
group calls upon any potential future candidates to be
presented as early as possible and to participate in the
same General Assembly process.

We understand that the first straw poll of the
Security Council will take place later this week. The
ACT group believes the wider membership needs to
be informed of the outcome of that and subsequent
polls and strongly encourages close communication
between the President of the Council and the President
of the General Assembly in that regard. The ACT group
also reiterates that it is the prerogative of the General
Assembly to draft the resolution on the appointment of
the next Secretary-General.

The ACT group calls on all States to adhere to the
code of conduct, a pledge to support timely and decisive
Security Council action in situations involving atrocity
crimes. So far, 112 Member States have joined the
code. We encourage them to make sure that the code is
being implemented. That means applying and invoking
it consistently in all relevant country situations before
the Council.

Following the October 2015 open debate on
working methods (see S/PV.7539), the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/ 19. The ACT group
welcomes the commitment therein to holding an annual
open debate on working methods. That statement also
takes note of the efforts of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters to
enhance the transparency of its activities, including by
providing regular briefings to interested Member States.
The ACT group looks forward to participating in such
meetings. We also believe that the report prepared by
Spain containing recommendations gleaned from the
2015 open debate could serve as guidance for the work
of the Informal Working Group, and we encourage the
Group to consider it fully.

The ACT group welcomes presidential note
S/2016/619, adopted last week. We are pleased that the
period of observation for incoming Council members
has been extended to three months. We call on Council
members to implement that provision to the maximum
extent possible, as stated in the note.

The ACT group also welcomes the arrangement
regarding the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary
bodies no later than 1 October each year and the fact that
the process will be facilitated jointly by two members
of the Council, thereby providing an enhanced role for
the elected 10 members of the Council.

Sixty-two per cent ofthe Council's meetings in 2015
took place in the format of closed consultations, which
is a significant increase in comparison with previous
years. In addition, the Council also considered 56 issues
under "Any other business". While we welcome the
fact that the Council acts quickly with regard to urgent
situations, we need also to underline that the enhanced
use of "Any other business" and closed meetings does
not add to the transparency of the Council's work.

The ACT group also welcomes the practice of
providing public wrap-up meetings and informal
briefing sessions to non-members. More recently,
Council members have also conducted joint informal
briefings by the presidency at the end of the month.
That practice has shown that formal public wrap-ups
and informal briefings do not replace each other and,
on the contrary, may be mutually reinforcing.

Finally, the ACT group welcomes the efforts
of Japan as Chair of the Informal Working Group
to prepare a new note that would consolidate and
streamline all decisions taken regarding working
methods since the publication of presidential note
S/2010/507. We encourage the Council to provide an
updated, strong and comprehensive document that can
lay the groundwork for further positive developments
in this domain. Implementation will of course remain
at the centre of our attention.

