Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): Let me begin by expressing
Ukraine's deep and sincere condolences to the families
of the victims, as well as to the Federal Government
of Somalia, regarding recent terrorist attacks carried
out by AI-Shabaab that resulted in numerous casualties
among the civilian population, including women
and children. This is just another confirmation that
Al-Shabaab remains the most significant threat to
peace and security in Somalia, as was characterized
in Ambassador's Umarov's briefing, for which we
are thankful.

In the context of an ongoing drought, Al-Shabaab
activities hamper joint efforts to provide the much-
needed humanitarian response. In that regard we
welcome the plan of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Federal Government
of Somalia to secure main supply roads and to help
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to drought-
stricken communities in the country. We also support
cooperation between the Somali National Army and
AMISOM. troop-contributing countries in the fight
against terrorism. In that respect we would like to
commend the Kenya Defence Forces for their successful
operations on 2 and 26 March, in which a total of
84 Al-Shabaab militants were eliminated.

We note that some progress has been made by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, as well as by the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea, to ensure the goals set out in their respective
mandates led to a significant improvement in arms and
ammunition management in the country and a decrease
in illicit exports of charcoal from Somalia. Better-
coordinated cooperation in that regard by the Federal
Government of Somalia, including through its timely
and comprehensive notifications to the Committee, has
been an important factor, contributing to the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime in Somalia.

We believe that additional joint efforts to ensure
the full and effective implementation and enforcement
of the arms embargo and charcoal ban will substantially
limit illegal arms trafficking within and outside of the
country, and will curb the illicit charcoal trade, thus
depriving terrorist groups of potential revenues and
weapons. We welcome the active involvement of all
international partners, Member States and international
and regional organizations in providing relevant
support to that end. African Union cooperation has
been remarkable in that regard, particularly through
AMISOM'S documentation and registry of all military
equipment discovered and captured, as well as through
its assistance to the Somali federal authorities in
implementing the charcoal ban.

Another issue of concern for us is the spate of
attacks on commercial vessels off the coast of Somalia,
which highlights an increase in pirate activity in the
Gulf of Aden. There are signs that the emergence of
piracy could be the result of the financing of pirates
by entities from countries in the region. In that regard,
we would like to ask the Monitoring Group to follow
up on that information and to provide the findings in
the midterm update to the Committee. We consider that
information crucial to the prevention and countering of
piracy and armed robbery at sea. Furthermore, detailed
information on illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing should be included in the next report of the
Monitoring Group.

We cannot fail to mention the recentpositive changes
in the Somali State- and peacebuilding processes. The
peaceful elections of the President and of the speakers
of both Houses of the Somali Parliament, followed by
the unanimous endorsement of the country's new Prime
Minister, all resulting in an unprecedented cross-clan
support and community reconciliation, were important

steps towards Somalia's recovery and stabilization. We
hope that the newly appointed Council of Ministers
of Somalia will succeed in fulfilling its pledges to
rebuild the security forces and State institutions, tackle
corruption and unify the country.

With regard to Eritrea, we take note that no evidence
of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab was reported. At
the same time, we are perplexed that in some reports
of the Monitoring Group, information about Eritrea's
implementation of Council measures is limited to only
sentence. In that regard, we look forward to seeing a
comprehensive overview of this matter in the midterm
update. We proceed from the understanding that
constructive cooperation of the Eritrean Government
would contribute to effective implementation of the
Group's mandate, which is a precondition for any
changes to the sanctions regime. In that regard we
support the work of the Chair of the Committee to
prepare a possible visit to the Horn of Africa and
underline the importance of including the Coordinator
of the Monitoring Group in such a delegation, with a
view to strengthening the result-oriented nature of
the visit.

