Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is
an honour to see you, Sir, presiding over the work of
the Council for this month, especially as you represent
the fraternal country Syria, with which we have close
ties. We are fully confident that the outstanding efforts
you and your delegation have made during your
presidency of the Council will be successful because of
your wisdom and efficiency. I also wish to pay tribute
to your predecessor, the representative of Singapore,
for the wise manner in which he conducted the work of
the Council last month.

It is very unfortunate that repeated violations of
international humanitarian law and inhumane acts
continue to be carried out by the Israeli Government
against the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories, despite international efforts made during a
very dangerous period in the Middle East under very
difficult and serious international conditions.

Kuwait strongly condemns the arbitrary Israeli
policies and practices against the Palestinian people
and its legitimate leadership, including the
reoccupation by Israeli forces last week of some
Palestinian towns, particularly Ramallah, the
perpetration of terrible, violent acts that have included
striking the presidential headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority, as well as terrifying civilians and laying
siege to them.

What is perhaps dangerous and must be
confronted is the fact that the Israeli Government has
been applying measures it applied before 1993 to lay
siege to the Palestinian territory and subject it to the
Israeli civilian administration. That has given the clear
message to the international community that Israel is
not committed to any agreement it previously signed
with the Palestinian Authority within the framework of
the peace process, including the Oslo agreement. That
is a very frustrating matter and is an obvious retreat
from the peace option that the Arab countries and the
international community have chosen.

Perhaps what Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
stated in a New York Times op-ed article a few days
ago, namely that he would not withdraw to the 1967
borders, that there would not be a settlement on
Jerusalem now and that the only option for reaching a
settlement now is a long-term temporary agreement,
will delay reaching a final settlement. This is a very
dangerous situation that leads to continued violence,
the deterioration of the security situation and the
suffering of the Palestinian people, who are living
under difficult economic conditions. They need now,
more than ever, the support of the international
community to rebuild what has been destroyed by the
Israeli military apparatus.

Kuwait renews its call to the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities, condemn Israeli behaviour
and take practical steps quickly to ensure that it
implements its resolutions, particularly the recently
adopted resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403
(2002) and 1405 (2002) and work to ensure that the
Israeli Government respects all the agreements it has
signed with the Palestinian Authority.

Under these conditions, my country welcomes all
the diplomatic efforts made to restore confidence and
put an end to violence. We support the Secretary-
General in this regard. We call on the Council to
seriously consider the Secretary-General's proposal to
send a multinational force to protect the Palestinian
people, to work to diminish tensions, and to create a
climate conducive to a return to negotiations.

In this context, we also wish to welcome the
efforts made by the Arab countries, particularly those
of Saudi Arabia and Egypt, to coordinate with
influential international parties, particularly the United
States and the "quartet", in order to find a formula that
satisfies all concerns of the parties involved in order to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the region
on the basis of implementing resolutions of
international legitimacy, particularly resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and the principle of land for
peace. These are the terms of reference for bringing
about a peace settlement. In this context, Kuwait also
supports all the efforts being made to convene a peace
conference on the Middle East with the participation of
all parties concerned.

In conclusion, Kuwait reaffirms that it is
important that the Council pursue this question to reach
a final settlement ending the Israeli occupation of all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan
and the Lebanese territories. Establishing a Palestinian
State with Jerusalem as its capital is the only means to
peace, security and stability for all. Unless there is an
end to the Israeli occupation, which is the core of the
conflict and the source of instability in the region, no
country will have security.

