Mr. Dieng: I should like first of all to thank the
Missions of Jordan and Luxembourg - and particularly
you, Mr. President, and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas - for
convening this briefing.

As Council members are aware, during our visit to
the Central African Republic, our main objective was
to assess the risk of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity occurring in the country and to
advocate with transitional authorities and other relevant
stakeholders for a cessation of violence and enhanced
protection of the civilian population.

It was evident from what we saw and heard that
the situation in the Central African Republic was
desperate. We received reports and testimony from
victims and witnesses that told of shocking episodes of
violence perpetrated against innocent Central Africans,
including women and children. And this violence
continues even as we are discussing the human rights
and humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic today.

As I said in my previous statement at the Arria
Formula meeting of the Security Council on 1 November
2013, we face a situation of widespread and massive
violations of human rights and abuses such as have never
been witnessed before in the country. There have been
widespread reports of summary executions and other
forms ofextrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances,
forced displacements, and acts of mutilation and sexual
violence committed against adults and children, as well
as the destruction and widespread looting of property,
including hospitals, schools, churches and mosques. At
the same time, as Council members will hear in greater
detail from my colleague Assistant Secretary-General
Kyung-wha Kang, the humanitarian situation is equally
very disturbing.

In response to continued attacks by ex-Sele'ka
elements targeting Christian civilians since December
2012, traditional, community-based self-defence groups
across the country evolved into a more organized
Christian militias known as the anti-Balaka, which
have targeted ex-Seleka members and Muslim civilians
suspected of supporting them. Reports received indicate
that the anti-Balaka militias are becoming more
organized than before and reportedly include some
former army soldiers sympathetic to former President
Bozize. These former soldiers have reportedly played
a leadership role in organizing attacks against Muslim
civilians. For example, attacks in Bangui on 5 and
6 December resulted in the deaths of at least 1,000
people, most of whom were ex-Sele'ka members and
Muslim civilians. In interviews with some individuals
who claimed to be members of anti-Balaka militias in
Bangui, they alleged that the militias have deployed in
all 16 provinces of the country to mobilize Christian
civilians against Muslim civilians.

On the other hand, the ex-Sele'ka elements continue
to carry out attacks against Christian civilians
throughout the country. While in the Central African
Republic, we received testimony from people who had
witnessed the killing of Christian civilians by ex-Seleka
during a series of reprisal attacks.

The religious leaders in Bossangoa had divergent
views on who bore responsibility for the ongoing
violence in the province. The Bishop of Bossangoa
diocese decried the abuses committed against
Christians and the perceived complicity of the Muslim
communities. On the other hand, the representative of
the Muslim community in Bossangoa decried continued
attacks against Muslims by anti-Balaka, who in his
view were being hosted and supported by the local
Catholic bishop.

In consultations with the then Head of Transition,
Michel Djotodia, I stated to him clearly that he bears
primary responsibility for security and that he should
take all measures possible to protect all populations,
irrespective of their ethnic or religious affiliation.
We urged Mr. Djotodia to join forces with religious
leaders and civil society to immediately embark on a
reconciliation campaign aimed at putting an end to the
violence and to the hatred between communities.

The violence that was initially perceived as a
confrontation between ex-Seleka and anti-Balaka
militias quickly evolved into a very dangerous
confrontation between Muslim and Christian civilians,
and the level of hatred between these communities
shocked me. Incitement to commit violence on the
basis of religion or ethnicity and deliberate and targeted
attacks against civilians based on their identity are
factors that indicate a high risk both of crimes against
humanity and of genocide.

There is no doubt that the actions of the African-
led International Support Mission for the Central
African Republic (MISCA) and of French troops have
contributed immensely to the protection of Central
Africans, in particular in and around camps for
internally displaced persons. However, it is evident
that their resources and capacity to protect are limited,
given the scale of the violence and the fact that it is
happening across the country and MISCA is still only
partially deployed. There is an urgent need for the
full deployment of MISCA peacekeepers as soon as
possible.

Another concern emerging from our mission and
which has had a negative impact on civilian protection
was the perception by some that peacekeepers deployed
in the country were not neutral. Some interlocutors
alleged that peacekeepers, in some instances, were
perceived to side either with anti-Balaka or ex-Seleka

elements, which has eroded trust in some instances and
affected their capacity to act.

In our interaction with religious leaders, we noted
that, despite concerted efforts by the Archbishop and
the Imam of Bangui to promote peace and dialogue, the
impact of the initiatives undertaken since December
2012 remains limited. There is an urgent need to
support and intensify such interreligious dialogue, both
at the national and at the community levels.

In my assessment, the widespread, unchecked
nature of attacks by ex-Seleka and anti-Balaka militias,
as well as by armed civilians associated with them,
against civilians on the basis of religion or ethnicity
constitute crimes against humanity. If not halted, there
is a risk of genocide in the country.

The primary responsibility for the protection of the
population lies with the Central African authorities.
However, recognizing the fact that the transitional
authorities have neither the capacity to protect the
civilian population nor to exercise control over the
armed elements that are attacking them, particularly
women and children, the international community must
take concrete measures to assist the State to stop the
abuses and protect civilians. There is an urgent need to
support the full and effective deployment of MISCA.
African countries should urgently contribute troops to
the Mission.

There should be concerted efforts to promote and
support a national peace and reconciliation process.
There is an urgent need to promote dialogue between
Christians and Muslims to mitigate the existing ethnic
and religious divisions in the country. As a first step
among a series of initiatives, my Office is working to
support the efforts of the President of the Commission
on Human Rights of the National Transitional Council
and the National Coordinator of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to organize
peace forums in the country that will bring together
community and religious leaders from seven provinces.
But that is not enough. I urge the international
community to contribute to the process.

It will be difficult to promote reconciliation
and restore peace in the country without addressing
the current culture of impunity. The human rights
violations and abuses that have occurred have sowed
seeds of hatred in communities. It is very important that
we support all initiatives, including the Commission
of Inquiry, to identify perpetrators and hold those
responsible for violations and abuses accountable. We
should also consider the establishment of transitional
justice mechanisms. There can be no excuse or
justification for condoning impunity.

Although the international community is
responding late in the day, there is still a window to act
to mobilize appropriate resources and to reverse one of
the worst human rights and humanitarian crises of our
time. We need to uphold our responsibility to protect
Central Africans from the risk of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.

