Mr. Chikoti (Angola): Allow me, in the name of
my Government, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to congratulate your predecessor on the
brilliant manner in which he conducted the proceedings
of the Council during his mandate.

The holding of this meeting of the Security
Council to address the humanitarian situation in
Angola is reflective of the concern of the international
community in this regard. This is the second time that I
have addressed the Council within a period of two
weeks in order to discuss issues concerning conflicts in
Africa and their consequences. This is indicative of the
deep commitment of this body of the United Nations in
its efforts to find solutions to achieve stability on the
African continent.

I would therefore like to take this opportunity to
reiterate my Government's appreciation for the efforts
of the Security Council to find a solution to the
situation in my country. We would especially like to
thank Mr. Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General, for his
personal dedication and the interest he has
demonstrated in seeking peace for Angola.

My Government is aware, as are the nations
represented here, of the seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in our country, which, contrary to our
expectations, worsened during 2001. Judging by the
number of important delegations from the United
Nations that visited us, we note that these
developments are being followed with great interest.
We will certainly remember that, in May of 2001,
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos reiterated to the
nation and to the international community the need for
a resolution of the conflict based upon a peace plan.

In this context, the Government considers the
following points essential to achieve peace: first, the
unilateral and unconditional cessation of hostilities on
the part of Jonas Savimbi's troops and the turning over
to the United Nations of all of their weapons; secondly,
the resolution of UNITA's internal problems by UNITA
itself; thirdly, the conclusion of the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol, in accordance with the evolution
of the situation; and fourthly, the holding of and
participation in general elections.

The Government's plan to which I have just
referred calls upon UNITA rebels to respond positively
so that we can put an end to this atrocious war and
conclude the tasks that remain to be completed under
the Lusaka Protocol as a way to restore the long-
awaited peace. Instead, in response to this Government
initiative, Jonas Savimbi's forces increased their
terrorist acts - acts that are still fresh in the memory
of many Angolans and, indeed, in that of all those who
have witnessed the magnitude of those atrocities.

Allow me to take this opportunity to present
images that illustrate, on the one hand, the effects of
these acts of terrorism on the Angolan people and, on
the other hand, the efforts of the Government to reverse
the situation. Some of the images may be a little hard
to watch - but that is the reality with which we live.

A videotape was played in the Council Chamber
Mr. Chikoti (Angola): Those are some of the
images that we wanted to bring to the attention of the
Council.

Faced with the intransigence of Savimbi's
UNITA, and UNITA's failure to respond to any of the
appeals for a resolution of the conflict by means of
dialogue, my Government has no alternative but to
implement its peace agenda, which provides for
political, economic, social and military actions.

In the political sphere, the Angolan Government
finds itself in the awkward and unprecedented position
of being the only country in the world where the largest
opposition party maintains a presence in the Parliament
while carrying out an active rebellion against the
established constitutional order. In spite of all this, the
Government has kept intact the pillars of our emerging
democracy, ensuring its citizens' exercise of their
rights while allowing national dialogue without any
exclusion. In fact, discussions continue in the Angolan
Parliament with regard to the adoption of a new
constitutional law that takes into account proposals
originating from all political parties represented in that
sovereign body - a constitution that will establish the
rules for the holding of the upcoming elections.

In the economic sphere, an International
Monetary Fund-monitored reform programme aimed at
ensuring macroeconomic stability in our country is
under way.

This year, for the first time in Angola's history,
our national budget allocated 21 per cent of its funds to
social and welfare-related programmes, in contrast to
the 11 per cent allocated to defence and security. This
reflects a significant change in national priorities and a
pattern that confirms the importance that the
Government attaches to the social welfare of the
population.

Further, this is also a reflection of the impact of
sanctions on UNITA, which have made it more difficult
for UNITA to pursue its military option and to procure
military hardware and other equipment. It is therefore
important for the international community to maintain
and strengthen the sanctions as a deterrent as well as an
encouragement to return to the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol as a basis for a sustainable political
solution to the crisis.

In the military sphere, to counter the terrorist
activities carried out by the UNITA rebels - as we
have seen in the images just shown - the Government
has undertaken measures to guarantee the effective
control of its national territory and the extension of the
State's authority, in compliance with its constitutional
responsibility to ensure the safety of all communities
across the country.

A climate of relative confidence is emerging that
is encouraging many people, including soldiers of the
rebel group, to return to normal life. But their return
has overwhelmed an already saturated public assistance
infrastructure, raising by more than half a million the
number of those in need of emergency aid, making an
overall national total of more than 4 million displaced
persons, representing approximately 25 per cent of the
country's population. That places the humanitarian
situation at the centre of our concerns; for that reason,
as the Council is well aware, the Republic of Angola is
one of the few countries that has adopted a specific law
which provides rules for the resettlement of displaced
persons.

In that regard, the Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for 2002 contains a clear strategy that seeks to
ensure that the provision of assistance takes into
account the principles stated in the constitution of the
Republic of Angola and the international guidelines.
Educational programmes to promote respect for human
rights have been conducted in close collaboration with
the human rights division of the United Nations Office
in Angola and have covered the various echelons of the
armed forces and the national police.

The Government continues to lead and implement
humanitarian support operations in close coordination
with the United Nations. To that end, it has created
appropriate structures at both the national and the
provincial levels.

In characterizing the humanitarian situation in
Angola, I would like to call attention to the major
constraints that the Angolan Government and its
partners face.

The first relates to food and other basic needs.

The second concerns roads and bridges. Here, it
is necessary to note that, in spite of the Government's
effort to rebuild roads and bridges during the short
period of peace that we experienced in 1991 and 1992,
most of these have again been destroyed as a result of
the post-electoral conflict.

Thirdly, the poor condition of airstrips constitutes
another major concern of the Government. The most
serious cases have already been identified and specific
measures for their repair have been taken, most notably
the airstrip in Kuito because of its importance.

The fourth area is demining. We have seen an
almost total halt in the mine clearance programme.
This has had a negative impact on other areas, such as
programmes for resettlement and for the distribution of
agricultural land.

Fifthly, the response from international donors to
the 2001 Consolidated Appeal represented only 46.8
per cent of the expected amount. The fact is that this
constitutes an important setback in terms of our
expectations.

In order to improve the quality and the quantity
of humanitarian assistance through its coordination
mechanisms, the Government organized a decentralized
format to carry out its national emergency programme
for humanitarian assistance by transferring total
responsibility for implementation to the provincial
governments, which were allocated resources
amounting to $12.5 million. For 2001, the Government
allocated to the Ministry of Assistance and Social
Reintegration $17 million for various existing
programmes, in particular for humanitarian assistance.
With the aggravation of the situation during the final
quarter of last year, the Government reinforced that
funding with an additional $6.5 million to acquire food
and other items in the national market to assist people
in newly liberated areas.

Eight days ago, my Government held an
extraordinary session of the Standing Committee of the
Council of Ministers to discuss the country's
humanitarian situation. At that session, the
Government adopted a set of measures to expand the
assistance it has been granting to secure medical aid,
medicine and food for the neediest populations.
Moreover, and parallel to the implementation of its
programme of emergency humanitarian aid, the
Government will continue to implement the
resettlement and demining programmes, as well as
vaccination campaigns against polio, measles and
meningitis and campaigns aimed at the prevention of
endemic diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis,
diarrhoea and HIV/AIDS.

The Government is also determined to increase
medical and auxiliary personnel in critical provinces,
especially Bie'. Another priority is the repair of
infrastructure, such as bridges, airstrips and roads, in
order to facilitate the timely provision of humanitarian
assistance, the settlement of people and the free
movement of people and goods. In the area of
transportation, existing fleets will be reinforced with
more trucks.

Given the large number of displaced persons, the
Government approved a programme, budgeted at $60
million, which targets the provinces of Moxico, Huila,
Uige, Huambo, Kuando Kubango, Kwanza Sul, Bie,
Lunda Norte and Malange.

My Government is aware, as are its partners, of
the temporary and transitory nature that these
emergency assistance programmes must assume. From
that perspective, and in the light of the significant
improvement in the military situation, we intend to
accelerate the resettlement programmes for displaced
persons with the implementation of activities that will
allow the transition from a state of emergency to one of
social and economic development leading to the
eradication of poverty.

Among the measures to reduce poverty and
strengthen national reconciliation efforts are soon-to-
be-implemented pilot programmes aimed at socially
reintegrating demobilized soldiers and the general
population of displaced persons. The Government and
the United Nations have already jointly approved terms
of reference for these pilot programmes. We are
currently at the stage of selecting the experts who will
prepare them. This measure will implement the
recommendations contained in the latest reports of the
United Nations technical missions that recently visited
our country.

Let me end by saying that the Angolan
Government believes that the efforts it has been
developing should continue to enjoy the support of our
international partners. We therefore reiterate our appeal
to donors; we expect that their response to the 2002
Consolidated Appeal to be more significant, in order to
respond to the growing needs and numbers of internally
displaced persons in our country.

We further reiterate our conviction that only by
means of a coordinated, continued and effective
approach to the humanitarian situation, with the full
participation of the Government, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
targeted population, shall we overcome these
challenges.

I cannot conclude without reaffirming to OCHA,
in Angola as well as in New York, our recognition of
the altruistic work it has done in our country and
express our deepest appreciation to the donor countries
and to all in the international community who, in one
way or another, have provided support to the Angolan
people.


