I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I would also like to welcome to the Security Council Ambassador Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and our colleagues the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Ethiopia. Like others, we have been following this issue closely, both as a member of the Security Council and as a country that has had a long-standing relationship with each of the three countries. On various occasions and in other instances, we have stated our position on this issue to all the parties concerned. We had hoped that this issue could be settled amicably among these three neighbourly and fraternal countries. I would like to note that meeting in the Security Council to discuss this issue should not create a precedent, but should be seen as part of our collective efforts to help all parties resume negotiations and come up with an acceptable, amicable and implementable solution. I should like to add the following points. First, all parties must continue negotiations with the intention of finding a win-win solution. From what we understand, most of the technical issues have been resolved. However, there are some outstanding issues. Like in a marathon, the most important yard, I believe, is the last yard, and it is crucial, of course, for all runners to cross the finish line. I would therefore like to emphasize that all parties should spare no efforts in amicably resolving these issues. Often, when there are outstanding issues, it is not due to the lack of a solution, but to a lack of political will. We implore all parties to come together at the highest level and in the spirit of cooperation and solidarity - in the spirit that we strongly adhere to in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, namely, good-neighbourliness, whose analogue is the spirit of Ubuntu, for which Africa is famous in the resolution of all kinds of issues. Secondly, all negotiating avenues should be explored and utilized by all parties. All relevant parties should pursue facilitating or mediating roles as necessary. With the concurrence of all parties, any persons or institutions that could assist in finding peace, including the United Nations and its Secretary-General, should be considered. In line with our long-standing position on advancing the role of regional organizations, we believe that settling this issue in the regional context is always one of the best options. We commend the initiative of the President of South Africa, His Excellency Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, in his capacity as Chairperson of the African Union Assembly, to facilitate discussion among parties under the auspices of the Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union. We welcome the fact that at the Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau, all parties renewed their commitment to finding a peaceful, negotiated solution to all the outstanding issues as well as to establishing a tripartite committee. Thirdly, we appeal to all parties to refrain from any unilateral action that would hamper the continuation of negotiations or further exacerbate the already- fragile situation. We must be continuously aware that, in exercising rights, we are also bound by responsibilities, including to our neighbours. Let us show that we are all responsible parties. What is at stake is the lives and livelihoods of millions of people all along the River Nile. I think that Sir William Golding, British author and poet, was quite correct when he said that "he who rides the sea of the Nile must have sails woven of patience". I hope that all parties can weave this sail of patience, allow negotiations to conclude at the earliest and refrain from actions that will not serve the purpose of all those whose lives depend on the Nile. I would like to conclude by quoting an old Kanuri proverb from West Africa: "At the bottom of patience, one finds heaven". Let us all find the heaven that we seek, in the form of peace, stability and prosperity for our peoples.
