Mr. Vieira de Mello: Before I respond,
Mr. President, may I request you to please convey to
His Royal Highness, Prince Willem-Alexander, the
Crown Prince of the Netherlands, my gratitude for his
presence this morning until only a few minutes ago,
and my gratitude for his message of support to me and
to the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET).

Let me also thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council for the strong support
once again expressed today for our mission. This is
extremely important to me and to my colleagues, but,
more important, to the East Timorese leaders and
people.

I have a few comments on points that were made
by practically all members of the Council, first on the
question of the refugees in West Timor and the need for
proper registration, the need for them to be able to
exercise a free choice either to return in safety to East
Timor or to remain and integrate in Indonesia with
international support. This is clearly key to the success
of our mission, including to the conduct of a free, fair
and comprehensive democratic electoral process next
year

I thank the Council also for what all members
said about the need to improve our resources and
capacity-building in the area of the judiciary,
particularly with regard to the investigation and
prosecution of serious crimes. I thank in particular
Ambassador Soderberg of the United States for her
clear indication that the United States will consider as a
matter of urgency the appeal for additional human
resources, not least investigators, for East Timor. I
often compare the situation we found ourselves in on
13 June last year, when we entered Kosovo with the
benefit of considerable human resources for the
investigation of serious human rights abuses in that
territory, and the lack of such resources as we went into
East Timor and until today. Please help us; please
respond urgently to the request that we will be
circulating informally to members of the Council and
other potential supporters.

I am also grateful for what several delegations
said about the need for an East Timorese defence force,
its development and its training in the very near future.
There again we need fresh resources, because, as the
Council knows, there is absolutely no provision for this
purpose in the East Timor consolidated budget.

Many speakers - indeed, practically all -
welcomed the establishment of the Joint Border
Commission and expressed the wish that we transform
it swiftly into a body for regular high-level contacts to
address and resolve the wide-ranging issues that exist
at present on the bilateral agenda and that are of mutual
interest.

Ultimately, I wish to restate here that we fully
support the statement by all the members of the
Council that East Timor and Indonesia must establish
the strongest and the friendliest possible relations.
These relations will obviously be mutually beneficial.
That is indeed our policy, and I should point out that
our Director for Political, Constitutional and Electoral
Affairs, Mr. Peter Galbraith, has been in Jakarta since
Sunday. He had yesterday, and was planning to have
today, a number of meetings. He reported on an
extremely fruitful meeting he had yesterday with
Coordinating Minister Bambang Yudhoyono, in
preparation for a visit that I also intend to pay to
Jakarta in the very near future.

Thank you also for everything you said about the
flexibility in the use of the resources under the assessed
budget of UNTAET and on the question of its assets.

Concerning the preparation for the post-
independence period, I wish to thank again the leader
of the Security Council mission, Ambassador Martin
Andj aba, for the strong recommendation he made in his
report, and you, Mr. President, for the very supportive
letter that you have written to the President of the
General Assembly.
(spoke in French)

In reply to the specific question posed by
Mr. Doutriaux on this subject, I cannot give an estimate
as to the use of resources from UNTAET's budget as
such in support of the activities of establishing this new
administration that will become independent, we hope,
towards the end of next year. We have made several
practical suggestions about the use of UNTAET's
budget - for example, for the training of an increased
number of Timorese police and for the rehabilitation of
the physical infrastructure of the new Timorese
judiciary. We will certainly be able to give you and the
Fifth Committee some concrete proposals. As you have
indicated, we will obviously remain within the limits of
what is reasonable, according to the estimates of the
Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ).
Thank you for giving us the opportunity of making
specific recommendations for the current UNTAET
budget or for the next one, according to the duration,
obviously, of the mandate that you will give us at the
end of the month of January.

(spoke in English)

I turn to other specific questions. Ambassador
Soderberg of the United States and Ambassador Wang
Yingfan of China asked me about the latest update on
the bilateral discussions and on the question of
pensions. Unfortunately, we have not had any bilateral
negotiations with Indonesia since our last round in
July. This is clearly unsatisfactory. We must agree on
the date of our next bilateral meeting, as distinct from
the Joint Border Commission meeting. The question of
pensions figures very high on the agenda of our
bilateral discussions. We had managed to reach partial
agreement on the question of pensions to be paid by the
Government of Indonesia to its former East Timorese
civil servants, and I believe that further progress can be
made as soon as we meet again. I will request the
leader of our delegation to the Joint Border
Commission meeting to propose dates for the next
round of bilateral discussions.

Ambassador Andjaba, supported by Ambassador
Eldon, Ambassador Chowdhury, Ambassador Wang
Yingfan and Ambassador Ward, requested that, as part
of the renewal of UNTAET's mandate at the end of
January, the Secretariat should submit
recommendations on the presence of the United
Nations after independence, and stated that planning
should start soon for that to happen. I thank him for
that. We fully agree with you, Ambassador Andjaba, as
we discussed with you and other members of the
Security Council mission in Dili, and I will certainly
share your request with my colleagues in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, who should
be in a position to provide you with a general blueprint
on how we see the United Nations presence in East
Timor after independence at the time when the
Secretary-General submits his report to this Council in
January.

Ambassador Eldon clearly pointed out that the
question of the recruitment of senior civil servants
must be addressed as a matter of priority in the process
of Timorization. He asked how we intended to do that.
We began discussing this in Cabinet last week and will
continue, tomorrow, Wednesday. The two main
challenges we face are that many skilled, competent
East Timorese do not live in East Timor, and it is, as
can be imagined, difficult to provide them with the
necessary incentives to return and help us fill the gap
that presently exists in the recruitment of the new civil
servants of East Timor.

Secondly, the salary scale of the East Timorese
civil service is clearly not competitive, even though I
must say that partners of UNTAET, in particular the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), felt that our salary
scales were perhaps too high in terms of their longer-
term sustainability. That is the dilemma we face. How
we might be able to resolve this quandary is what
Cabinet, and later the national council, will need to
address, but I assure Ambassador Eldon and other
members of the Council that we are giving the matter
the highest priority.

Ambassador Heinbecker of Canada asked me to
assess the chances of agreement on a transit
arrangement between the enclave of Oecussi and the
rest of the territory of East Timor. As the Council
knows, that has also been on our agenda of bilateral
discussions with the Government of Indonesia. Clearly,
the insecurity that prevailed in West Timor in
September and October made further discussions on
this subject extremely difficult, but it is a matter to
which we shall continue to give top priority, not least
because the population of the enclave must be provided
with the basic right of moving freely within East
Timorese territory, and at present the only way they can
do so is by using barges that are put at their disposal by
UNTAET, not least by the UNTAET military, which is
most unsatisfactory. in addition to being very unsafe.
We are also looking into the possibility of establishing
a regular ferry service with the enclave as well as with
the island of Atauro. but for that we would need
additional financial resources. I will be presenting this
need to the donor conference in Brussels next week.

Once again, Mr. President, many thanks for
giving me this opportunity to report to the Council on

the latest developments in East Timor. and I once again
thank the Council for its strong support.

