Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to see you, Mr. Minister, once
again presiding over a meeting of the Security Council.
We are grateful to all of the briefers for their statements.

Water is essential for life. It is only when there is
stable access to that key resource that one can talk about
sustainable development in all three of its components.
In that regard, it is difficult to overstate the timely
nature of activities aimed at implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with particular
regard to water issues.

Currently, Member States are working in the
General Assembly on a draft resolution initiated by the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. That draft
resolution is currently in the Second Committee of the
General Assembly. It is designed to be a catalyst for
the implementation of practical measures in the area of
water within the framework of the new United Nations
International Decade for Action, called "Water for
Sustainable Development".

With regard to the topic of today's Security
Council meeting, which links water resources issues
and ensuring peace and security, we think that
natural resources, in and of themselves, are neutral
in nature. Therefore, their presence or their scarcity
cannot, a priori, be regarded as an underlying reason
for conflicts and for creating a threat to peace and
security. The deterioration of the situation with regard
to access to water, which can be due to various factors,
can exacerbate existing disputes between States, and
not necessarily in the water sector, or it can be used
to exacerbate tensions between them. However, the
root cause of the conflict lies elsewhere, namely, in the
ineffective management of water resources, not in the
resources themselves.

In that context, we are concerned by the ongoing
attempts to directly incorporate a security component
into issues relating to water resources. Securitizing
the issue of water could lead to the shifting of the
focus of international efforts towards a subjective
search for "guilty parties' and the subsequent probable
imposition of military intervention in the parts of
the world concerned, where what is really needed is
specific expert activity in order to work out solutions
for emerging issues. In that way, emphasizing the
geopolitical aspects of water cooperation, including
international security, can only complicate the quest
for the resolution ofa difficult socioeconomic situation
and, as a result, hinder sustainable development as
a whole.

Our delegation has earlier repeatedly expressed
doubts about the advisability of involving the Security
Council in various issues relating to sustainable
development, as well as involving other non-core
United Nations agencies that do not have the
appropriate expertise and tools and cannot, therefore,
bring added value to discussions on the topic. Under
the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its work is aimed at
resolving specific conflict situations, first and foremost
through reconciliation among conflicting parties. It is
not clear what kind of practical measures the initiators
of today's meeting, focusing on the theme of water
resources, are expecting from the Security Council.

Bringing issues relating to sustainable development
into the busy Security Council agenda can also lead
to imbalance in the activities of other major United
Nations bodies. We are convinced that adherence to
the clear division of labour within the United Nations
system is the key to the effective and transparent
functioning ofthe Organization as a whole. In addition,
attempting to view the management of water resources
from a general perspective, especially through the
prism of international security, makes it more difficult
to consider the national and regional particularities of
water cooperation. This, in the end, can undermine
existing agreements at various levels.

The key to resolving issues in the area of water
is to increase the general level of socioeconomic,
scientific and technical development of countries and
bringing their own potential to bear in this respect. The
international community must concentrate its efforts
on the economic, social and environmental aspects of
the issue and, if possible, provide countries in need
with the necessary financial and technical cooperation
and help them to build capacity in terms of their own
national specialists.

Of course, such assistance should take into
account the specific requirements of, and strategies
for, their own national development as well as regional
particularities. The lack of concrete action in this area
should not give rise to attempts to identify questionable
causes of problems, given that an appropriate resolution
to such problems is vital to reducing tensions between
countries experiencing water scarcity.

Implementing the 2030 Sustainable Agenda for
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on
financing for development provides us with additional
possibilities for further cooperation among States on the
basis of creating a balance among the three dimensions
of sustainable development.

We believe that in order to continue a substantive
discussion on water issues, it would be useful to consider
the lessons learned by the international community
from the recently concluded International Decade
for Action, "Water for Life" 2005-2015, of which
the Russian Federation was one of the initiators. We
deem it important to make use of and improve on such
experience and practice, as they would enhance our
efforts to promote sustainable water use. That is why
Russia supported the Tajikistan initiative to declare a
new decade on water issues.

In this respect, the United Nations development
system can play an important role in helping
international efforts in this respect. We are in favour
of strengthening inter-agency cooperation under UN-
Water, which brings together all the structural entities
within the United Nations having to do with water
supply. We deem it important to develop and improve
the regional and international legal basis in the area of
regulating water resources. We note in this regard the
positive experience in implementing the Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes within the region regulated by
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
As regards the issue of the management of transboundary
watercourses, we believe in principle that we must
arrive at mutually beneficial solutions, on the basis of
partnership and respect for national sovereignty.

We regret the fact that the delegation of Ukraine
once again tried to use this forum not for the purpose
of constructively contributing to discussing the issue
of international peace and security, but rather for
purposes of propaganda to provide political cover
for the criminal activities of Kyiv. The people of the
Russian Crimea are not likely to forget that in April
2014 Kyiv ordered the blocking of the locks of the
Northern Crimea canal, which at the time provided for
85 per cent of the freshwater needs of approximately
2 million people. Such activities undertaken by the
Ukrainian authorities undermine human rights and
a whole slew of international humanitarian norms, in
particular the right to fresh water and sanitation and
the right to food, as well as the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council on human rights, let alone article
25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights.

