Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, I should
like to express the sincere appreciation of the Indonesian
delegation to the sponsors of the draft resolution that is now
before us. We are particularly heartened by the timely and
swift manner in which this Council has been able to
respond to the tragic developments in Srebrenica. Indonesia
is following with grave concern the Bosnian Serbs'
aggression against and occupation of Srebrenica, which has
exacted a tremendous toll in human life and represents a
direct challenge to the will of the international community.

The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
marked by various reprehensible acts by the Bosnian Serbs.
The Indonesian delegation has consistently expressed its
strong condemnation of the shelling of safe areas and
population centres, the sniping at civilians, the obstruction
of humanitarian relief efforts and the perpetration of "ethnic
cleansing" involving, inter alia, the relocation of
populations by force, summary executions and the
destruction of homes, cultural institutions and places of
worship by the Bosnian Serbs. Yet there have been
occasions when the nature of their acts has been of such
magnitude that it truly represents a qualitative escalation.

My delegation believes that the issue before us today
constitutes such an escalation. In marked contrast to its
previous actions, the Bosnian Serb army has gone beyond
shelling and laying siege to the safe areas; it has now
blatantly attacked and occupied the safe area of
Srebrenica in direct contravention of Security Council
resolutions. It also constitutes a clear violation of the
Agreement for the demilitarization of Srebrenica of 18
April 1993 between the Government of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnian Serb party.
Furthermore, it illustrates the Bosnian Serbs' continued
belief in the logic of war and their contemptuous rejection
of all efforts to find a peaceful and comprehensive
solution to the conflict. In this connection, my delegation
highly commends the personnel of UNPROFOR in the
safe area of Srebrenica for the courage and determination
they have shown in their effort to defend safe areas while
facing the much bigger military force of the Bosnian Serb
army.

Every military conflict invariably brings with it
untold suffering and deprivation to the civilian population,
particularly to children, the elderly and the infirm. The
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been no
exception. The fate of the civilian population in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has been of special concern to my
delegation. We have consistently called upon the Bosnian
Serb party to cease its obstruction of humanitarian relief
operations and to end its disruption of the supply of basic
amenities to the besieged people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this regard, we therefore View with
serious concern the flood of refugees forced to flee
Srebrenica as a result of the Bosnian Serb aggression. Not
only has this brought to a new level the plight of an
already suffering people, it is also a tragic reminder of the
Bosnian Serb attempt forcibly to change the ethnic
composition of the population. The international
community must unreservedly condemn these violations
of international humanitarian law.

Only recently, the Bosnian Serb party has
demonstrated its contempt for the accepted norms and
practices of international behaviour by detaining and
taking as hostages UNPROFOR personnel. The Security
Council reacted to this development by, inter alia,
authorizing the strengthening of UN PROF OR with a rapid
reaction capacity. Now we are witnessing the recurrence
of the detention of UNPROFOR personnel by the Bosnian
Serbs. The Indonesian delegation is alarmed by the most
recent detention of Dutch UNPROFOR personnel by the
Bosnian Serb party and finds the threat against the lives
of those personnel in the event of renewed air strikes
utterly reprehensible. This development clearly poses an
immediate challenge to the newly constituted rapid
reaction force of UNPROFOR.

 

My delegation is pleased to note that many of our
concerns are reflected in the draft resolution before us. The
draft contains a clear demand to the Bosnian Serb forces to
cease their offensive and withdraw from the safe area of
Srebrenica immediately. The commitment of the Security
Council to the defence of the safe areas has been clearly
defined in a number of its resolutions, in particular
resolution 836 (1993). Consequently, one of the principal
tasks of UNPROFOR has been to protect the safe areas
from armed attacks or any other hostile acts. Clearly, the
latest development in Srebrenica requires a determined
response by the international community.

In this regard, the Indonesian delegation would in
particular like to highlight the request to the
Secretary-General to use all resources available to him to
restore the status of Srebrenica as defined by the
Agreement of 18 April 1993 in accordance with the
mandate of UNPROFOR. The international community
cannot accept as a fait accompli the situation which has
been brought about by the Bosnian Serbs' aggression. They
must further be made to recognize that such a stance
applies to all the safe areas in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Nor can the international community accept
any attack on or detention of UNPROFOR personnel by the
Bosnian Serbs. My delegation therefore fully supports the
demand contained in the draft resolution that the Bosnian
Serb forces immediately and unconditionally release all
detained UNPROFOR personnel.

Equally important is the demand that all parties allow
unimpeded access for the UNHCR and other international
humanitarian agencies to the safe area of Srebrenica for the
purpose of alleviating the plight of the civilian population.

This draft resolution is a manifestation of the resolve
of the international community to stand firm in the face of
the continued Bosnian Serb defiance of relevant Security
Council resolutions. At the same time, it underscores the
importance of renewed political efforts to achieve an
overall peaceful settlement to the conflict. The Indonesian
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

