The President (spoke in French): After consultations
among Council members, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on their behalf.

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
2014 (2011), 2051 (2012), 2140 (2014), 2201 (2015),
and 2204 (2015) and presidential statements of
15 February 2013 and 29 August 2014.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen, and its commitment
to stand by the people of Yemen.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
commends its engagement in assisting the political
transition in Yemen.

"The Security Council supports the legitimacy
of the President of Yemen, Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and calls upon all parties and Member
States to refrain from taking any actions that
undermine the unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen, and the legitimacy of
the President of Yemen.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for, and commitment to, the efforts of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar, and to the United
Nations-brokered negotiations.

"The Security Council condemns the ongoing
unilateral actions taken by the Houthis, which
undermine the political transition process in
Yemen, and jeopardize the security, stability,
sovereignty and unity of Yemen and expresses deep
concern about the insufficient implementation of
resolution 2201 (2015).

"The Security Council deplores that the
Houthis have not implemented its demands in
resolution 2201 (2015) to withdraw their forces
from government institutions, including in the
capital, Sana'a, and normalize the security situation
in the capital and other provinces, and relinquish
government and security institutions.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern over continued arbitrary detentions by
all parties, in particular by Houthis, contrary to
resolution 2201 (2015), and reiterates its demand

for the unconditional and safe release of all persons
arbitrarily detained.

"The Security Council welcomes that the
Prime Minister Khaled Bahah and other members
of the Cabinet are no longer under the house arrest
imposed by the Houthis.

"The Security Council urges non- State actors to
withdraw from Government institutions, including
in the south of Yemen, and to refrain from any
attempt to take over such institutions.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the air strikes against the presidential
palace in Aden and attacks at Aden international
airport. The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the horrific 20 March bomb attacks
at the two mosques in Sana'a and in Sa'dah, Yemen,
which killed at least 126 and injured many more.
The Security Council urges all sides to refrain from
any further use of military force, any offensive
military actions and other uses of violence.

"The Security Council reiterates its call urging
all parties to agree upon and announce publicly
dates for completing the constitutional consultation
process, to hold a referendum on the constitution,
and to conduct elections under the new electoral
law pursuant to the new constitution and in this
regard demands that the parties take all actions
conducive to this process, including by the full
implementation of resolution 2201 (2015).

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
at the ability of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
to benefit from the deterioration of the political
and security situation in Yemen, mindful that any
acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivation, whenever, wherever
and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
solution to the situation in Yemen is through
a peaceful, inclusive, orderly and Yemeni-led
political transition process that meets the legitimate
demands and aspirations of the Yemeni people
for peaceful change and meaningful political,
economic and social reform, as set out in the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference, the Peace and

National Partnership Agreement and its security
annex.

"The Security Council strongly calls upon
all parties, in particular the Houthis, to abide by
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and
the Peace and National Partnership Agreement and
its security annex and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to accelerate inclusive United
Nations-brokered negotiations, including on issues
relating to governance, to continue the political
transition in order to reach a consensus solution
and stresses the importance of full implementation
of agreements reached and commitments made
towards that goal.

"The Security Council emphasizes its call
for all parties in Yemen, including the Houthis,
Government officials, leaders of political parties
and movements, and members of so-called popular
committees, to adhere to resolving their differences
through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, and refrain from
provocation and all unilateral actions to undermine
the political transition. The Security Council
stresses that all parties should take concrete steps
to agree and implement a consensus-based political
solution to Yemen's crisis in accordance with
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and
the Peace and National Partnership Agreement and
its security annex.

"The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the President of Yemen, Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, to engage in good faith in the United
Nations-brokered negotiations.

"The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the Gulf Cooperation Council to convene a
conference in Riyadh, upon the request of the
President of Yemen, with the participation of all
Yemeni parties to further support the political
transition in Yemen, and to complement and
support the United Nations-brokered negotiations.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
of all parties allowing all Yemenis to assemble
peacefully without fear of attack, injury, arrest, or
retaliation.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
comply with their obligations under international
law, including applicable international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand
that all parties in Yemen cease all armed hostilities
against the people and the legitimate authorities of
Yemen and relinquish the arms seized from Yemen's
military and security institutions, in accordance
with the Peace and National Partnership Agreement
and its security annex.

"The Security Council also urges all parties
to facilitate safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors to reach people in need of
humanitarian assistance. It also reaffirms the need
for all parties to ensure the safety of civilians,
including those receiving assistance as well as
the need to ensure the security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel.

"The Security Council notes with appreciation
the work of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Yemen, Jamal Benomar, and stresses the
importance of the United Nations close coordination
with international partners, including the Gulf
Cooperation Council, Group of Ambassadors in
Sana'a, and other actors, in order to contribute to
the successful transition.

"The Security Council calls on all Member
States to refrain from external interference which
seeks to foment conflict and instability and instead
to support the political transition.

"The Security Council demands that all parties
fully implement all Council resolutions on Yemen,
including resolution 2201 (2015).

"The Security Council reaffirms its readiness
to take further measures against any party in case
of non-implementation of its resolutions on Yemen,
in particular its resolution 2201 (2015)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/8.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.
