The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Lithuania for organizing this important debate.

The rule of law is at the heart of our work at the
United Nations. It is intrinsically linked to peace and
security. When public institutions fail to deliver justice
or to protect peoples' rights, insecurity and conflict
prevail.

At the national level, reconciliation and enduring
peace require the strong rule of law through responsive
and inclusive institutions. People must be able to trust
that their institutions can resolve disputes promptly and
fairly, and provide equitable access to basic services,
including justice and security.

At the international level, adherence to the rule of
law is critical for conflict prevention and the peaceful
resolution of disputes. Mechanisms to combat impunity
and ensure accountability, including United Nations-
assisted criminal tribunals, reinforce the primacy
of law. That is why strengthening the rule of law is
now an integral part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Today, 18
missions around the world currently mandate rule-of-
law support.

We are providing national authorities with
Wide-ranging support, from constitution-making
to strengthening police, justice and corrections
institutions, and from anti-corruption efforts to those
ensuring justice and accountability for gender-based
crimes.

I have designated the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme - working with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
UN-Women and other partners - as the global focal
point for police, justice and corrections. That new
global focal point arrangement has already assisted our
efforts from Mali to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to Haiti and beyond, strengthening our ability to
deliver as one effectively and coherently. I encourage
members of the Council and other Member States and
regional organizations to support the global focal point
and work with the United Nations to ensure the long-
term development of national rule-of-law institutions.

The crafting of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates provides a strategic opportunity to support
national priorities in this area. Along with police and
military elements, mandates for new missions should
include justice and corrections. That will help extend
State authority and lay the foundation for longer-term
institution-building. Those mandates should be guided
by several important points. Let me briefly highlight
four.

First, mandates should reflect the specific
challenges of a country and identify priority areas of
support. That will enhance the effectiveness and gender
responsiveness of our rule-of-law work. It also helps
guide programming and serves as a basis for dialogue
with national authorities.

Secondly, sequencing or establishing phases
for the implementation of the different components
of assistance is vital. Promptly addressing people's
immediate security and protection needs is crucial to
laying the groundwork for the long-term success of
institutions and processes.

Thirdly, given limited human and financial
resources, a gradual or progressive implementation
strategy may be the most effective in transitioning from
peacekeeping to long-term development assistance.
That requires early collaboration between missions and
country teams.

Fourthly, assessing progress is essential to making
policy decisions supported by evidence and responsive
to particular needs. The Security Council has made
important inroads towards promoting monitoring and
evaluation of United Nations rule-of-law assistance.
Specific and sequenced mandates, which include data-
collection and evaluation capacities, would further
support those efforts. As I noted in my report to the
Council of 11 June 2013 (S/2013/34l), the Organization
must nurture and strengthen a culture of evaluation.

I am encouraged by the Council's continued
commitment to ensuring that we make the most and
the best of rule-of-law assistance in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. I greatly appreciate the
Council's discussion today.

