Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation also wishes to thank Ambassador Munoz for
his very comprehensive briefing and for all the work he
is achieving as Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. We concur fully with him in his
analysis and observations.

My delegation associates itself with the
presentation to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union. Therefore I will confine myself to two
observations.

First, my delegation wishes to reaffirm that, given
a changing and persistent threat - as attested to by the
cowardly attack in Madrid on 11 March - the
international community must remain mobilized. We
should not let our guard down. On the contrary, we
should strengthen our unity to combat this scourge.
Indeed, that is what the member States of the European
Union have done, as evidenced by the Declaration on
Combating Terrorism adopted on 25 March this year.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) in
January, which has made it possible to strengthen and
improve the provisions for combating Al Qaeda and
the Taliban. That resolution should, inter alia, make it
possible act more effectively in controlling financial
flows. My delegation believes that that is indeed a
priority aspect in the fight against Al Qaeda. Bank
investigations and the transparency of financial
movements are a key element in the struggle against
terrorism.

In particular, I would like to underscore the
matter of the diversion of funds intended for charitable
or humanitarian purposes. In this spirit we
strengthened the monitoring regimes not only here but
also in the European Union or with the Group of Eight.
Non-governmental organizations have been included
on the list of the Committee against Al Qaeda. We need
to press forward with determination in the control of
financial flows. Regular review of the resolution gives
us this possibility. Among other things, we need to
develop mechanisms for registering funds transfers so
as to prevent the abuse of informal systems such as the
hawala or human cash couriers. The strengthened links
between the 1267 Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will make it possible to improve
our shared knowledge, particularly concerning the
financing of terrorism.

Secondly, let me recall that the fight against
terrorism in general and against Al Qaeda in particular
cannot be waged in isolation. In the framework of the
Group of Eight, France took the initiative at last year's
Evian summit of establishing the Counter-Terrorism
Action Group to improve technical assistance and
training for third countries, in particular developing
countries. We also provide bilateral support in
enhancing practical counter-terrorism measures.
Finally, we work to promote in-depth political dialogue
among Member States on the question of terrorism.

As Ambassador Mufioz said, and as the
presidency of the European Union will also say, the
fight against terrorism cannot be dissociated from
respect for human rights. To the contrary, the fight
against terrorism cannot be won without full respect
for human rights.

