Mr. Annabi: I thank you, Madam, for organizing
this important open debate on Haiti. This meeting
offers a clear indication of the continued strong
commitment of the Security Council and the wider
international community to Haiti's stabilization
process. I am honoured to speak alongside of Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis and President Clinton, the United
Nations Special Envoy.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) enjoys constant close collaboration with
the Haitian authorities. I wish to recognize the
leadership of Prime Minister Pierre-Louis and her
strong support for this partnership. We are deeply
grateful to President Clinton for his willingness to lend
his unique prestige and abilities to Haiti's quest for a
better future. His involvement will be invaluable in
promoting the country's socio-economic development.

The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2009/439) provides an update on the
stabilization process with regard to the five key
benchmarks endorsed last year by the Security Council.
These benchmarks concern political dialogue and
elections, the extension of State authority, ensuring
security and stability, strengthening the rule of law and
human rights, and socio-economic development.

As an introduction to today's debate, I would like
to summarize key developments in each area, while
highlighting where further efforts are required.

Political dialogue lies at the heart of the
stabilization process. A peacekeeping operation can
succeed only if there is a genuine will for change
within the host country. We are encouraged in this
regard by the continuing efforts of President Preval,
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis and the Haitian
Government to foster constructive dialogue within the
country. President Preval's establishment of a series of
broad-based commissions on issues of national interest
has contributed to inclusive discussions on the
country's future.

We also saw, at the end of last year, a much-
needed improvement in collaboration between the
executive and legislative branches of Government. This
paved the way for the adoption of key legislation,
including financial laws that enabled the cancellation
of the bulk of Haiti's international debt to the tune of
$1.2 billion. The Senate last week seated 11 new
members who were elected in June. We hope that the
replenishment of the upper house may pave the way for
more effective action by the Parliament, which
frequently lacked a quorum in the past.

At a time when Haiti faces difficult choices, but
also enjoys a valuable opportunity to advance, these
positive trends must be strengthened. The country
cannot afford renewed political and institutional
paralysis of the kind that afflicted it in 2008. It is
critical that all branches of Government enhance
collaboration, avoid inflammatory language, and
jointly assume responsibility for hard decisions. Such
cooperation is indispensable to identifying and
implementing solutions to urgent problems, to pursuing
the fight against impunity and corruption, and to
ensuring the stable governance that is required for
development.

The international community can contribute by
showing strong support for those who place national
interest above narrow personal ambitions. Civil
society, too, has a responsibility to engage to ensure
the sustainability and legitimacy of decisions that
affect the entire Haitian people.

Secondly, in the area of extension of State
authority, some progress has been made in enhancing
Haiti's institutional capacity. The Mission is
contributing, within its limited means, by providing
expertise to key ministries, as well as in the areas of
local governance and border management. Working
with Haitian authorities, MINUSTAH has supported
reforms that have increased customs revenues and
enhanced the local management of resources. Bilateral
partners and international organizations are supporting
a number of other capacity-building initiatives, for
which we would like to express our appreciation.

However, all of those initiatives combined
represent a fraction of what is required to enable the
State to deliver basic services to the population, which
is critical for lasting stability. Real progress in that area
will depend upon the continued political will of the
Haitian leadership and on strong and coordinated
support from bilateral and multilateral partners.

Thirdly, in the area of security, the past year has
seen continued progress in addressing threats in rural
and urban areas and the further development of Haiti's
own security capabilities. MINUSTAH has worked
with national authorities to undertake a variety of
tasks, including anti-gang operations in Cite Soleil and
in Martissant, promoting security along the land and
maritime borders, anti-kidnapping actions, responding
to civil unrest and ad hoc threats, and regular patrolling
throughout the country, including in remote areas.

Meanwhile, the Mission has also supported the
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, which
constitutes a critical element of MINUSTAH's exit
strategy. The Haitian National Police now comprises
nearly 10,000 officers, including 468 new officers who
graduated last month. Mid-level and senior police
officers are receiving advanced training, in part
through bilateral scholarships. MINUSTAH is working
with Haiti's partners to support national programmes to
enhance the police's institutional capacity and
infrastructure.

That progress is encouraging and should
contribute to investor confidence. However, at the
same time, we must not lower our guard prematurely
before these advances have been consolidated. Haiti
continues to face threats, including the potential for
resumed activity by gangs, criminals and other armed
groups, corruption and violence associated with illegal
trafficking, and the risk of civil unrest. All of those
threats may be manipulated to achieve personal or
political objectives, including in the context of
forthcoming electoral processes. Potential spoilers are
likely to exploit any indication of weakness or
disengagement.

While the Haitian National Police is becoming
stronger, it does not yet have the capacity to address
those threats without assistance. The continued
presence of international troops and police therefore
remains indispensable to protecting the gains that we
have achieved and to ensuring continued progress.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General recommends in his
report the retention of our security component at a
broadly similar level, but with some adjustments to its
configuration. Those include the repatriation of a

number of armoured personnel carriers and an
associated reduction of 120 troops in our military
component. At the same time, he has suggested an
increase of 120 officers in our police component to
bring all formed police units up to standard strength.
Those measures would lower the Mission's profile
while increasing its flexibility and maintaining its
capacity to respond effectively to possible threats over
the coming 12 months.

At the same time, further efforts must be made to
address significant shortfalls in the Haitian Police's
equipment, especially outside of Port-au-Prince, and to
increase its financial resources and managerial
capacity. In order to achieve the timelines established
in national reform plans, it is essential that the Haitian
authorities continue to prioritize the necessary political
decisions while continuing to benefit from strong and
sustained support from MINUSTAH and bilateral
donors.

Fourthly, we have seen further progress towards
the strengthening of other rule-of-law institutions and
the protection of human rights, following national
blueprints and drawing on the commitment of Haiti's
leadership.

In the area of justice, the training school for
magistrates is now up and running, after having been
closed for a number of years. It is important that the
recruitment of the first class of magistrates be
expedited, taking full advantage of that new resource.
Likewise, we hope that the supervisory body for the
judiciary - the Superior Council of the Judiciary -
will soon be put in place.

In the area of corrections, the construction of a
new prison near Port-au-Prince and the rehabilitation
of other facilities are under way. That is an important
initial step towards responding to the urgent problem
of extreme prison overcrowding. More also needs to be
done to strengthen the Office de Protection du Citoyen,
which will play a key role in promoting respect for
human rights.

We must bear in mind that the creation of all of
these institutions is a long-term process. Continued
Haitian leadership and sustained international support
are indispensable to creating a solid institutional
framework to protect the legal and human rights of the
Haitian people.

The fifth area of the stabilization process -
socio-economic development - is not, as the Council
knows, the core business of peacekeeping operations.
There is, however, a strong linkage between security,
stability and development. Peacekeeping operations
can help create the conditions for development, but
stabilization cannot succeed unless there is some
prospect of tangible improvement in the daily lives of
the Haitian people.

The Mission has worked closely with the United
Nations country team and donors to highlight the need
for a peace dividend. The creation of several thousand
temporary jobs through labour-intensive projects has
helped to respond to immediate needs, but continued
generous assistance from the international community
will remain essential for the foreseeable future.

We have also sought to reflect that sensitivity
within the work of MINUSTAH, drawing, inter alia, on
our engineering capacity. The priorities of our
engineering component are necessarily dictated by the
operational needs of the Mission. But as they help us to
achieve our mandated tasks, their work to repair basic
infrastructure or to respond to urgent needs can also
make a difference in people's lives and strengthen
relations between MINUSTAH and the community
where we serve.

At the same time, it is vital that further efforts be
made to lay the foundations for long-term progress,
based around the revival of private-sector activity.
Today, we see a window of opportunity. Haiti's
inherent advantages as an area for investment have
been highlighted repeatedly over the past year. The
engagement of President Clinton as United Nations
Special Envoy can help create the dynamism and
coordination that is required for success. At the same
time, it is critical that the Haitian leadership reach out
to the private sector and take the additional regulatory
measures needed to create an environment that is
genuinely conducive to business.

In conclusion, let me say that over the past two
years events on the ground have highlighted the fact
that stability is built slowly and that setbacks are to be
expected. But they have also shown that if we
persevere and if we stay the course, we can advance.
We remain convinced that today Haiti enjoys a
remarkable opportunity for change, as President
Clinton just underscored. We cannot lose confidence
when we meet challenges and we cannot take progress
for granted, but must work to nurture and consolidate
it. With the continuing engagement of the Haitian
leadership and people, and with the assistance of the
Security Council and the wider international
community, I am confident that the stabilization
process will succeed and that the Haitian people can
look forward to the better future to which they have
aspired for so long.

