Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the French
presidency for convening this quarterly open debate.

The Middle East is undergoing a rapid and
fundamental transformation that is accompanied by
a wide array of tragic events in Syria, Yemen, Libya,
Palestine and other hotspots. The Middle East peace
process is the alpha and omega of the current situation
in the region, as well as the marker of the limitations
and weaknesses of the existing regional security
system. That is why any efforts aimed at restoring
regional stability should take the Palestinian issue in
all its aspects into account. Indeed, the presence of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine at this table proves
that the Palestinian question remains fundamental.

We join others in welcoming the decision of the
Hamas leadership to dissolve the Gaza administrative
committee, and we commend the effective mediation of
all parties, first and foremost Egypt, aimed at advancing
the process of inter-Palestinian reconciliation. We urge
the parties to make the best use of the momentum
created in Cairo and take further steps to fully to
reunite Gaza and the West Bank under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. This must be done without delay
considering, inter alia, the dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza. Given that not much time has passed since
we witnessed the escalation in the Temple Mount/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, we should not allow unilateral
actions and inflammatory statements to push the
situation to the edge.

On the ongoing stalemate in the peace process, one
cannot help but underscore that the continued expansion
of settlement activities does not contribute to the easing
tensions and runs contrary to our expectations. Ukraine
reiterates its position that the Israeli-Palestinian
peace settlement lies within the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including land for peace, the Quartet road map, the
agreements previously reached by the parties, and
the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. Both Israel and the
Palestinians should refrain from taking any action that
could undermine the prospects for a peaceful settlement.
The statements of both Mohammad Abbas (A/72/PV.8)

and Benjamin Netanyahu (A/72/PV.3) we heard in the
General Assembly last month left the impression that
both sides are still oceans apart.
Syria remains one of the hotbeds poisoning
the region with the seeds of geopolitical rivalry and
sectarian hatred. We take note of the agreements reached
in Astana on 15 September, in particular on the Idlib
de-escalation zone. If the idea works, then a durable
nationwide ceasefire could be within reach, giving a
chance for a full-fledged political process to emerge.
Ukraine welcomes the serious progress achieved in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in
Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor.

The conventional defeat of Da'esh must herald
a new opening and new hope for the Syrian people.
However, the absence of tangible breakthroughs on
the political and humanitarian tracks is a clear sign
that so far, military logic prevails over the diplomatic
approach. One the whole, the entire international
community should avoid at any cost falling into the
trap of short-term solutions on Syria. Such ad hoc fixes
seem to deliver temporary relief, only to set the stage
for a deeper crisis in the long term.

The fact that no root causes ofthe conflict have been
addressed so far essentially means more opportunity for
Da'esh and Al-Qaeda to capitalize on the grievances of
the disaffected population. We continue to believe that
there should be a longer-term blueprint for Syria - one
firmly based on a commitment to a negotiated political
settlement and the clear understanding of what will
come next.

Ukraine is deeply concerned with the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen. Millions
there are facing the threefold threat of food shortages,
cholera and violence. The rainy season and lack of
clean water resources are set to further aggravate the
cholera epidemic. The International Committee of the
Red Cross estimate that cholera cases could reach a
million by the end of the year is simply devastating.
On the security track, Ukrainian is disappointed by
the latest series of statements and provocative actions
by the Houthi leadership. The threat to attack Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates with ballistic
missiles is a clear disregard of international efforts to
resolve the conflict.

Only lasting peace will allow us to reduce the
sufferings of the Yemeni people. That is why the
continuing absence of dialogue between parties and
their unwillingness to sit at the negotiating table are
unacceptable. The further fragmentation of the Yemeni
political landscape is a cause of growing concern.

Tensions are high in other parts of the Middle
East as well. There is a long and difficult path ahead
to restore the long-awaited stability to the region,
including through the efforts of the Security Council.
In order to succeed, the Council has to stand united,
and our hopes for that are still high.

