Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is very pleased to see your country preside
over the Security Council this month, Sir, in particular
when a person of your stature, long experience and
expertise is presiding. At the same time, we highly
appreciate the work of your predecessor, Ambassador
Ole Peter Kolby, the Permanent Representative of
Norway, for his efficient conduct of the Council's work
last month.

It seems that since the current Israeli Government
rose to power, it has carried out a well-considered and
specific programme to eliminate the legitimate
Palestinian Authority and to occupy the territories
under its control, while constantly denying that.
However, there is much clear evidence to the contrary:
many new settlements have been constructed, requiring
the confiscation of new land in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. In addition, the head of the Israeli
Government announced that Israel needed a million
more Jewish immigrants. That million, of course,
requires the building of new settlements.

The Palestinian territories have been crowded by
Israeli settlements over the terms of successive Israeli
Governments, particularly since the current
Government introduced its slogan of power and
suppression to surpass previous Governments in
confiscating Palestinian territories to suppress and
humiliate the Palestinian people by erecting roadblocks
and cutting off roads, water and electricity. For
example, during Ramadan, when Muslims observe their
fast, a Palestinian said to a television broadcaster that
he leaves for home at 4.30 p.m. but does not arrive
there until 10.30 p.m. - five hours after the end of the
fasting day - because of roadblocks erected by the
Israeli army.

In order for the Israeli Government to begin the
implementation of its programme of usurpation and
destruction, it had to create a crisis. The head of the
Government visited the Al-Aqsa Mosque, setting off
protests that started the second intifada with all its
destructive consequences. It has escalated to a point
unprecedented since the beginning of the Palestinian
cause in 1948.

Israel's excessive use of military force,
employing a large number of tanks, evokes scenes from
both world wars. We saw tanks crush automobiles and
prevent ambulances from reaching the injured,
transforming Palestine's cities and villages into
battlefields. All that is clear evidence of the current
Israeli Government's plan, which relies on the
achievement of its expansionist policies by force.
We wish to state things as they really are. After
11 September, the Israeli Government deliberately
created confusion and misunderstanding with regard to
the concept of terrorism. Everyone condemns terrorism
and terrorist acts, but everyone also condemns
occupation and asks for its end. The Palestinian
territories, and part of the Syrian and Lebanese
territories, are under occupation. Resistance to the
Israeli occupation is internationally recognized as
legitimate. No matter how much the Israeli authority
tries to confuse the issues and obscure the difference
between resistance to occupation and fighting
terrorism, it will not succeed. Things are clear, except
in the minds of Israeli officials, who are adamant and
intransigent.

Resolution 1397 (2002) sets out clearly the idea
of two States, Palestinian and Israeli, existing side by
side. Before the current Israeli Government's rise to
power, the Palestinian State had all the basic qualities
of a State, in terms of infrastructure and democratic
institutions. Then, suddenly, Israel started destroying
that State's infrastructure, besieging its elected
President, as if it were saying to the Security Council
and the world's leaders that they had the right to think
or dream whatever they wanted, but that it would bring
about, on the ground, a fait accompli that would benefit
not two States, but only one - Israel.

Having unified the capital of Jerusalem by force
for its own benefit, Israel wants to unify the entire
territory by force for its own benefit as well. It sees no
problem in making the Palestinians refugees in their
own country, and does not object to their leaving Israel
to live in neighbouring Arab countries, as some Israeli
extremists are advocating.

There is clear evidence that the world is going in
one direction and Israel is going in the opposite one.
Where are we in relation to the numerous peaceful
initiatives, the last of which was the initiative of His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia,
adopted by all Arab countries? All those initiatives rely
on the principle of land for peace. Regrettably,
however, Israel pays no attention to that, having said
that both the Palestinians and the Arabs want to throw
Israel into the sea and therefore do not want to
recognize Israel.

The Arabs are now offering a just peace based on
the concept of two States, as referred to in resolution
1397 (2002). Nevertheless, Israel - or at least its
current Government and its head in particular - has
demonstrated no willingness to act accordingly since
the drive for peace began in earnest. Sharon simply
seeks both to keep the land and to achieve peace by
force.

It has been rare in the history of the Security
Council for two resolutions to be adopted on the same
issue within such a brief period of time, as was the case
with resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002).
However, we have yet to see Israel implement those
resolutions. We consider the Security Council to be the
organ best suited to maintaining international peace
and security, but when it adopts consecutive
resolutions requiring a United Nations member, Israel,
to abide by its will, and when that member pays no
heed to those resolutions, we believe that it is the
Council's duty to enforce the implementation of its
resolutions by taking practical measures, as it has done
with regard to many hotbeds of tension throughout the
world. At the very least, it must dispatch an
international observer force to come between the
Palestinians and the Israelis, a step similar to those
taken by the Council in other conflict areas elsewhere.
We believe that the time has come for the Council to
take such practical steps to address the situation in the
Middle East.

