Mr. Elnor (the Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month,
which coincides with the Council's consideration
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/515) on
Darfur and the renewal of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I would also like to thank Mr. Chambas
for his presentation.

There can be absolutely no doubt that the
period covered by the report witnessed a significant
improvement in the security and humanitarian situation
in Darfur, thanks to the efforts of the Sudanese
Government. Where the report asserts in a number
paragraphs that the situation was stable, that the working
conditions of the mission had considerably improved
and that there were neither obstacles to the movement
of the Operation nor obstruction to the issuance of
visas, that is due to our policy of full cooperation in
facilitating the mission's work from its establishment
in 2007 by resolution 1769 (2007).

Despite those significant advances, the report
mentions that a number of incidents occurred during
the first quarter of 2014, which it attributes to remnant
armed groups that carried out attacks in Attewiesha,
Haskanita, Alleit J alal-Nabi and Kalamendu in the north
and south of Darfur. Thus are all instances of violations
during the reporting period attributed to such groups.
We find that the facts have been presented in such a way
that it is unclear who is responsible. For example, with
regard to air strikes, despite contact with the authorities,
we reject the allegations contained in the report. The
report cannot mention unknown sources. The same
holds true for the number of displaced persons, rapes
and other violations. The statistics are imprecise, which
runs counter to professionalism and the truth.

With regard to the national dialogue, we would
like to point out that it is a Sudanese initiative. It is an
internal matter in which the Government is in charge.
All the political parties agree on that. That is why the
report goes beyond the mandate of the Joint Envoy. In
paragraph 35, we note a unilateral declaration.

The draft resolution to renew the mandate of the
Operation should support the peace and stability
Operation in Darfur and should focus on the mission's
priorities. The next few months will focus on support
to the development and relaunching of the recovery and
rebuilding efforts and on providing assistance to the
displaced persons who are returning to their homes, in
particular those who are returning voluntarily. We would
like to remind the Council that resolution 1769 (2007),
which established UNAMID, stipulates in paragraph 24
that the Council will consider the end of the mission's
mandate when the situation has significantly improved.
Well, the situation has significantly improved. We are
moving forward in the peace and stability operation
within the framework of the national dialogue initiative,
which guarantees remnant armed groups the right to
participate fully just like other political parties. We are
therefore already envisioning an exit strategy for the
mission.

While we recognize the interest of the United
Nations in peace and security in the Sudan and Darfur,
we would like to note that the huge amount of funds
allocated since 2007, had they been allocated for
various projects in Darfur, would certainly have saved
the Organization a great amount of money. Now it
is important to consider a withdrawal strategy for
UNAMID, in cooperation with the African Union.

The consolidation of peace and stability in Darfur
is rooted in the President's initiative for national
dialogue. The Government has provided a number of
guarantees for the participation of armed groups in that
dialogue, and no obstacles have been placed in their
way. That is why we count on the Council to ensure
that the dialogue is successful, by sending a clear
message to armed groups to become involved without
preconditions. Success in that dialogue is the shortest
path towards achieving peace and stability in Darfur
and in Sudan as a whole. All the parties in the Sudan,
whether the Government or the opposition, agree on
the importance of the dialogue. It is essential that it be
launched immediately.

In conclusion, it is important for the information
contained in the Secretary-General's reports on Darfur
to be objective, impartial and professional to avoid
overstepping the mandate of the mission.

