Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Israel, the occupying Power, has reiterated its
close relationship with armed terrorist groups. This
fact was proved by its targeting today of a Syrian Arab
Army warplane over the rural area of western Dara'a
and Quneitra, which was bombarding the strongholds
of the gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
on the periphery of the Yarmouk valley. This close
relationship has also been proved by the Syrian Arab
Army's discovery of Israeli military equipment in
these hideouts.

The Security Council decided more than 15 years
ago to discuss the situation in the Middle East, and holds
quarterly general debates on the topic in recognition
of the importance of this situation in the hope that the
relevant Council resolutions requiring Israel to end its
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Arab Golan, by withdrawing to the borders
of 4 June 1967, will be implemented. However, all of
these efforts have been fruitless because of Israel's
refusal to comply with Security Council resolutions and
owing to the policies adopted by some members of the
Council to provide Israel with the political protection
and cover that allow it to maintain its occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon,
notwithstanding the fact that more than 51 years have
elapsed since the occupation started.

The policies of these States have contributed
to the transformation of Palestine into an open
collective prison and facilitated Israel's application
of racial policies of apartheid against Palestinians,
the legitimate owners of land in Jerusalem and other
occupied territories. These States have supported
Israel's expansion of cancerous settlements, which
undermines any possibility for the establishment of
a desired Palestinian State. In addition, those States
insist on not addressing the current developments in
Palestine within their broad real context. They attempt
to portray the situation as mutual violence that must
be de-escalated, and are oblivious to the root causes of
the conflict, namely, occupation, settlement-building,
population displacement and other practices of the
Israeli occupation, not to mention the attempts of some
to promote sinister deals that would strip Palestinians
of their legitimate rights.

My country, Syria, condemns in the strongest terms
the Hebrew-Jewish nation-State law, which has been
enacted by the Knesset of the usurper Israeli entity and
entrenches that racist entity. We call on the international
community to shoulder its responsibilities and thwart
this law, which runs counter to all the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and does not protect the
inalienable and historic rights of the Palestinian people
to restore their territory, including the right to return.

Along the same lines of the aforementioned
barbaric Israeli policy, Israel has occupied the Syrian
Golan since 1967, thereby keeping Syrians under the
yoke of abominable occupation. It is a bitter situation
that cannot be overlooked as Israel continues its
occupation and the colonial settlement-building in
the Golan, not to mention its policies of repression
and racial discrimination. Israel plunders the Golan's
natural resources and arbitrarily detains Syrians in
Israeli prisons, in violation of the Geneva Conventions.
By way of example, Sudqi Almaqt, the Syrian
Mandela, was detained by Israeli authorities because
he had video and audio recordings of Israeli occupation
forces cooperating in the Syrian occupied Golan with
gangs related to Da'esh and Al-Nusra Front in the
disengagement of forces zone in the Golan.

We have always informed the Security Council and
United Nations organs of Israel's unlimited support
to terrorist armed groups in the disengagement zone,
including repeated direct military aggression by Israel
against Syrian territories in support of these groups. It
is a flagrant violation of the disengagement agreement
and of international law, on which the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Special Coordinator
are suspiciously silent. Israel has falsely alleged that
it has no connection to the war in Syria. However,
Israel, together with the Governments of some States,
has smuggled hundreds of members of the terrorist
White Helmets organization and leaders of other armed
organizations. This proves that Israel and those States
support terrorist groups in their aggression against
Syria and the destruction of Syrian infrastructure under
false pretexts. Israel has facilitated the infiltration
of terrorists into Israel and Jordan, and thence to the
States that sponsored them, and provided them with the
means to destroy Syria and tarnish its image.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reaffirms its sovereign right over the occupied
Syrian Golan within the 4 June 1967 borders, which
is non-negotiable and does not fall under a statute of
limitations. Our occupied land and usurped rights
should be restored to us as the legitimate owners. Israeli
settlers must leave our land in the Golan sooner or later.

In conclusion, the Syrian Government calls on
the Security Council to take all immediate measures
necessary to compel Israel to stop its aggression and
violations; end the occupation of Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan; withdraw to
the 4 June 1967 borders, according to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981); and facilitate
the establishment of a Palestinian State, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.

I will not respond to the statement made by the
representative of the Bani Saud regime, which is the
exclusive representative of the terrorist and takfiri
Wahhabi ideology. This regime inspires terrorist
ideologies all over the world, including those of
Al-Qaida, Da'esh, Boko Haram and others. This
terrorist Wahhabi regime is responsible for all of the
bloodshed and lives claimed by terrorists, whom it has
supported in Syria and elsewhere, while it continues in
each meeting to distract us from our objectives in order
to serve Israel, its partner in international terrorism.

