Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), on her comprehensive briefing.

cote d'Ivoire welcomes the renewal of the mandate
ofthe United Nations Mission in Iraq, which once again
illustrates the convergence of views of the members of
the Security Council and their continued support for
the efforts to restore peace, security and stability in that
country since the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007).

cote d'Ivoire welcomes in particular the gradual
improvement in the security situation in Iraq and the
military defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), thanks to the full backing ofthe Council.
My country very much hopes that this unified dynamic
will continue, with a view to determining appropriate
collective responses to the remaining challenges to
peace and security in Iraq.

To bear fruit, the efforts of the international
community must resonate with the willingness and
commitment of the Iraqi authorities to address, as
soon as possible, persistent political, security and
humanitarian challenges, with a view to strengthening
the legitimacy and the effectiveness of State action.
In that respect it is important that the question of the
formation of the Government be resolved as soon as
possible. The Security Council must send a strong
message to the Iraqi parties to that effect, so that they
commit to agreements to permanently fill the remaining
ministerial posts. A fully functioning Government
will no doubt be one more step in the process of
strengthening the national institutional framework and
will accelerate the implementation of the governmental
programme for the period 2018-2022, which is aimed at
improving basic services and promoting reconstruction
and economic development throughout the country.

Cote d'Ivoire fervently hopes that the commendable
efforts of the international community will help
restore the social fabric and strengthen Iraq's security
institutions. On the other hand, the progress made in the
normalization of the political situation must continue
as outstanding issues in the relations between Baghdad
and Erbil are resolved. They require bold compromises
from both parties, including the promulgation of a
national hydrocarbon law, the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the 2005 Iraqi Constitution and
the adoption of a law on revenue sharing. C6te d'Ivoire
encourages the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to respect their respective
commitments following the adoption of the 2019 federal
budget law.

On the humanitarian front, Cote d'Ivoire believes
that special attention must be paid to the situation of the
1.75 million persons who have been displaced, almost
500,000 of whom live in camps and face difficulties
related to access to livelihoods, social protection
programmes and humanitarian assistance. Addressing
the health and education needs of the most vulnerable
segments of society, including women and children,
should provide further impetus for the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of displaced persons. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the continued strengthening of
the strategic partnership between the Government and
international partners, including the United Nations,
the World Bank and the European Union, through the
Executive Committee for Recovery, Reconstruction
and Development.

Echoing presidential statement S/PRST/2019/l,
adopted on 19 February, my country encourages
cooperation between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities
in order to diligently and definitively provide an answer
to the question of missing Kuwaiti nationals and seized
property, including the Kuwaiti national archives.
cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that a successful

conclusion of this dispute will strengthen trust between
the two parties.

Regarding the massive human rights violations
committed by the Islamic State between 2014 and 2017,
including against the Yazidi ethnic minority of Sinjar,
Cote d'Ivoire, which is committed to the principle of
accountability, believes that those offences against
human dignity cannot go unpunished. I therefore
express the full support of C6te d'Ivoire for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, which collects, stores and preserves
evidence of ISIL's crimes in Iraq. cote d'Ivoire
encourages the Iraqi authorities to cooperate with the
Team to ensure that it carries out its tasks successfully.

