The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/586, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Burundi.

After consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council took note of the
Secretary-General's special report on the
situation in Burundi (8/2005/586) dated
14 September 2005, in particular the proposal to
establish a partners' forum as an international
support mechanism.

"The Security Council also took note of the
declaration adopted on 13 September 2005 in
New York during the summit on Burundi, co-
chaired by the Secretary-General and the
President of the Republic of Uganda in his
capacity as Chairman of the Regional Peace
Initiative for Burundi.
"The Security Council welcomes the
decision taken during the summit to establish a
forum of Burundi's partners and encourages the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to conclude discussions with all concerned
partners in order to establish the forum as soon as
possible.

"The forum should work with the
Government of Burundi in consolidating peace
and national reconciliation in Burundi, supporting
reforms being undertaken by the Government and
in enhancing donor coordination, and work in
close coordination with the peacebuilding
commission once it is operational.

"The Security Council also reiterates its call
to the donor community to pursue bilateral and
multilateral efforts to support the country."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/43.

The Security Council thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20p.m.

