Ms. Yparraguirre (the Philippines): The
Philippines thanks the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate.

Without a doubt, terrorism and violent extremism
are two of the biggest threats to international security.
Our individual and collective actions must, therefore,
rest on two parallel tracks: prevention and countering
its spread. The two are not mutually exclusive and must
be taken simultaneously for our efforts to be effective.

The Philippines advocates a whole-nation approach
to countering and preventing terrorism and violent
extremism within our borders. It entails engaging
non-traditional Government agencies, academe and the
private sector in implementing community-awareness
campaigns and target-hardening programmes. The
Philippines is also proactively engaged in various
domestic undertakings to strengthen its counter-
terrorism preparedness. We continue to pass laws
aimed at assisting in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. The anti-money laundering law and
anti-terrorist financing law were passed and amended
to further strengthen our counter-terrorism and counter-
violent-extremism efforts. The Human Security Act of
2007, our landmark law against terrorism and violent
extremism, is undergoing its final phase of review.

We have also been collaborating with country
partners, through bilateral talks, agreements and
joint projects, and with international organizations to
ensure that our front-line agencies and offices have an
integrated and synchronized approach to countering
terrorism and violent extremism and are abreast of
international developments. Here at the United Nations,
the Philippines, together with 10 other countries,
are members of the Group of Friends of Chemical,
Biological, Radiological or Nuclear Risk Mitigation
and Security Governance, which seeks to shine a
spotlight on chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear issues, including those that relate to terrorism
and violent extremism.

Information sharing plays a key role, not only in
ensuring greater coordination, but also in enhancing
intelligence sharing among Government agencies. We
established the Philippines Regional Anti-Terrorism
Council Convergence Groups in the various regions
of the country, which are tasked with ensuring a rapid
response to any potential threat. An Inter-Agency
Working Group on Persons of Interest and Foreign
Terrorist Fighters in Conflict Areas has devised a
plan of action on information collection, collation
and processing. We intend to establish a special
investigations committee on foreign terrorist fighters
to study what penal laws would enable us to prosecute
those who travel for terrorism or related training,
pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014).

On the prevention side, the Philippines continues to
develop its capacity to detect and prevent insider threats
from homegrown violent extremists. We support grass-
roots-based efforts to help communities understand
how to protect themselves against extremists or terrorist
propaganda. Deradicalization programmes are being
strengthened through partnerships with local religious
leaders and religious schools to improve their capability
to promote moderate or tolerant religious teachings.
The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism has
also been assisting us in that effort. We have started
a comparative research study on radicalization in
Zamboanga City in Mindanao in an effort to identify
and isolate the drivers or motivating forces that lure
the vulnerable sector to become violent extremists.
Through the study, we are working on a conceptual
model of the radicalization of communities that could
strengthen our preventive efforts.

As we review the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in June, it is our hope that we will
be able to infuse new and effective ideas into our
collective approach that will ensure long-term success
in our fight against terrorism and violent extremism.

