Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenca, for his clear
briefing on the major challenges that continue to arise
in the Middle East.

One of these aforementioned challenges is the
ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict - a question as old
as our Organization - which has endured on the agenda
of the Council along with all its familiar, disturbing
consequences. Indeed, on the ground negative trends
continue to fuel violence and radicalization and move us
ever further from the two-State solution, which in our
view remains the only viable option. Senegal takes this
opportunity to reiterate its condolences to the families
of the victims of the recent violence and to reiterate
its firm condemnation of violence and terrorism,
regardless of its perpetrators or their motives.

My delegation welcomes the signing of the
reconciliation agreement between Fatah and Hamas,
facilitated by Egypt's laudable efforts. We hope that
the will of the Palestinian political actors to reunite
will be reflected in the formation of a national
unity Government and the holding of long-awaited
municipal elections.

Yet beyond the political aspect, we wish to see
a lasting solution to the considerable humanitarian
and socioeconomic challenges facing the Gaza
Strip, including the lack of electricity and water and
limitations in the public health and reconstruction
sectors, which severely impact an estimated 2 million
people, half of whom are children. In this connection,
my delegation reiterates its support for efforts to ensure
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East enjoys access to
sufficient and predictable resources. In this regard, we
welcome the contributions of more than $60 million
pledged at the meeting held by the Organization
for Islamic Cooperation on 21 September on the
sidelines of the seventy-second general debate of the
General Assembly.

We reiterate our support for the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by certain countries, including Egypt, the
Russian Federation and the United States, to revive the
peace process, which has been at a standstill since 2014,
on the basis of existing platforms, notably the Arab
Peace Initiative. My delegation therefore continues to
appeal to the international community - particularly
the Security Council, the Quartet and countries of
the region - to ensure that, like the Israeli people,
which enjoys a democratic and prosperous State, the
Palestinian people are able to achieve their legitimate
aspirations to a sovereign and viable State on the basis
of internationally recognized and guaranteed borders.

With regard to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, my delegation is of the view that two priorities
should guide the action of the international community.
The first is the fight against terrorism, in particular
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the former Jabhat al-Nusrah, based on a comprehensive
strategy that takes due account of the imperative to
protect populations and civilian infrastructure, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The second priority is the search for a negotiated
political solution under United Nations auspices. We
therefore appeal to all parties - the Government, the
opposition and civil society - to engage in good faith
in the Geneva talks under the auspices of the Special
Envoy with a View to finding a definitive solution to
the conflict on the basis of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).

Before concluding, I refer to the conflict in Yemen
in order to reaffirm Senegal's conviction that only a
negotiated political solution between the parties - while
respecting the legitimacy of the Yemeni Government
and taking into account the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, as well
as the resolutions of the Security Council - will bring
peace and stability to a country experiencing one of the
worst humanitarian disasters of our time.

