Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Secretary-General Guterres, as well as the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland to the Chamber.
Indonesia welcomes the convening of today's
briefing, under Kuwait's presidency, to further enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States in resolving conflicts. We would also
like to highlight Kuwait's excellent role in the region
in that regard.

As we often state, Indonesia believes in the principle
that neighbours know best. Cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
peace and security is consistent with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and important to
achieving lasting solutions. Enhancing such cooperation
has been a recurring theme for Indonesia's membership
of the Security Council, including through the adoption
of document S/PRST/2007/42, during our presidency
in 2007. We have always championed the need for the
greater involvement of regional organizations, as we
have done in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
region on peacebuilding and conflict resolution. In that
regard, permit me to share several points.

First, the League of Arab States, with its
22 members, remains of great importance and
relevance. In recent years, it has assumed a leading
role in maintaining peace and security in the region.
It has facilitated the pacific settlement of disputes
between its members, adopted clear stances on the
conflicts in the region and supported humanitarian
situations. Its member States have also been actively
participating in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
However, many countries of the Arab region remain
afflicted by conflicts. Therefore, we commend the
renewed determination of the League of Arab States
to strengthen its role in conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
the region. The League of Arab States is best placed
to envision conflict-specific solutions, considering its
unique understanding of the dynamics of the situations
involving its members. It should continue to advance
a comprehensive regional approach, particularly in
resolving long-standing conflicts in the region.

I should like to concur with the statement made
by the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
earlier today on the issue of the continuation of Israel's
illegal occupation of Palestinian territory. We condemn
any effort leading to the illegal annexation ofPalestinian
territory, which would further destabilize the Middle
East. We will continue to work with our brothers and
sisters towards the aim of the Arab League to achieve
the vision of a two-State solution, based on relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed
parameters. We also concur with the statement made
by Secretary-General Guterres that there is no plan B.

Secondly, cooperation between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States should be enhanced,
building on respective comparative advantages, based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that such cooperation
should be more structured to ensure its effectiveness
and sustainability. We recognize the merit in having
regular briefings and annual informal meetings between
the Council and the League of Arab States. However,
interactions between the two should go beyond those
meetings and enable a more meaningful dialogue that
delivers concrete actions. In that regard, we welcome
the appointment of an Assistant Secretary-General for
the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, as well as the
opening of the United Nations Liaison Office in Cairo.

Thirdly, there should be a greater focus on
prevention and mediation. Indonesia believes that
tackling the root cause of conflicts is imperative to
preventing conflict or relapse into violence. There is
a nexus between peace and security and development.
In many instances, potential conflicts diminish when
there are economic and social developments that lead
to greater opportunities and well-being of the people.
Therefore, it is important to remain proactive in
identifying and addressing the social and economic root
causes of violence. In addition, the mediation efforts
of the League of Arab States should be promoted and
supported. Information-sharing, joint early warning and
empowerment to enhance the capacity of the League of
Arab States are areas that could be further explored.
On many occasions, we have underlined the importance
of horizon-scanning so as to prevent conflict or ensure
that emerging conflicts will not escalate further.

In that vein, we are deeply concerned about the
most recent developments near the Strait of Hormuz,
including the attack on two oil tankers earlier today.
Such attacks should be condemned. We call on all
countries of the region and elsewhere to exercise
restraint and work together to help de-escalate tensions
in the region.

Indonesia views the League of Arab States as an
important partner, both historically and strategically.
We signed a memorandum of cooperation in 2016 to
promote cooperation on many issues. We will continue
to work together with the League of Arab States and
countries of the region in pursuit of global peace and
security, in promoting a culture of peace and tolerance,
in combating terrorism and in addressing development
challenges and the myriad issues facing the world today.

Lastly, we welcome the draft presidential statement
prepared by Kuwait regarding this very important issue.

