Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your country, the Republic of the Congo, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We have full confidence that the work of
the Council will be successful under your able and
wise stewardship. I express our profound appreciation
as well to the Permanent Representative of China for
his adept leadership of the Council during the month of
July.

At this time, I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Michael Williams, for his
briefing to the Council today on the current situation in
our region and to thank him on behalf of Palestine for
the role he played during his short tenure. We wish him
every success in his new post in London, which will
allow him to remain in contact with us and the question
of Palestine.

When addressing the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, we
cannot but refer to the reality of what is actually
happening on the ground. I repeat, we cannot but refer
to the reality of what is actually happening on the
ground. As depressing, negative and frustrating as
these facts may be - and as repetitive as it may
sound - this is the tragic reality of the Palestinian
people living under Israel's occupation. It is our duty
as the representatives of the Palestinian people here at
the United Nations to continuously bring this situation
to the attention of the Security Council until Israel, the
occupying Power, ceases - or is compelled to
cease - its illegal policies and practices.

Israel's unlawful policies and incessant violations
of international law continue to cause severe hardships
for the Palestinian civilian population, to compound
the difficult situation on the ground and to undermine
any peace efforts. Indeed, the cessation of such illegal
policies and practices is a prerequisite for making
peace, a delicate process that requires good will and a
stable environment conducive to truly reviving and
advancing peace negotiations.

Regrettably, in the months that have passed since
I addressed the Council in April, Israel, the occupying
Power, continued to commit violations and grave
breaches of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
Israeli occupying forces continue to carry out repeated
military raids, assaults and incursions throughout the
occupied territory, terrifying, killing and injuring more
Palestinian civilians, including many children. They
continue to use excessive, indiscriminate and lethal
force against the defenceless Palestinians in addition to
extrajudicial killings. At the same time, Israeli
occupation forces persist in their attacks, spreading
havoc in the property of Palestinian civilians, including
their homes and cultivated land, as well as destroying
their infrastructure and aiming at the unlawful
confiscation of Palestinian lands.

Despite the fact that over 200 Palestinian
prisoners have been released, Israel continues
arbitrarily to detain and imprison thousands of
Palestinians. That includes 112 women and at least 300
children. This is in addition to other violent house-to-
house detention campaigns that are carried out daily.
Such illegal and destructive acts by Israel, the
occupying Power, exacerbate the suffering of the
Palestinian people at all levels. They also cause further
deterioration of the situation, fuelling violence and
tension.

At the same time, Israel is continuing to pursue
its unlawful colonization campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
occupying Power is continuing to construct and expand
its illegal settlements in the West Bank, particularly in
and around the area of occupied East Jerusalem. It is
also continuing to transfer Israeli settlers to the
occupied territory on a daily basis - at a rate of
approximately 1.5 busloads of settlers per day,
according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

In addition, Israel is continuing to unlawfully
construct the wall in occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. In doing so it is confiscating
more Palestinian land, demolishing more property of
Palestinian civilians and causing more damage to the
environment and further fragmenting the Palestinian
territory in pursuit of this illegal and destructive plan.

All of that is being done in grave breach of
international law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention, in serious violation of United Nations
resolutions, in total disrespect for the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and in
disregard of the provisions of the Quartet's road map.
Both the settlements and the wall are destroying the
territorial contiguity and integrity of the Palestinian
territory and must be dismantled - I repeat, they must
be dismantled. Their continued presence seriously
undermines the viability of the two-State solution, and
thus the prospects for peace.

While further fragmenting the Palestinian
territory and separating Palestinian population centres
into isolated and barely viable cantons, Israel is also
maintaining a discriminatory road network and permit
system, with more than 550 checkpoints and
roadblocks throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Prolonged closures
and severe restrictions on the movement of Palestinian
persons and goods are arbitrarily and routinely
imposed by the occupying Power. Such practices
amount to collective punishment of the Palestinian
people, in violation of international humanitarian law.
Moreover, those measures violate the freedom of
movement of our citizens, as well as their other basic
human rights. They also continue to cause great
damage to the already frail economy, to hinder
development and to worsen the humanitarian crisis.

In that regard, while the wall and checkpoints
have been more damaging to socio-economic life in the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip has been more affected by
the continuing closure of the crossings into and out of
the territory. Only limited human and material traffic is
permitted to pass through the checkpoints when they
are infrequently opened for short periods of time. The
closures, in addition to Gaza's continued separation
from the West Bank due to the lack of territorial link
between the two areas of the territory - both in
violation of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access - have exacerbated humanitarian conditions in
Gaza and further impoverished its population.

That in brief is the prevailing situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of Israel's continued imposition
of illegal policies and measures on the Palestinian

people under its occupation. Not only are such actions
not conducive to peace negotiations, they are actually
in total contradiction of the spirit of peacemaking.
What is needed now, as I mentioned earlier, is a
complete cessation of all of those unlawful Israeli
policies and a demonstration of the good faith and
confidence-building measures needed to advance the
peace process towards our shared vision of two-States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security.

Of course, any assessment of the situation on the
ground today in the occupied Palestinian territory must
also take into account the regrettable events that
occurred on the Palestinian side in the Gaza Strip in
June. Reflecting on those events saddens us. It is with
great pain that we refer to those developments, which
are alien to the democratic, pluralistic and humane
Palestinian tradition. The coup d'etat carried out by
outlawed militias against the Palestinian Authority in
the Gaza Strip is a serious matter, for it threatens the

unity of our land - whose integrity and unity has
already been gravely undermined by the occupying
Power - as well as the unity of our people and our

national movement. The situation on the ground in
Gaza today must be restored to that which existed prior
to the events of June 2007, to allow for the
maintenance of the unity of our people and land.

In that connection, we reaffirm the statement
made by President Abbas to the Central Council of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), namely, that
our goal remains that of the establishment of the
Palestinian State on all of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including the West Bank, East Jerusalem and
the Gaza Strip. Moreover, President Abbas emphasized
that the Palestinian land and people are one, and that
they will never be divided.

The situation of the Palestinian people in the
Gaza Strip, the majority of whom are living under very
difficult circumstances and enduring severe socio-
economic and humanitarian hardships, is among the
high priorities on the Palestinian agenda. We shall
spare no effort to assist them until the abnormal
situation that now prevails in Gaza is redressed. In that
regard, we will continue to call upon, and to actively
engage, the international community, including here at
the United Nations, to help in any and all ways
possible to alleviate the hardships being experienced
by our people in the occupied Palestinian territory, in
particular those suffering in Gaza.
Despite the difficulties we face as a result of the
continuation of Israel's illegal policies and practices
and the additional difficulties arising from the situation
in Gaza, we now have before us a significant
opportunity to move towards ending Israel's
occupation and the attainment of the two-State solution
on the basis of the 1967 borders. That would entail the
establishment of the Palestinian State in all the areas
occupied by Israel since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and the achievement of a just and agreed
solution to the issue of Palestinian refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III), of
1948.

It is in that spirit that we see the positive aspects
of the recent speech by United States President George
Bush, in which he called for the convening of an
international conference in the autumn to find a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by ending the
occupation and achieving the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security. We believe that the basis for such a
conference is well known: it consists of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Road Map and the principle of land for peace.
There is thus no need to create a new basis, since the
existing basis for a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict contains the basic elements for peacemaking.

What we need now are the political will and
resolve to push this process forward, making it possible
for a Palestinian State to be swiftly established,
because the occupation has now been imposed on us
for more than 40 years, too much damage has already
been done to our people, and our people are
desperately yearning for peace and their freedom. All
concerned parties and all those who support the two-
State solution and a peaceful Middle East should be
involved in the upcoming conference, which has
always been the forum preferred by the Palestinian and
Arab sides for resolving the conflict.

Ultimately, the conference - which could be
transformed so that it is under United Nations
auspices- could make it possible to find a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution based on the tenets
of international legitimacy. It could also pave the way
for the participation of those countries that wish to
contribute in a concrete and constructive way to the
building of a future sovereign, independent and viable
Palestinian State and that could monitor compliance
with the peace treaty that we hope will be signed as the
final outcome of the international peace conference.

Energetically and in good faith, President Abbas
is engaging his counterpart, Mr. Ehud Olmert, Prime
Minister of Israel, to prepare constructively for what
we hope will be a fruitful and successful conference in
the autumn.

Although it is far too early to come to any serious
conclusions, we note the emergence of positive signals
in addition to President Bush's speech. For instance,
there are the activities and meetings of the Arab
foreign ministers in that regard, including the Arab
League mission to Israel by the foreign ministers of
Egypt and Jordan to formally present the Arab Peace
Initiative, which calls for a comprehensive, just and
permanent solution to the entire Arab-Israeli conflict.
There are the recent visits to the region and the
meetings held by Ms. Condoleezza Rice, United States
Secretary of State; the recent meeting in Moscow
between President Mahmoud Abbas and President
Vladimir Putin; and the important meeting of the
Quartet principals in Lisbon, at which Mr. Tony Blair
was officially appointed as Quartet Special Envoy.

Those signals and activities have been very
important, because they may give our people hope for a
solution within the near future that will end their long
suffering and oppression. Indeed, it is our most earnest
hope that together, all of these efforts can build the
momentum necessary to help us overcome the
obstacles that we all currently face and move forward
on the path towards peace by producing serious
understandings and agreements leading to the long-
awaited meaningful negotiations between the two sides
on final-status issues concerning borders, Jerusalem
and the Palestinian refugees. Those essential
components must be resolved before the establishment
of a Palestinian State and the achievement of the peace
in the Middle East that we all seek.

