Not for the first time this year, Liechtenstein approaches the quarterly open debate on the Middle East in an atmosphere of grave concern. Foremost among today's issues is the continued spectre of the annexation of parts of the West Bank by Israel. Liechtenstein reiterates its long-held position that the annexation of territory, or any decision to change or amend the border between Israel and Palestine without the explicit consent of both parties, is in violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such actions are illegal regardless of the scale or speed of annexation. Far from making Israel more secure, annexation undermines the prospect of a two-State solution based on applicable international law, in particular international humanitarian law, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, which remain the only viable pathway to a sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In all situations Liechtenstein will implement its policy, in accordance with international law, not to recognize as lawful any annexation of territory. Liechtenstein notes the ongoing proceedings in Pre-Trial Chamber I of the International Criminal Court (ICC) with regard to the situation in Palestine and looks forward to its decision in due course. Such proceedings by a standing and authoritative international court are the expression of an effective international rules-based order, as consistently advocated by a large part of the United Nations membership. Political attacks against the ICC can only intend to weaken the rule of law, undermine multilateralism and strengthen the rule of might - a trend that we are determined to oppose, along with many others. We will therefore continue our support for the ICC in providing justice undeterred and with confidence of its broadly supported mandate. Liechtenstein regrets the withdrawal of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the United States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) - decisions that undoubtedly make the world a less safe place. The JCPOA was a milestone achievement of multilateral diplomacy that strengthened the international rules- based order and achieved concrete results in terms of nuclear non-proliferation. Full compliance with its terms needs to be restored. Liechtenstein also recalls that resolution 2231 (2015) remains in force and therefore continues to be binding on all States, with a special responsibility for all members of the Security Council. We closely followed the process leading to the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020), which will allow millions in north-western Syria, particularly in and around Idlib, to continue to receive aid. However, the process of arriving at the resolution demonstrated once again that the Council was unable to muster the political will to prioritize the protection of the Syrian people, even if the humanitarian necessities are perfectly clear, and to agree on measures that are commensurate with the challenge at hand. Based on the information available, we must conclude that the agreement found within the Council is likely to exacerbate the humanitarian suffering in the country, falling short of bringing more permanent relief. We thank those members of the Security Council who put their collective weight behind achieving this minimal solution for the continued cross-border delivery of aid, in particular the co-penholders. In contrast, the use of the veto by two permanent members of the Council to block two previous draft resolutions put forward by the co-penholders, and subsequently ensure an end to aid deliveries through the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah border crossings, is deplorable. We are concerned that people in northern Aleppo and north-eastern Syria will suffer due to these actions, just as they have done as a result of the 14 previous vetoes regarding the situation in Syria over the past seven years. It is long past time that such flagrant use of the veto be met with a response from the wider membership, including through action in the General Assembly. Despite the fact that the membership has predominantly and clearly expressed itself on the need to ensure accountability for the worst crimes committed in Syria, the Security Council continues to ignore the call for a referral to the ICC. In that context, the decision to create the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 in late 2016 is increasingly relevant in the quest to bring about a measure of justice for the atrocities that have been committed in Syria. The International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism's diligent work is a constant reminder of the central role of criminal accountability in any political process aimed at sustainable peace and genuine reconciliation in Syria. Liechtenstein welcomes the clear commitment to that effect by the participants of the fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region and remains fully aligned with it.
