Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): It is an honour indeed, Sir, for us to see you
presiding over today's meeting, which is devoted to a
debate on an extremely important issue. We welcome
you personally, Sir, both as President of Costa Rica and
as President of the Security Council. We also welcome
the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Panama, Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro.

At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its gratitude to the delegation of Costa Rica for
having organized this important meeting on the
maintenance of collective security through general
regulation and reduction of armaments, which we
believe will contribute to the Security Council's efforts
in that regard.

Achieving collective security for all States
continues to be the ultimate purpose for which the
Security Council was established. Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations confers upon the Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and mandates it to act
on behalf of all Member States.

Six decades have transpired since the
establishment of the Security Council. However,
collective security remains an elusive goal for every
State. In spite of certain indicators that point to
genuine successes and the historic circumstances that
have long guided the actions of the Council, it is quite
clear that the current international circumstances
provide a more appropriate environment than that
which prevailed during the decades of the cold war.
That more propitious environment should enable the

United Nations to play its rightful role in promoting
collective security, disarmament and the regulation of
armaments. However, all of us must bear in mind that a
more conducive international environment in itself is
insufficient to improve the effectiveness of the
Council. Among other matters, there is first and
foremost a need to improve the Council's legitimacy.

In the 2004 report (see A/59/565) of the
Secretary-General entitled "A more secure world: our
shared responsibility", which was prepared by his
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change,
several terms are used repeatedly, such as: "a threat to
one is a threat to all". Paragraph 24 of the report also
states that "Every State requires the cooperation of
other States to make itself secure". Those concepts are
now indisputable and have become mere platitudes.

The regulation of disarmament and arms control
can undoubtedly serve to promote collective security
for all States, small and large. However, the regulation
of armaments should take place in the context of
comprehensive and multilateral negotiations in which
all States participate. In the era of globalization, where
a revolution in information and communication
technologies has taken place, the regulation of
armaments, disarmament and non-proliferation are
indeed of growing importance, for they have an impact
on every State in one way or another. Those issues
must therefore be addressed through international and
multilateral agreements and treaties under the auspices
of the United Nations. Multilaterally negotiated and
implemented disarmament and arms reduction
agreements are the appropriate mechanisms through
which States parties can consult and cooperate to find
solutions to any problem that may arise with regard to
the objectives or implementation of the provisions of
those instruments.

International cooperation, in particular between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, serves to strengthen collective security.
Given their increasing potential, the primary role they
play in the area of preventive diplomacy and their
capacity to understand the genuine reasons for conflict
in a given region - which in turn enables them to
contribute to the prevention or resolution of conflicts a
such cooperation should be strengthened in line with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

My country believes that there is a very close link
between disarmament, development and human rights.
There can be no development without security and
stability, and vice versa. It is therefore clear that
disarmament and arms control cannot but have a
positive impact on development, security and stability.

A very paradoxical situation exists with regard to
global military expenditures and the various aspects of
socio-economic underdevelopment * including
hunger, poverty and disease - that afflict more than
two thirds of humankind. The excessive acquisition of

armaments - which, according to United Nations
statistics, currently accounts for $1 trillion in spending
annually - consumes a far greater share of human,

natural, financial and technological resources than it
should. That places a heavy burden on the economies
of all States. It also has an impact on trade, financial
flows and technology exchange at the global level. The
Group of Governmental Experts established pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 57/65 to consider that
issue at the international level concluded that global
military spending, which had begun to decline slightly
in the 19905, began to rise again since 2001.
Consequently, defence budgets have grown throughout
the world, serving to accentuate a climate of insecurity,
fear and mistrust.

The international community has committed itself
to devoting part of the resources freed up as a result of
the implementation of disarmament and arms reduction
agreements to socio-economic development. That
should contribute significantly to resolving numerous
problems associated with poverty and the spread of
disease and, in turn, help to achieve collective security.

In that regard, Mr. President, we believe that your
country serves as an example that the world should
both welcome and emulate. While you have been
fortunate as regards geography, it is quite clear that it
has been the will of your people that has led you down
this path. We wish to express our gratitude to your
delegation for preparing both the concept paper for this
meeting and the draft presidential statement before us
which we support.

