The President: I thank the representative of
Slovenia for his kind words addressed to my delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Malaysia.

My delegation expresses appreciation to Ambassador
Fowler, Chairman of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) for his comprehensive briefing
on the work of the Committee, of which I am honoured
to be one of his Vice-Chairmen. As have other members,
we welcome today's open briefing on a subject of
tremendous interest to the larger membership of the
Organization. Malaysia is particularly pleased that this
open briefing takes place under its presidency. We
congratulate Chairman Fowler on his two recent extended
visits overseas, to Africa and Europe, to raise the profile
of the work of the Committee, which in our View is
important.

Malaysia strongly supports the efforts made by the
Chairman of the Committee on the critically important
issue of making sanctions against UNITA more effective.
We are entirely in agreement with the Chairman's
observation that sanctions are not punitive in intention or
design, but are intended to establish the conditions for a
resumption of political dialogue to achieve a durable
resolution of the conflict. In this regard, we believe that
new and radical means are needed. The Committee and
the Council will continue to review UNITA's willingness
to engage in political dialogue and will deliberate on the
sanctions accordingly. We continue to believe that it is
only through dialogue, compromise and accommodation,
and not through continued military hostilities, that the
conflict will be resolved and peace restored.

 

It is an open secret that, thus far, sanctions against
UNITA have had limited impact. Clearly, more effective
measures are needed, covering both the demand and supply
aspects of the problem, as Chairman Fowler has indicated
in his report. It is for this reason that the Chairman of the
Committee travelled not only to Africa, but also to Europe.
As Committee Chairman, Ambassador Fowler has proposed
a set of 19 measures to strengthen the Committee's work.
His recommendations deserve serious study and
concentration by the Council. We find particularly
appealing, for example, his Recommendation 17, calling on
the World Customs Organization to work with the sanctions
Committee and its experts panels in the implementation of
Council-imposed sanctions. If implemented, this should
prove to be a particularly effective instrument.

My delegation is gratified that Ambassador Fowler
was able to address the seventeenth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) in Algiers in his capacity as Chairman of the 864
Committee. This demonstrates the seriousness which
African countries attach to the issue. This seriousness is
further exemplified by the draft decision adopted by the
OAU Council of Ministers reaffirming the unwavering
support of that organization for the relevant Security
Council resolutions and appealing to all OAU member
States to work strenuously for the implementation of
Security Council resolutions relating to sanctions against
UNITA.

The Security Council is determined to play its part in
rendering the sanctions more effective. In this regard, the
Council had decided, through its resolution 1237 (1999), to
establish two expert panels to collect information on the
sources and methods of violations of Council-imposed
sanctions against UNITA and to recommend measures to
end these violations and to improve the implementation of
the sanctions. We look forward to the final establishment of
the expert panels soon and await their interim reports.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Ambassador Fowler once
again, to respond to some of the comments and questions
posed to him and perhaps make some concluding remarks,
if he so wishes.

