The Secretary-General: Madam President, let
me begin by welcoming you to United Nations
Headquarters. I am very glad that you are with us today
as we review the situation in Africa and in the Mano
River subregion, and the lessons to be learned from our
experiences in Sierra Leone. Indeed, if the prospects
for Sierra Leone look so much more promising today
than they did two years ago, that is in large measure
due to the timely intervention by your own country,
which helped to stabilize the situation. I too will be
very brief, because I see that the head of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is joining the
Council in this seminar, and if I say too much, he either
will have to repeat what I have said or will have
nothing to say.

I think, Madam, that your initiative today in
organizing a workshop on lessons learned in Sierra
Leone and on how to develop a coordinated approach
to the situation in that part of Africa is no less timely,
and is extremely welcome. It comes at a critical
juncture, when the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) is about to begin a new phase of its
operations there but when, at the same time, the
escalating conflict in Liberia threatens to destabilize
the whole area.

The United Nations peacekeeping experience in
Sierra Leone offers invaluable lessons, not only
because of the success achieved so far but also,
particularly, because of the trials encountered in the
early stages of the Mission and how they were dealt
with. The combination of early command-and-control
challenges experienced by the Mission, mistakes made
in taking over from a subregional peacekeeping
operation, lack of adequate preparation and an attempt
to implement an ambitious mandate without adequate
resources resulted in a costly crisis in May 2000.
Lessons were learned the hard way from that tragic
experience. But, thank goodness, the international
community did not give up.

The Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop contributors, as well as regional partners and
individual Member States - in particular, the United
Kingdom - took swift concerted action to correct the
situation. I think that one of the other main lessons we
learned from this is that when we get into these
operations - in these fluid and ambiguous
situations - we have to be prepared for the
unpredictable. Indeed, we should go in prepared for
developments on the ground and have the stamina and
the will to stay the course. I think that in Sierra Leone
we did this. It holds lessons for us in other areas, too.
Therefore, it is a question of effective preparation,
adequate resources, enough analysis and information to
anticipate how the crisis is likely to develop, and the
resources and political will to stay the course until we
have achieved our objectives.

