Mr. Klein (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to appear once again before this Council to give an
update on developments that have taken place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to describe the progress
achieved by the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

Recent acts of Violence in Mostar, Trebinje and
Banja Luka have once again raised the question of
whether the Dayton Accords are in the process of
failing or whether it is possible to achieve the objective
of reconciliation and the establishment of a multi-
ethnic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in the
Balkans in general.

Allow me to make three observations. The first is
to note that the current period is a complex and volatile
one, but that developments in the field are a source of
optimism rather than pessimism. The decisive test of
Dayton is whether the necessary conditions exist on the
ground for people to return to their homes. It is now
almost 10 years since the war began, and the number of
people returning to their regions of origin has never
been as high as it is today. It cannot be ruled out that
this year as many as 100,000 minority returnees will
return to their homes. The main obstacle is more
economic than political. It is above all a question of
lack of jobs and lack of donors for the rebuilding of
housing.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, democratic Governments in Zagreb and
Belgrade no longer actively conspire for the partition
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In my recent meetings
with Croatian, Bosnian and Yugoslav leaders, they
have shown a real will to put substance into
constructive bilateral and regional relations based on
mutual respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of each State. This is based not on love but on
realism. Cooperation between them is the fundamental
building block for reaching closure on the Serb-Croat-
Bosniac question in the Balkans and for creating the
political and military stabilization that is essential for
their economic growth and progress and their eventual
integration into Europe.

UNMIBH has seized this opportunity. In the past
month, we have brokered a trilateral arrangement for
cooperation in combating illegal migration and
organized crime. Last week a bilateral agreement was
reached on using expertise and facilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to assist in the establishment of a new
State Border Service in Yugoslavia, and we are now
working on a mechanism to enable refugee police
officers to return to police jobs in Bosnia and
Herzegovina while keeping their seniority and pension
entitlements.

I was also enormously heartened last month when
the process of establishing truth and reconciliation
commissions began in both Sarajevo and Belgrade. For
the past decade, if not for the past 50 years, the
politicization and distortion of history has been a
weapon of manipulation in the hands of extremists.
These are the first brave steps by the people themselves
to establish what really happened and what and who
plunged one of the most developed socialist States into
a vortex of barbarism and self-destruction. It is a
psychological maxim that until the patient recognizes
that he has a problem, a cure is unlikely to be found.
Truth and reconciliation commissions are the first steps
in the process of healing and of establishing individual
responsibility. Until one identifies the guilty, one can
ultimately not absolve the innocent.

My third observation is that it is far more prudent
and effective to work on the integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina than its disintegration. Progress continues
to be made. The mono-ethnic wastelands are being
reversed. Towns such as the ethnically cleansed Drvar
are now mixed. The central Bosnia canton comprising
an equal number of Bosniacs and Croats is integrated
and functioning. Internal inter-ethnic trade and
commerce have been re-established. Increasingly,
ethnic partitionists are on the back foot. Robust actions
by the international community to expose their
corruption and criminal self-interest are taking effect.
Two weeks ago, extremist leaders of the Croat self-rule
movement failed in their attempt to extort unlawful
taxes from Croats in central Bosnia, and Croat soldiers
have started to return to their barracks.

The political crisis is not yet over. But, for the
ultra-nationalists, the writing is clearly on the wall.
Moreover, a new territorial settlement cannot be
reached by consensus, and attempts to impose one will
only lead to resistance and renewed war. It should be
recalled that Dayton was possible only because the war
was allowed to continue until the situation on the
ground approximated the 51/49 territorial formula that
would be accepted by all sides. All attempts to
negotiate a different formula have failed through the
opposition of one or the other party. Those who were
unable to negotiate the consensual redrawing of
boundaries during the war should not now try to revive
failed schemes, especially when neighbouring States no
longer support them and internal divisions have started
to blur. The newfound respect in the last year for the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
be encouraged, not discarded.

Most importantly, the precedent of giving up on a
multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina would be a
disaster for its people, for the region and for the
international community. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
the test case. If international intervention fails there,
we dash the hopes of a new generation that is just
beginning to exercise democracy. More importantly, we
sound the death knell for multi-ethnic States anywhere
in the Balkans, with grave implications for peace and
stability in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Kosovo and elsewhere.

For the first time, war could spread beyond the
borders of the former Yugoslavia. If, after six years of
massive engagement, the result is failure and
withdrawal, United Nations authority, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) alliance and the
principle of multi-ethnic tolerance as a basis of
democratic society are all compromised. Our collective
credibility is at stake. If we abandon the field now to
extremist partitionists and segregationists, the moral
and political basis for future interventions against
ethnic cleansing and expulsion of minority populations
is weakened, perhaps fatally.

For these reasons and more, we cannot afford to
give up on Bosnia and Herzegovina. Nor is it necessary
to do so. It is my considered view that, with a steady
hand, a credible strategic plan and dynamic leadership,
the core issues addressed in Dayton - refugee
return, full military stabilization and internal
accommodation - could be resolved within the next
two or three years. At that time, Europe and European
institutions could take over the job of bringing the
countries of the region up to European economic and
social levels. But as long as the international
community continues to pursue a piecemeal approach
to the Balkans, in which loose coordination among a
multitude of actors is an unsatisfactory substitute for
purposeful planning, the real opportunities to close a
tragic decade of war and instability will go begging.

What is most needed is what has been most
lacking: a credible and practical vision to assist the
region, shed its Balkan past, embrace its European
future and move from the Yugo to the euro. We need to
articulate what we want the region to look like in 2005,
2010 and 2015, and what we, the international
community, intend to do to get there. The starting point
is clear. Weak States devastated by war, near the
bottom rung of development, with underdeveloped
democracy and rule of law, lack a credible overarching
construct for stabilization and development. The end
point is also clear: stability and development require
domestic accommodation, interregional cooperation
and, ultimately, European integration. A credible path
to move from one to the other must be planned and
articulated. This was recognized in the original concept
of the Stability Pact, which, regrettably, has diffused
some of its political dimension. A reconsideration of
the respective roles of the Stability Pact and the
European Union would be timely. If either of those
bodies cold become the engine of regional cooperation
and integration, the role of other organizations would
be much clearer and more effective.

Another important aspect is that the people of the
region themselves must articulate their will to live
peacefully together as part of Europe and undertake the
domestic measures and accommodations necessary to
do so. In Bosnia and Herzegovina the international
community has, for nearly six years, been practically
the sole driving force of Dayton implementation. A
quasi-protectorate has been established in which
democratic form has taken the place of democratic
substance. Parts of the Dayton Constitution are now
starting to creak. Constitutional evolution - which can
and must be achieved without reopening other aspects
of Dayton - is becoming necessary, and probably
inevitable. Dayton is the floor, not the ceiling. It was
never intended to constrain such an evolution or to
substitute for local formulation of the common political
will and aspirations of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

However, agreement on the fundamental rules of
the game, the constitutional equality of all citizens and
a permanent election law languishes. The new leaders
have shown little will to move away from their
personal and sectarian positions in the interests of the
citizens and the country as a whole. Their failure to
exercise real leadership is directly contributing to the
turbulent political climate. Thus, despite the shady
personal interests of its leaders, the Croat self-rule
movement has tapped into the fears of many Croats
that they will become marginalized. And the Serb
unwillingness to implement the decisions of the
Constitutional Court and to participate constructively
in State institutions is drawing a stronger Bosnian
counter-reaction that is being manifested, inter alia, in
the politicization of religious events. The result,
political ferment and increased incidents of public
disorder, has a direct impact on our mandate and on
implementation, as well as on the security and safety of
international personnel and property. This cycle will be
finally broken only when the leaders and the people
themselves engage constructively to agree on the
constitutional rules that will govern their State.
Without this we will continue to face the problems of
parallel institutions and non-accountable political
structures.

Turning now to the specific work of UNMIBH,
the report of the Secretary-General shows a Mission
that, I think, is dynamic, focused and results-oriented.
Our internal Mandate Implementation Plan is a
comprehensive blueprint of some 57 specific projects
that address individual police officers, police
organizational structures and rules and the relationship
between police and society at large. About one third of
the projects have been completed, one third are
ongoing and the remainder will be launched in the next
six months. When the Plan is completed, which I
expect will be at the end of 2002, each of the
approximately 20,000 local police officers will have
been vetted, trained and basically equipped, and will be
working in professional and accountable police
structures. It is possibly the largest programme of
police reform and restructuring that has ever been
undertaken.
However, I must emphasize that as long as the
majority of the police receive less than a living wage
and there is no effective judicial follow-through, and as
long as political parties interfere directly in police
work and appointments, the establishment of the rule of
law will be incomplete. These key areas - salaries,
judicial follow-through and political interference -
fall outside our mandate. We must depend on the
timely and effective support, actions and political
policy-setting of the High Representative.

Allow me to briefly draw the Council's attention
to some highlights in our mandate implementation, as
well as some challenges where additional assistance is
required.

The deployment of the State Border Service is
making exceptional progress. Since its inauguration,
one year ago, the State Border Service now covers
some 62 per cent of the border, as well as the major
international airport in Sarajevo. It is the first multi-
ethnic State-level agency. It has begun to make
frequent seizures of contraband, including drugs and
other smuggled goods. When fully deployed and
equipped, together with the reformed customs service it
will play a major role in increasing desperately needed
State revenues and cracking down on organized crime.

The State Border Service is also a major
instrument to reduce unregulated migration to Western
Europe, as well as human trafficking. Some 10 per cent
of all legal entrants to Western Europe pass through
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Last year over 25,000 such
migrants entered through Sarajevo airport alone. This
year more effective border controls and the
introduction of a Visa regime for Iranian passport
holders has so far halved the number of such migrants.

Several donors have contributed generously to the
deployment of the State Border Service. However, we
remain about $5 million short of our requirements this
year, especially for salaries. Completion of full
deployment and equipment next year depend on a new
contribution of about $17 million. In the following
years the State Border Service is expected to be more
than self-financing through its contribution to
improved State revenue collection.

Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
insidious and lucrative of crimes. In the past 18 months
UNMIBH and the International Organization for
Migration have assisted nearly 400 trafficked women,
of whom 304 have been repatriated. We have
intensified our efforts on illegal migration and
organized crime through the Joint Entity Task Force;
and in March this year police officers from five
different police structures, working together,
simultaneously raided 38 nightclubs, in every canton of
Bosnia and Herzegovina except one. One hundred and
seventy-seven women were given the option to freely
choose whether they wished to remain in those bars or
to be repatriated.

To further assist in fighting international
organized crime, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the official inauguration of the Sarajevo national
Interpol office, established with considerable UNMIBH
assistance, will take place next week.

Training and monitoring police performance and
minority returns is at the core of our mandate. We seek
to ensure that return security plans are prepared,
incidents are professionally investigated and police
reports to judicial authorities are of a quality and
thoroughness sufficient to commence criminal
prosecutions. The small Criminal Justice Advisory Unit
is already playing a central role in that regard.

The fact that minority returns have doubled and
that most returnees experience no security problems is
evidence of improved police performance and public
acceptance. However, the number of return-related
incidents is still unacceptably high in certain areas,
particularly in the eastern part of the Republika Srpska
and in parts of Herzegovina. Also, only a handful of
perpetrators have been convicted and sentenced. We
hope that the Independent Judicial Commission, now
established in the Office of the High Representative,
will robustly address the problem of lack of judicial
follow-up.

Multi-ethnic police forces are an essential
confidence-building measure for returnees and an
important test for minority rights. Two and a half years
ago the police forces were mono-ethnic. Today, through
the two police academies and the voluntary
redeployment programme, there are almost 1,000
minority police. There is no shortage of potential
candidates; but the full potential of our minority
recruitment programmes will not be reached until
action is taken to improve police salaries, especially in
the Republika Srpska, and until the police are given
priority for housing assistance and provision of
alternate accommodation.
An area where we are meeting political
obstruction is in establishing the post of a professional
and non-political commissioner of police in every
police administration. Recently, Bosniac politicians
have tried to intimidate UNMIBH personnel to ensure
that their own Bosniac candidates are appointed to the
Federation Ministry of the Interior and to senior posts
in other common institutions. The strength of that
intimidation and manipulation is proof of the need for
professional and non-political appointments staffed
through transparent measures. I would ask for the
Council's support in sending a clear message that
independent commissioners of police must be
appointed in all police administrations by the end of
this year.

Looking ahead, we expect that it will be a
politically hot summer in which police performance
will be under the microscope. The violent events we
have witnessed recently are the result of premeditated
incitement by fringe groups of extreme nationalists
intent on preserving their criminal gains and on
derailing the establishment of the rule of law and
normal civil society.

Unfortunately, difficult economic conditions,
including over 40 per cent unemployment among
young people, many of whom are children of displaced
persons, are creating a disillusioned underclass that is
easily manipulated and mobilized. At the aborted
Ferhadija mosque ceremony in Banja Luka, a small
group of extremists was quickly swelled by young
people and schoolchildren throwing rocks. The police,
whose planning did not anticipate the number and
violence of the demonstrators, were quickly
overwhelmed. In Mostar, the speed and viciousness of
the ultra-nationalist's counterattack on the Stabilization
Force (SFOR) and international civilian personnel was
underestimated. In Trebinje, local police were passive
against their fellow Serbs. In all cases, UNMIBH has
taken swift and effective action against non-performing
policemen. Senior officers resigned or were dismissed
in Banja Luka and Trebinje; in Mostar, seven police
officers were de-authorized and the High
Representative eventually removed the Minister of the
Interior, who was one of the leaders of the riot.

However, dismissal from a very low- and
irregularly paying job in the police force is an
imperfect sanction. Consequently, at a time of
increasingly violent resistance from extremists, whose
interests are directly threatened by more intrusive
measures of peace implementation, the international
community is more reliant than ever on the security
support of SFOR.

In this context, I must express some concern
about the possible further SFOR reductions. As a
recent report from the International Crisis Group
warned,

"Any significant cuts in SFOR levels now
would strengthen Bosnia's hardliners and
encourage extremists throughout the Balkans.
Their long-time belief that they can wait out the
international community would seem justified."

This is not a matter solely of troop numbers. The
mobility and rules of engagement of SFOR,
particularly the multinational specialized units, are
critical. We cannot afford a security gap between
unarmed UNMIBH police monitors and SFOR combat
troops working under military rules of engagement.
The Violence of the past two months has sounded a
warning bell. If we are serious about protecting
international personnel and property, the security gap
must be closed. Widening the rules of engagement of
the multinational specialized units is an option that
deserves serious consideration.

But some very significant actions can be taken
even within SFOR's current rules of engagement. The
arrest and trial of notorious war criminals remains the
most important action to undercut extremists and
consolidate peace implementation. Their continued
presence undermines the establishment of the rule of
law, inhibits inter-ethnic reconciliation and holds back
the political future of the country. The lack of progress
in arresting Karadzic and Mladic for nearly six years is
a testament to the weakness of the international
community in the face of evil. It undermines the
authority of the International Tribunal as well as the
credibility of SFOR and, through that, it throws into
question the resolve of participating Governments to
lead the peace process to a successful conclusion.

I am pleased to report some progress on
Srebrenica, which has been a desolate blight on the
conscience of the international community. Last
December, UNMIBH proposed to the five principal
international organizations that we establish a
comprehensive plan to address the return,
reconstruction and revitalization needs of that tragic
area. The Srebrenica Action Plan was adopted in
March to address the problems of the living, thus
complementing the work of the International
Commission on Missing Persons and the Office of the
High Representative to assist the Victims' associations
and establish the Potocari burial site and memorial.
UNMIBH's role is focused on return security and
multi-ethnic policing. Our immediate priorities are the
voluntary redeployment of about 10 Bosniac police
officers to work in Srebrenica, the construction of a
model police station in the town and several
infrastructure projects, beginning with the schools and
hospital. Working closely with SFOR and local police,
we are making every effort to ensure that the
forthcoming commemoration on ll July will be a
secure and orderly one. However, I am concerned that
signs of increasing religious polarization may prejudice
the success of this and other events. A more active
promotion of dialogue between religious and cultural
organizations is desperately required. In the United
Nations Year of Dialogue among Civilizations, when
the Pope can enter a historic mosque in Syria, it should
not be beyond the ability of Bosnian religious leaders
to make additional efforts at promoting tolerance and
reconciliation in their own country.

Permit me to conclude my briefing by addressing
three issues that I believe are seminal. First, the
success of multi-ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
key to the prospects of multi-ethnic States throughout
the Balkans. We must see the process through to a
successful conclusion. We did not come to Bosnia and
Herzegovina to do what was easy; we came to do what
was right.

Secondly, as this Council has previously noted,
there is no exit without strategy. UNMIBH has an
achievable strategy. We believe that we can complete
our core mandate by the end of next year, provided that
we keep a full team of the 1,850 international police
officers until at least July 2002 and that we find the
relatively modest additional funding for the State
Border Service and basic police equipment. We cannot
get out, in a sense, without getting in, but I see no other
organization with a similar strategy or Vision. Crisis-
management must go hand in hand with strategic
planning and operations. Only when we agree on a
common vision can there be coherence and efficiency
in the respective roles of the many current international
actors, including the United Nations, the European
Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Stability Pact and the Peace Implementation
Conference.

Thirdly, I cannot overemphasize the importance
of the active involvement of this Council in any review
of long-term international planning, presence and
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. If there is to be
a new international debate on the Balkans, as some
have suggested, it should not be on how to redraw
maps; it should be on what is required to finish the job
and on how to streamline and make our efforts more
efficient to that end.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the women
and men who are dedicated to the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to
thank all the States that have placed their nationals
under the United Nations flag in Bosnia. Ninety-five
nations are represented in UNMIBH, including 13
members of the Security Council. These personnel are
examples par excellence of what can be accomplished
in the cause of peace by women and men of good will
from various nations and ethnic groups. I thank the
Security Council for its support.

