Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me continue
where you, Mr. President, left off - with day two of
the visit of the Security Council.

On 13 July, the Council travelled to Caldono, in
Cauca-an areathathas been highly affectedby conflict
over the past five or more decades. Our first meeting
there was with community leaders from Caldono and the
surrounding region. Those leaders represented diverse
stakeholders, including local indigenous authorities
and civil guards, women's groups, Afro-Colombian
groups, human rights defenders, cooperatives of rural
workers and the Church. Those stakeholders expressed
their concerns regarding several challenges that were
hindering their work, such as the lack of channels for
democratic participation at the local level, the slow
pace of implementation of transitional justice and crop-
substitution aspects of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
the polarization of the national political discourse and
killings of and threats against community leaders and
human rights defenders.

On that last point, I would like to note with concern
that one woman community leader decided not to
attend the meeting with the Security Council due to
threats that she had received the night before. All of
us would hope that no further threats are made against
her or against her colleagues who were able to attend
the meeting with us. That meeting was an important
opportunity for Council members to hear at first-hand
from those whose daily work focuses on building peace
at the local level in Colombia. The discussion with them
brought to life many of the challenges outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (8/2019/530). We commend
their ongoing commitment to their work.

From Caldono, the Council travelled to the Santa
Rosa territorial area for training and reincorporation,
where we met Government representatives, including
Foreign Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, who we
see here today, and Presidential adviser Emilio Archila,
local authorities and ex-combatant residents. We also
toured a productive project, where ex-combatants and
community members were growing tree tomatoes for
sale in local and external markets, and we heard about
other such projects.

Inouropenmeeting,the Governmentrepresentatives
outlined the efforts the Government has been taking to
roll out the development plan, with a territorial focus
in Cauca, in concert with local indigenous authorities.
We also heard about Government-led reintegration
programmes in the surrounding area. Regional and
local Government representatives reaffirmed their
commitment to peace. Local indigenous authorities
called on the national Government to accelerate the
implementation of the peace agreement and expressed
their concern about the killings of community leaders
and overall insecurity in the region.

The leaders of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) and former combatants called
for the consolidation of peace, the acceleration of
implementation of the peace agreement and increased
efforts to ensure political reintegration, especially
ahead of local elections in October, alongside an
increased State presence in areas previously occupied
by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo, where other illegal armed groups
now threaten to increase their activity.

The visit to the tree tomato productive project
allowed the Council to see how agriculture plays a
central role in the reintegration of former combatants
and to hear from them about their collective efforts
and commitment to reintegrating into civilian life.
The former combatants were proud of the results their
project has shown over the six months since it began and
were now looking to expand past the local market and
sell directly to national and international supermarkets
and distribution channels.

Members of the Security Council showed their
appreciation for the quality of the tree tomato product
in their personal consumption and, without wishing
to name names, I would simply suggest to those
stakeholders that, if they are looking for an external
export market, they might start with Russia. That visit
to the field was an important complement to our day
in Bogota and we are grateful to the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, the Government,
FARC, former combatants, community leaders and
all other stakeholders who were involved in the
organization of the visit and the discussions we held.
We very much welcome the commitment of all whom
we met to building and sustaining peace in Colombia.

