Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): At the outset, our
delegation expresses its gratitude for the opportunities
to address the Security Council twice this month under
your able leadership, Mr. President. We appreciate the
convening of this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, as well
as the co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East, for their
invaluable perspectives on the subject matter. Our
delegation also acknowledges the outstanding service
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
in fulfilling what remains one of the most intense yet
most important responsibilities of the international
community and the Security Council.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;
however, we wish to highlight a few points in our
national capacity.

As we meet here today, the recent mass suicide
bombings at places of worship and hotels in Sri Lanka;
the shooting at a synagogue in southern California here
in the United States; and another attack at a Protestant
church in Burkina Faso are sad reminders that the
world is becoming increasingly dangerous and call on
us to act together and decisively. We condemn in the
strongest terms those acts of violence and offer our
condolences to all those affected.

As the world continues to witness the deteriorating
situation in Israel and in Palestine, Botswana remains
equally concerned about the developments in the
region. Without any doubt, the ongoing situation has an
adverse impact on the political, economic and security
situations of both Palestinians and Israelis. Of further
worry is that those trends undermine meaningful
negotiations and prospects for achieving lasting peace
and the realization of the ultimate goal of a two-
State solution. We are especially deeply concerned by
reports in Gaza indicating a dire situation that is at risk
of major escalation, with retaliatory actions causing
severe humanitarian suffering, deaths and injuries of
innocent civilians. We therefore call for restraint in the
use of excessive and lethal force, for the protection of
the lives of all.

Our delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) (S/2019/251), relating to Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We remain
troubled by how little progress was achieved during the
reporting period. We are particularly concerned about
the ongoing settlement activities in the Palestinian
territories. We reiterate that those actions are in
violation of international law and constitute a significant
obstacle to achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. We echo the call for complete
adherence to obligations under various international
instruments, as well as the call to refrain from any steps
that could reverse progress towards the resumption of
the peace process.

Our delegation fully supports the international
community's continued efforts towards finding a
negotiated settlement on the Middle East conflict.
We remain optimistic in our collective ability to exert
influence on the parties concerned to resume the
intra-Palestinian peace talks, with a view to paving the
way forward towards relaunching the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the momentum
maintained throughout several recent gatherings,
including the third intra-Palestinian meeting, a
conference of a group of Arab and European Foreign
Ministers and the first joint summit of the League of
Arab States and European Union member States, all
held in February.

There is certainly a lot to be gained ifthe Palestinian
leaders and their people can reunite behind their desirable
and well-deserved cause for self-determination. But
the prevailing rift and divisions among the Palestinian
leadership in itself greatly undermines their collective
ability to engage meaningfully in the peace process as
a united negotiating force.

Allow me to conclude by once again reiterating
our delegation's long-standing position and conviction
that there is no alternative to the two-State solution. We
believe that bringing about lasting peace in the Middle
East, whereby Palestinians and Israelis live side by
side in a peaceful and dignified manner regardless of
race, religion or otherwise, remains a cause still worth
pursuing. That would be the greatest investment and
peace dividend by the international community for
generations to come.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm Botswana's
solidarity with the Palestinian people, as well as our
unwavering support for a sovereign Palestinian State as
determined by the pre-1967 international borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We renew our call for the
strengthening of coordination of international efforts
to that just end.

