Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself with the European Union
statement that Ireland will deliver later.

So-called targeted killings of the kind we have
just seen are unlawful and counterproductive. The
United Kingdom condemns extrajudicial killings. We
recognize Israel's right to defend itself and protect its
citizens, but it must act in accordance with
international law.

The United Kingdom has repeatedly condemned
the terrorist attacks against Israeli citizens. We once
again condemn another suicide bombing at the Erez
Crossing. We share the European Union's
condemnation this weekend at their meeting of Foreign
Ministers, where they repeatedly condemned the
terrorist attacks committed by Hamas, which have
resulted in the deaths of hundreds of Israelis. Terrorists
inflict huge suffering and loss and try to undermine the
true Palestinian cause. The Palestinians must take
immediate and effective action to stop the terrorism
emanating from the occupied Palestinian territories in
line with their obligations under the road map.

Like others, we urge both parties to exercise
restraint and to stop this escalating cycle of violence.
Disengagement by Israel from Gaza and parts of the
West Bank gives the international community the
opportunity to help the Palestinian Authority with the
economic, political and security measures they take
and that they need to take in order to get to the point
where the concept of a viable Palestinian State
becomes a real possibility.

We are not prejudging final status negotiations,
nor is this disengagement plan pushing the road map to
the side. As my Prime Minister said in Washington last
Friday, instead, it is a way back to the road map. The
road map remains the right route to a just and lasting
peace settlement. Our focus should be on getting this
process back on track. The international community
should work together to make Israeli withdrawal a
success and to ensure that it is the first step toward the
vision, as set out in this Council's resolution 1397
(2002), of two States living side by side within secure
and recognized borders. A comprehensive settlement,
agreed between the two sides, is the only way that
either side will find peace and security.

