Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Senegal for convening this open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2016/927, annex) provided
to guide our discussion. We commend the Deputy
Secretary-General for sharing with us his perspectives
on this subject. Our appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of La Francophonie, the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
as well as all the other briefers.

Please convey, Mr. President, to His Excellency
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye the best wishes of my Foreign
Minister, Mr. Geoffrey Onyeama, who regrets not
being able to attend this meeting.

Since their inception, United Nations peace
operations have been a vital part of the global security
architecture. They serve as an inspiration and source
of hope for victims of conflicts. It is incumbent upon
all concerned to ensure that peace operations remain
relevant now and in the future. This requires the
collective efforts of United Nations States Member
to surmount the existing and emerging challenges,
including the increasing asymmetrical attacks, which
have grown in both complexity and severity. Nigeria
therefore welcomes this important debate focused on
seeking ways to strengthen the capacity of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to curb the increase
in asymmetrical threats, particularly in the context of
implementing civilian-protection mandates.

Although the United Nations has faced terrorist
attacks over the years, transnational terrorist
networks pose a fundamentally different threat than
other non-State armed groups that United Nations
peacekeepers typically face. In addition, their links
with transnational organized crime and their use of
asymmetrical tactics have a substantial operational
impact upon United Nations field missions.

//The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali raised concerns about the
need to address the challenges of implementing complex
mandates in operational theaters where transnational
terrorist networks are active. In the coming years, there
is a strong likelihood that the United Nations will be
asked to deploy field missions and increase its presence
in environments characterized as a seat of transnational
terrorist networks. Given the complexity of the
challenges posed by transnational terrorist threats, we
deem it necessary for the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to prioritize actions that will have an
immediate and lasting impact.

Preventive action should mark the trail of essential
measures taken to inhibit transnational terrorist
networks from destabilizing vulnerable States,
including strengthening of political mechanisms
to address grievances, population security and the
re-establishment of State authority. We also underline
the need for an improved understanding of the context
in predeployment mission planning, including through
liaison and cooperation with regional organizations.
Missions should be able to adequately monitor
occurrences in the environment, by deploying
intelligence capacities and ensuring that they are well
integrated in the mission.

In spite of the daunting challenges, United Nations
peace operations have proved to serve as a flexible and
adaptable tool that has evolved over time to respond
to evolving challenges. In that vein, contemporary
United Nations field operations need to continually
adapt to sometimes rapidly changing circumstances
on the ground. As peacekeepers find themselves in
environments where they face increased challenges,
each situation will require its own specialized mix of
skills and experience.

We would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
peacekeepers who lost their lives in the line of duty,
including the civilians in the recent attack in Mali.
We offer our deepest condolences to their families,
friends and Governments. We salute the courage
of peacekeepers, who sometimes find themselves
serving in hostile environments and in extremely
difficult conditions.

