Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Let me first of all express
my gratitude and commend you, Sir, for your
leadership in convening today's Security Council
meeting on peacekeeping issues in general, apart from
individual operations. It is important because the
expansion of peacekeeping activities has been posing
difficult problems for the United Nations.

Japan has participated in peacekeeping missions
since 1992 and has made valuable contributions to the
maintenance of peace and stability in many parts of the
world. Through its engagement, Japan has discovered a
number of problems related to peacekeeping and has
proposed to the United Nations and the international
community new ideas to address them. Japan is ready
to discuss every aspect of peacekeeping, but because of
time limitations I will confine my comments to a few
issues which I believe are most important today.

According to some reports, the peacekeeping
budget may rise to $4.5 billion in 2005. Under current
arrangements, Japan's share will be approximately
$900 million. This exceeds its annual bilateral official
development assistance to Africa. For any country, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to assume such a huge
proportion of the financial costs for peacekeeping
while maintaining the same level in development
assistance, which Japan believes is crucial to efforts to
eliminate poverty and to prevent conflict from
occurring.

I believe it is necessary to draw an overall picture
of the process of conflict resolution. In particular, for
the purposes of funds allocation, it is useful if the
anticipated financial requirements for all phases of
conflict resolution are given in advance. At the Tokyo
donor meeting on Timor-Leste, all the costs for
peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance, transitional
administration and reconstruction were presented to
donors. A similar effort was made in the case of
Cambodia and was very useful.

The recent surge in peacekeeping activities has
not only created financial difficulties, but has also
caused a shortage of human resources and other
problems. Japan reaffirms its intention to continue its
support, including the provision of civilian experts, for
whom there is now a pressing need.

Each peacekeeping operation should be given a
clear mandate and have mission objectives with precise
and realistic benchmarks, so that the parties to the
conflict, the Secretariat, the Security Council and
interested Member States can cooperate effectively to
achieve them. This is the true meaning of the so-called
completion strategy. It in no way amounts to the setting
of an artificial deadline. An operation with a solid
completion strategy will attract wider international
participation and enjoy greater effectiveness. Needless
to say, in a humanitarian crisis, action may be taken on
an exceptional and emergency basis.

Once deployed, a mission must be constantly
reviewed and major changes in mission environments
should be duly reflected in the review process. The
United Nations operation in Timor-Leste, which has
undergone a number of reviews and adjustments in
light of the progress made, provides a good example of
this approach. We appreciate the inclusion of
references to the review process in many Security
Council resolutions adopted since the initiation of the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire. There are
also many operations that were established decades
ago. These should be re-evaluated in order to
determine the causes of prolongation and possible
means of improvement.

Such activities as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and demining often play an important
role in the area where a peacekeeping mission is
deployed. In some cases, peace-building activities have
been included in the peacekeeping mandate. Japan,
advocating the concept of consolidation of peace,
understands the importance of linkage between peace-
building activities and peacekeeping. However,
peacekeeping activities should not be expanded
without limitation in the name of peace-building.
Peace-building is to lead to reconstruction and
development and requires expertise that is different in
nature from that required for peacekeeping. It is
desirable that a special representative of the Secretary-
General be given a coordination role.

Given the expansion of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the cooperation of various
actors is of critical importance. The most vital role
should be played by those people in the area of
conflict. They should be encouraged to take the lead in
the peace process. In addition, cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations is indispensable
in view of the impact of a conflict over the entire
region. There should be an appropriate division of
labour between the United Nations peacekeeping
operation and regional and subregional organizations,
and the capacity of those organizations should be
further strengthened. The ongoing bilateral support is
important, but Japan is of the View that those efforts
could be more closely coordinated at the international
level. We hope that the Secretariat will play a more
active role in that regard. Finally and most importantly,
reform is necessary in order to involve in the Security
Council decision-making process those countries
contributing human, material, financial and other
resources. That is necessary to enable the Council to
work to consolidate peace, from the peacekeeping
phase to reconstruction and development, in
coordination with other international agencies and
bilateral programmes.

Issues surrounding peacekeeping are diverse and
complicated. The Security Council should promote
discussion involving the Secretariat, contributors of
human and financial resources and stakeholders
including countries in the region. Japan, which is
responsible for approximately one-fifth of the
peacekeeping budget, is eager to participate in such
discussions in order to fulfil its international
commitments while maintaining accountability to
taxpayers. The meeting of the Security Council
working group on Burundi provided a unique
opportunity for major stakeholders to state their views.
Japan strongly hopes that meetings of this kind will be
convened in future to discuss specific issues as well as
more generic issues related to peacekeeping.

Japan fully understands the fundamental
importance of peacekeeping as a tool for conflict
resolution and continues its active support. We are
prepared to accept a new peacekeeping operation if it is
justified and its mandate is appropriate.

