Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by thanking the five briefers, who
have presented their respective perspectives on the role
of the police in peacekeeping operations. The Action
for Peacekeeping initiative remains our road map for
focusing our efforts in the coming years. Allow me to
follow the five "PS" in my statement and my questions
to the briefers: prevention, performance, protection,
partnerships and peacebuilding.

First, an increased role is given to United Nations
police expertise in the context of prevention. We are
pleased that the Police Division is increasingly being
called upon not only in special political missions but
also in some cases outside missions. As highlighted
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/952),
the police play an important role in early warning.
The Police Division can provide the Security Council
with valuable information by analysing the state of
police and other law enforcement institutions in a
particular country and recommending responses to
emerging issues.

Secondly, mission performance goes hand in hand
with responsibility and accountability. In that context,
we are pleased that, under the new management
paradigm promoted by the Secretary-General, the
chiefs of police components in operations are now
part of the senior management teams and that they are
accountable for the performance of their component. In
that context, I would like to ask Mr. Lacroix to share
with us the lessons learned since the beginning of the
implementation of the comprehensive performance
assessment system, in particular on the police
components and their contribution to the strategic
objectives of the missions.

Thirdly, community policing and community
policing initiatives, among others, offer unparalleled
opportunities for the protection of civilians. That is the
case, for example, in South Sudan, where the police
component of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
is successful in some locations by working in unique
proximity with the population, relying in particular on

women components and unarmed patrols. In general, it
would seem appropriate to provide increased support in
the area of negotiated public space management, which
includes aspects of dialogue, respect for human rights
and a moderate and proportional use of constraint.

Fourthly, partnerships are at the heart of police
components in the field. They often work jointly and
in good understanding with those who lead parts
of security sector reform or conduct national police
training activities. Synergies exist on the ground with
civilian missions deployed by the European Union. My
question is for Commissioner Abdounasir, who has
had the opportunity to experience the partnership with
the European Union in both Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Can he illustrate that partnership
and its added value for the work of the United Nations?

Lastly, with respect to peacebuilding, while
police have a role to play across the peace continuum,
support for the transfer of policing functions remains
crucial in transitions. Haiti provides a recent example.
It is important for that phase to continue to provide
police advisory support when the host State considers
it necessary.

One of the future medium-term transition projects
could be the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), and we look forward to discussing the
results of the strategic review. In that context, how does
Commissioner Abdounasir see the role of MONUSCO's
police component evolving in the coming years? Does
he see any areas or provinces in which a formed police
unit presence could usefully replace a military presence?

