Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I wish to thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her comprehensive report on
the situation in the Sudan, particularly with regard to
jurisdiction over very serious crimes, atrocities and
human rights violations that have been committed
in Darfur.

Germany witnesses with much respect the
promising yet fragile political developments in the
Sudan. We will continue to support the Sudan on its
path to a truly civilian Government, formed on the
basis of free elections, in order to fulfil the democratic
aspirations of the Sudanese people. The democratic
aspirations of the Sudanese people necessarily include
Sudanese-led transitional justice, which is why we
look forward to learning more about the transitional
Government's ideas on transitional justice

Good governance, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and free elections are key factors on the
way to achieving lasting peace and stability. We also
know that reconciliation is fundamental to that end, but
that it can happen only when those who are responsible
for atrocities, especially in the Darfur conflict, are
held accountable and prosecuted. Germany therefore
encourages the authorities in the Sudan to ensure
accountability and make headway towards the future
by addressing the past. Ending impunity for the most
serious crimes is critical for preventing further grave
crimes and constitutes the foundation of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the country. We concur with
the Prosecutor that accountability for crimes under
the Rome Statute and full respect for the rule of law
and human rights are indispensable prerequisites
for sustainable peace, stability and development in
the Sudan.

In line with the principle of complementarity, it
is the primary responsibility of the territorial states
to investigate and prosecute crimes under the Rome
Statute. In that vein, we have taken good note of the
statement issued by the Sudan's Public Prosecutor, as
reported by Prosecutor Bensouda, shortly after the
verdict on Mr. Al-Bashir, which indicated that a number
of other cases are pending against him, including in
relation to the 1989 coup d'etat that brought him to
power and to crimes against humanity in Darfur.

However, if justice for crimes under international
criminal law are not part of the national jurisdiction,
the Sudan should cooperate with the United Nations and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the interest
of ensuring accountability. Germany strongly supports
the ICC with regard to its investigations concerning all
serious crimes committed since 2005. Those crimes
cannot go unpunished.

We have also taken good note of the Prosecutor's
statement regarding the confirmation by the
representative of the Sudan that investigations by the
Sudanese Public Prosecutor were ongoing in relation
to Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein and
Mr. Ahmad Harun. All are believed to be in detention in
Khartoum. In our View, it is crucial that they eventually
face justice with regard to their responsibilities for the
situation in Darfur, not only on charges of corruption
but for events that took place over the past years.

We call on all United Nations States Members, in
particular those on the Security Council, to keep up
their support for the Court in order to end impunity.
We also call on those States that have not yet joined the
Rome Statute to consider doing so.

