Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing, and once again express full
support for her work.

As a State party to this legal instrument, our
country fully supports strengthening the Court's
institutional structure and enhancing the effective work
of the International Criminal Court. In that regard,
we encourage the countries that are not parties to the
Rome Statute to accede to that instrument with a view
to achieving its universality. The fight against impunity
for internationally defined atrocity crimes, such as
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
inter alia, can be achieved only with international
cooperation. That is a key aspect in achieving the
Court's objectives. The Court requires the full support
of all States in order to enforce its rulings and to carry
out its work. The strengthening of the international
criminal system established through the creation of the
ICC requires States parties to abstain from measures
that would weaken the important functions of the ICC
as it combats impunity. With that understanding, it is
essential for us to preserve and uphold the independence
and impartiality of the Court and free it from the
meddling of specific interests that would only hamper
its effectiveness.

The unstable political situation following the
collapse of the Libyan regime's institutions, caused
by the NATO military intervention in 2011, continues
to have an adverse impact on the rule of law, and in
particular on the legal system in Libya. The aftermath
of that intervention is still being felt today. The
institutional collapse and the clashes between the
various factions seeking to wrest control of the country,
make it difficult for the State and its institutions to
function properly. In the light of that situation, Libya
must be supported in crafting a robust legal system
that would guarantee due process and respect for the
human rights of perpetrators of atrocity crimes. Libya
is a country that is submerged in widespread chaos and
violence, which Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia have exploited in order
to carry out their terrorist activities.

Violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law perpetrated by those
groups should also be investigated by the International
Criminal Court in order to determine the persons
responsible for such abuses. We welcome the ongoing
cooperation between the Libyan Public Prosecutor
and the ICC, as mentioned in the twelfth report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). Nonetheless, we urge the Libyan authorities to
coordinate efforts to a greater extent with the Office
of the Prosecutor and to engage in the consultations to
properly address issues such as the handing over of Saif
al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, so that he can be tried fairly and
in accordance with due process, in line with resolution
1970 (2011). His transfer to the ICC should be facilitated
by the militia in Zintan.

We are also concerned that individuals who have
been accused of engaging in acts of torture against
members of the Qaddafi family and members of the
Government of former President Muammar Al-Qadhafi
have not been detained or properly tried by the Libyan
justice system. We have also heard reports that one
individual accused of torture in a prison in Libya was
not only discharged but allowed to return to the same
prison, in which he had carried out those human rights
violations.

Finally, the Libyan Government is currently
facing various major challenges. We urge the Libyan
authorities not to lose heart in their struggle to establish
the rule of law with robust legal institutions which would
serve as a bedrock for the promotion of human rights
and the respect thereof, including the international
principles of due process, the right to defence and the
presumption of innocence, as judicial guarantees that
are deeply entrenched.

