Ms. Bensouda: I welcome this opportunity to once
again engage with the Council as I present my Office's
eighth report on Libya.

At the outset, I note with regret that, as we are
gathered here today, the security situation in Libya
is worsening. Political instability is growing and,
unfortunately, an environment is developing that
clearly cannot be conducive to closing the impunity gap
in Libya. This of course is an issue of concern for me
and my Office.

Since my most recent report to the Council
on Libya, in May of this year (see S/PV.7173), the
situation in the country has deteriorated. Despite the
June 2014 elections, Libya is currently split, with two
Governments vying for legitimacy. A more worrisome
aspect of the deteriorating situation is the ongoing
spate of assassinations in Benghazi and the threats to
media workers, human rights defenders and women
in particular, and to prosecutors, judges and lawyers.
There are indeed indications that crimes that fall within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court are
being committed.

Those troubling developments are clear signs that
Libya is moving down the wrong path in its transition
to what was hoped would be a peaceful country that
respects and pays homage to justice, accountability and
the rule of law.

Over the years, the Council has expressed its
grave concern at the worsening security situation
and the political divisions that threaten to undermine
the aspirations of the Libyan people. The Council
has reiterated its support to the people of Libya and
encouraged their continued and firm commitment to
the establishment ofa stable and prosperous State based
on national reconciliation, justice, respect for human
rights and the rule of law. Unfortunately, the Council's
calls for political dialogue and refraining from violence
and actions that challenge the stability of the State have
gone unheeded.

The international community could be more
proactive in exploring solutions in order to tangibly
help restore stability and strengthen accountability for
Rome Statute crimes in Libya. For its part, the Libyan
Government is encouraged to be more specific in
seeking such assistance. I can only reiterate my previous
calls to key partners of the Government of Libya to
provide it with the necessary support and to restore
security and cultivate accountability for international
crimes in the country.

To be more responsive in providing such critical
assistance, the possibility of forming an international
contact group on justice issues through which material,
legal and other support could be provided to Libya
ought to be explored. Such a forum should help to focus
attention on specific problems facing Libyan authorities
and assist supportive States in coordinating their own
efforts with those of the International Criminal Court
and Libya.

For our part, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that my Office will do all it can to support that kind of
coordination as a form of cooperation that will lead to
our own investigative and prosecutorial work becoming
more efficient and having more of an impact, and which
will reinforce the signal to the Libyan authorities that
they are not alone in facing the current challenges.

I cannot stress enough the deleterious impact that
the unstable political and security situation in Libya
has had and continues to have on my investigations.
While my Office remains steadfast in its commitment
to continue to pursue its mandate in Libya, the security
situation has significantly hampered our ability to
effectively investigate in the country. I urge the
Libyan authorities to expend all efforts, including
by coordinating closely with the United Nations and
my Office, to ensure that the necessary conditions
are in place as soon as possible so as to facilitate our
investigations in Libya.

Moreover, contact with the Libyan Government
has been largely confined to our liaison with the focal
point. Given the prevailing circumstances in Libya,
it has been difficult for the focal point to facilitate
effective contacts and secure much-needed assistance
from the relevant national authorities to facilitate my
Office's investigative efforts. As a result, progress with
regard to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding between my Office and the Government
of Libya has been slow.

Notwithstanding those challenges, we are
attempting to forge ahead. Recently, the focal point of the
Government of Libya arranged a key meeting outside of
the country between members of my investigation team
and Libyan national investigators. That constructive
meeting provided an avenue for valuable exchanges of
information and ensured plans for follow-up meetings.
The meeting laid the groundwork for coordination in the
investigation and prosecution of individuals of concern
to both my Office and the Libyan authorities. My
investigation team, I must acknowledge, was impressed
with the commitment and professionalism displayed by
the Libyan national investigators, who are undertaking
their work in difficult circumstances. I look forward to
building on that fruitful meeting and to working with
the Libyan authorities to address the most urgent cases
and to take further steps toward closing the impunity
gap in Libya.

An unfortunate reality, however, remains: the
combined effect of instability and lack of resources has
severely undermined my Office's investigative efforts
in Libya. This means that we have been obliged to scale
down resources for investigations in the country, in
effect limiting our ability to investigate, among others,
new instances of mass crimes allegedly committed by
the rebel forces. My Office will have to prioritize its
work and divert the limited resources at its disposal as
it strives to complete its investigations to be trial-ready
in other cases where the judicial process has already
been triggered.

As I have stated in another context, including at the
recent open debate in the Council on 23 October (see S/PV.7285), the continuing disparity between resources
and expectations risks systematic underperformance
that will harm not only the Court and its mandate, but
also the credibility of the Council. This is particularly
pertinent for situations that have been referred to
the International Criminal Court by the Council. I
encourage the Council to take this fact into consideration
in the light of the urgent need to revitalize the Libya
investigation.

My Office is committed to ensuring that justice
and accountability are respected and advanced in
Libya. To that end, I would be remiss if I did not
benefit from the audience before the Council today
to stress that the continued failure of the Government
of Libya to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the custody of the International Criminal Court is a
matter of great concern to my Office and the Court.
In the past, the Council has expressed its displeasure
at that failure to discharge a clear legal obligation.
Libya must demonstrate its commitment to justice
and accountability for mass crimes by fulfilling its
obligations towards the Court and the Council. I take
this opportunity before the Council to once again
call on Libya to immediately surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the International Criminal
Court.

As concerns the trial of Abdullah Al-Senussi in
Libya, my Office is closely monitoring developments
in the case, following on recent contacts with the
Libyan authorities and independent trial monitors.
The ongoing violence and alleged threats to judges,
prosecutors and lawyers do not augur well for a fair
trial that respects all of the rights of an accused person.
On the basis of the information collected and the status
of any progress made, I will assess my options in due
course, including whether to apply for a review of the
judges' decision upholding Libya's request that the case
against Al-Senussi be tried in Libya.

Similarly, my Office remains very concerned
about the number of individuals in detention, some
of whom reportedly lack access to due process and
may be subject to torture and death in custody. As
the Secretary-General has noted, "The handover of
all detainees to the effective control of the State is a
prerequisite for the establishment of the rule of law in
Libya" (S/20l4/653, para. 97). It is incumbent upon the
Government of Libya to ensure that detainees are either
tried within a reasonable time and with full respect for
their due-process rights, or released.

The time is also past due for the resolution of the
Tawergha issue. My Office has encouraged the Libyan
authorities to facilitate a visit by representatives from
the local councils of Misrata and Tawergha to New
York to meet and engage with Council members. It is
envisaged that the visit could materialize next week. The
main purpose of the visit is for those representatives to
make their efforts better understood. I must emphasize
that from the perspective of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, the mass displacement
of the Tawerghans remains an issue of concern to
my Office and, undoubtedly, to the international
community a whole. I am confident that I share this
concern with members of the Council, and I hope
that within the next six months, the representatives
of Tawergha and Misrata will be able to update the
Council on the progress they have made in redressing
the displacement of the inhabitants of Tawergha.

In conclusion, it is worth recalling that it was for
reasons of peace and security, and, indeed, the suffering
and plight of the Libyan people that the Council
galvanized to unanimously adopt resolution 1970
(2011), and, more recently, resolution 2174 (2014). The
Libyan people's hopes and aspirations for a peaceful
and stable State that thrives and sits firmly on the pillars
of justice and accountable Government are yet to be
realized. We therefore owe it to them to coordinate our
efforts more effectively to promote a peaceful and just
solution to the current situation in Libya. In accordance
with its mandate, my Office is certainly attempting to
do its part in strengthening justice and accountability
for international crimes in Libya and is coordinating,
as appropriate, with the Libyan authorities. There is
certainly room for all of us to do more. To be sure, we
must not fail Libya, but Libya must also not fail itself.

