Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium associates itself with the statements
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of the Group of Friends of Mediation.
I would also like to make some observations in my
national capacity.

Belgium has made conflict prevention one of its
priorities, for which mediation is an essential tool.
Belgium supports and encourages mediation initiatives.
That is why we have organized various conferences on
the topic that contribute to sharing experiences, the
making of contacts and the development of cooperation
between mediation participants. Last February, we
organized, in collaboration with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, a seminar in New York on
bridges between humanitarian negotiation and political
mediation. It was noted that there was sometimes
a difficulty in merging the objectives of political
mediation and those of humanitarian negotiation. Too
often, the actors involved in each of those processes
operate in isolation. Strategic reflection is therefore
necessary in order to make the best choices, while
information must also be shared freely, including
within the Security Council.

The need to promote the active participation of
women in mediation processes is another key theme.
Together with the African Union and the International
Peace Institute, we organized another seminar on that
topic with African women mediators. That led us to a
clear observation, namely, substantial participation by
women will never be the result of wishful thinking,
but rather the fruit of a decisive strategy. Without it,
negotiating teams and groups consulted in conflict
resolution will reflect our societies, which still too often
do not sufficiently include women. That has also had an
impact on the outcome of the mediation process. The
same is true for young adults, another group to which
the Council has devoted a resolution - resolution
2250 (2015). It is important to encourage local
and regional initiatives, such as the African Union
FemWise-Africa initiative.

I would also like to stress the importance of
coordination between mediation and peacekeeping
operations. Belgium supports the Secretary-General
in his determination to increase mediation expertise
within missions and to strengthen partnerships with
local and national mediation actors. The use of mixed
teams is a key tool in that connection, as it allows
increased contact with local authorities, traditional
and religious leaders and other relevant actors on the
ground in order to prevent local tensions from fuelling
conflict. Efforts made in that regard within the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic should be
commended. Special envoys and regional offices can
also play a critical role in conflict prevention.

The Security Council does indeed have a role to
play in this area. The complexity of the contexts in
which mediation processes take place requires an
integrated approach. Through its political messages,
the Council can contribute to the effective coordination
of these various initiatives and promote common goals.
The Council must support the Secretary-General's
efforts in that regard.

Furthermore, it is important to pay particular
attention to the root causes that have given rise to
conflict. There must be total cooperation between
peacekeeping operations and country teams. Work on
fundamental issues such as governance, the criminal
justice system, elections and transitional justice is
essential to sustaining peace and supplements the
efforts ofpeacekeeping operations.

Finally, in addition to its support of the Department
of Political Affairs, Belgium also finances various
projects initiated by non-governmental organizations
specializing in mediation and conflict prevention,
as well as multiple mediation organizations based in
Brussels, each with a different conflict-related specialty.
With that institutional body and the availability of
many specialists, Brussels has broad expertise that
will increase the chances of success of a multifaceted
conflict mediation. Those assets are now at the service
of peace.

