Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Acts of
terrorism can constitute a threat to international peace and
security. This is recalled in the draft resolution submitted
today at your initiative, Mr. President, for a vote by the
Council. And this is what the General Assembly solemnly
affirmed in 1994 in the Declaration on Measures to
Eliminate International Terrorism, adopted in its resolution
49/60. It is therefore quite legitimate for the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to take a
stand in the fight against terrorism.

This is not the first time that the Council has taken a
stand on this subject or some of its aspects. In 1970 the
Council adopted resolution 286 (1970), on aerial hijacking.
In 1985 it adopted resolution 579 (1985), on hostage-taking.
In 1989 it adopted resolution 635 (1989), on illegal acts
against the security of civil aviation, and resolution 638
(1989), adopted on kidnapping and hostage-taking. We also
recall the statement adopted on 31 January 1992, on the
initiative of the United Kingdom, when the Security
Council met at the level of heads of State or Government.
That statement affirmed the need for the international
community to respond effectively to international terrorist
acts. The Council then had the opportunity to respond to
such acts on several occasions, in particular last year, in
Security Council resolution 1189 (1998), through which the
Council condemned the attacks in Nairobi and Dar es
Salaam. The adoption of so many resolutions and
statements shows the continuing support of the Security
Council for the fight against international terrorism.

The draft resolution before us today is not designed to
have the Security Council replace the General Assembly in
its role, of defining the principles that must guide the fight
against terrorism. On the contrary: the Council endorses the
principles that were forcefully formulated by the General
Assembly on 9 December 1994 and the Declaration adopted
in General Assembly resolution 49/60. These principles are
based on the categorical condemnation of all terrorist acts,
wherever they may take place, whoever the perpetrators
may be and whatever their motives may be. As the
Assembly stated in 1994, this condemnation must, in
particular, lead States to refrain from organizing or
supporting terrorist activities; to arrest, bring to justice or
extradite those who commit such acts; to conclude
agreements and to cooperate to that end; to implement the
conventions to which they are parties; and not to grant
asylum to the perpetrators of terrorist acts.

The draft resolution before us also welcomes the
work done by the Assembly in drawing up new
instruments and conventions in this area and encourages
the adoption of conventions already in preparation. We
hope that the Assembly will continue its work, in
particular, by adopting before the end of the year the
convention on the suppression of nuclear terrorism and
the convention on the suppression of the financing of
terrorism, whose text has just been transmitted by the
Working Group to the Sixth Committee.

The fight against financing terrorism is indeed a
priority objective of the fight against international
terrorism, as the Secretary-General noted in a 1996 report
to the General Assembly. The power, the possibilities for
expansion and the destructive capacity of terrorist
organizations to a great extent depend on their means of
financing. The adoption by the General Assembly of the
convention on the suppression of the financing of
terrorism will reaffirm the will of the international
community to deprive terrorist organizations of their
resources and to fight terrorism in all its forms.

The French delegation believes that by taking a
stand on an issue that affects the maintenance of
international peace and security, by confirming the pivotal
role played by the United Nations and by supporting the
action of the General Assembly in this area, the Security
Council will be making a useful contribution. This is why
it will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

