Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I
would like at the outset to commend you, Madam, on
the excellent way you have presided over the Security
Council this month.

We are glad to welcome Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to
this meeting of the Council. We think that the
Secretary-General's decision to reappoint him as his
Special Representative for Afghanistan is an extremely
timely and good one. We fully support his work. We
hope that he, together with the Member States and the
Security Council, will be able to work effectively on
setting the solution to the Afghan problem on a
peaceful political course.

Tajikistan is very anxious to see a settlement of
the conflict in neighbouring Afghanistan as soon as
possible. This would help stabilize further the situation
in the country and throughout the region of Central
Asia. At the same time, as the President of Tajikistan,
Emomali Rakhmonov, has emphasized several times,
including at United Nations forums, the problem of
Afghan does not have only a regional dimension, but a
broader, international dimension, too. The tragedy of
11 September highlighted this all too clearly.

Under the present circumstances, it seems to us
that we have a unique opportunity to help the Afghan
people return to peaceful and stable development, to
become a fully fledged member of the world
community and to change the image that,
unfortunately, has been formed of them in the last few
years as accomplices to international terrorism and
other criminal, destructive and destabilizing forces.

Afghan society is on the verge of making a
fundamental change, and the international community
must help it seize this opportunity. Everything must be
done to ensure that, in the future, Afghanistan ceases to
be a source of threats to the Afghan people themselves,
to neighbouring States and to international security
overall. Everything must be done to ensure that
Afghanistan respects human rights and basic freedoms,
and that there is a halt to the shameful discrimination
against women and girls. Everything must be done to
restore to the Afghan people hope for a future of peace
and prosperity.

We consider that deciding the future of
Afghanistan is the exclusive prerogative of the Afghan
people themselves. The sine qua non for restoring a
peaceful life to Afghanistan is bringing an end to
foreign interference and uniting the efforts of the world
community under the aegis of the United Nations in
order to expedite the process of a political settlement of
the Afghan problem and reconstruction in the country.
It is also necessary to eliminate all hotbeds of terrorism
in Afghanistan, elements of organized crime and, as a
matter of great importance, the production capacities of
the drug mafia.
The territorial integrity of Afghanistan must be
ensured. In order to guarantee peace and stability in the
country it is necessary to establish an effective
government on a broad political and ethnic basis, in
accordance with the will and the consent of the Afghan
people. The broadest possible Afghan circles, both
within and outside of Afghanistan, must all help to
build that foundation. Of course, in the future
government there can be no place for the Taliban in the
political structure, because that would be fraught with
the danger of rebuilding in Afghanistan support bases
for terrorism and drug trafficking.

We are deeply disturbed over the difficult
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. The Taliban's
refusal to implement the demands of the anti-terrorist
coalition to extradite the masterminds and organizers of
the terrorist attacks against the United States has
brought only renewed suffering to the Afghan people
and an increase in the number of refugees and
displaced persons. With winter coming on, millions of
Afghans may die of hunger.

Immediately after the anti-terrorist operation
began in Afghanistan, the Government of Tajikistan
took a special decision to declare its willingness to
make our country's airspace and infrastructure
available for the provision of humanitarian assistance
to the people of Afghanistan, who have been suffering
for so long under Taliban tyranny. We call on all States
and humanitarian organizations to immediately provide
the Afghan people with the help they need. The
humanitarian disaster threatening Afghanistan must be
averted.

As indicated by the United Nations Office for
Drug Control and Crime Prevention, a significant drop
in the opium poppy harvest in Afghanistan this year
has not led to a corresponding reduction in the amount
of heroin smuggled into neighbouring countries and
Europe. Huge stockpiles of raw opium were used, and
these stockpiles were in Taliban-controlled territory.
Neighbouring countries, including Tajikistan, which
have been trying to block the distribution of drugs from
Afghanistan, have suffered because of this. In
Tajikistan alone, three times more heroin was
destroyed this year than last, and now the amounts of
that deadly product are measured in tons. We attach
enormous importance to combating illegal drug
trafficking, and we consider depriving international
terrorism of one of its main sources of financing as one
of our main contributions. We hope that United Nations
specialized agencies and donor countries will continue
to assist us and our neighbours in this struggle.
It is our hope that this Security Council debate on
the Afghan issue will help to strengthen the United
Nations central role in coordinating international
efforts to find a formula for a political settlement in
Afghanistan. My Government will continue to do
everything it can to help in solving this matter.

