Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to present the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of the resolution. The
report covers the period from 21 March to 11 June 2012.

During the reporting period, the Committee held
informal consultations on 1 June. The Committee
also continued to carry out its duties through informal
exchanges and the no-objection procedure envisioned
by paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the conduct of its
work.

During the informal consultations of 1 June, the
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts briefed the Committee
on the Panel's 2012 final report (S/2012/395). She
stressed that the Panel of Experts had concluded that,
while sanctions were effective in slowing the prohibited
nuclear and ballistic missiles programmes of the Islamic
Republic of Iran by increasing the cost of procuring
certain items, sanctions had not yet compelled that
country to accept a negotiated solution. The Coordinator
noted also the uneven implementation of Security
Council resolutions by States and recommended that all
States be reminded of the need to report incidents of
non-compliance. She reviewed the Panel's most recent
outreach activities, which included consultations with
States and participation in conferences and seminars.
Pointing to the report's recommendations and conclusions
and their usefulness for the 193 States Members of the
Organization, the Coordinator expressed hope that the
Committee would agree on the report's publication.
Committee members welcomed the Panel's final
report, which was characterized by some as being of
very good quality, well-researched and meeting high
methodological standards. Several Committee members
asked that the Committee follow up on the reports by
regularly considering new names of individuals and
entities on the list; issuing notices with guidelines for
implementing the resolution; and publishing the reports
in the quickest possible time frame. Other Committee
members stressed the need for the Panel to continue to
work within its mandate. Several members requested
that the open briefing of the Chair be held soon with
the participation of the Panel. Noting the linkages with
other sanctions regimes, several Committee members
recommended that the Panel explore possible synergies
with other expert groups.

During the reporting period, the Committee agreed
to add two additional individuals and one entity
to the list of persons and entities subject to United
Nations sanctions that were involved in incidents
of non-compliance reported to the Committee and
investigated by the Panel of Experts. On 24 May 2012,
the Committee sent a note verbale to all Member States
informing them of those designations. The Committee
will continue to discharge its mandate, as appropriate.

The Committee has received a number of
communications relating to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council measures. One State
transmitted, on 21 May, a report on the shipments
confiscated by its respective authorities during the first
quarter of 2012 and measures taken

"to prevent transit of any shipments to and from
the Islamic Republic of Iran which are suspected to
contain prohibited items that can be used in Iran's
nuclear and missile programmes".

The Committee, assisted by the Panel of Experts, is
following up on this communication.

Another State sought clarification on whether a
certain Iranian individual was the same person as the
individual Whose name appears on the Committee's
consolidated list. A third State inquired whether
certain items would contribute to the development of
technologies in support of Iran's proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activities. Lastly, a State asked for guidance with
respect to the scope and application of the assets-freeze
measures imposed by the Council through its resolutions
on the Islamic Republic of Iran. In all ofthose cases, the
Committee is gathering information from its members in
preparing its responses.

With regard to the incidents reported, on 23 March,
the Committee sent letters to six Member States
concerning a previously reported inspection and seizure,
on 28 August 2010, of a container on board the vessel
MS Finland. The Committee received communications
in connection with this case concerning a transfer of arms
and related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran to
the Syrian Arab Republic. In response to the Committee
letter asking for additional information regarding its
involvement in this incident, the Syrian Arab Republic
denied that the items were destined for one of its ports.
Another State informed the Committee that it was still
collecting information regarding the shipment and the
company involved and asked for a deadline extension.

The Committee, with the assistance of the Panel of
Experts, answered a general query sent by the Council of
Bureaux, which represents the International Association
of National Motor Insurers' Bureaux, regarding the
sanctions measures and their application.

During the reporting period, the Committee received
three notes verbales from a Member State containing
notifications with reference to paragraph 5 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007)
concerning payments made under a contract entered into
prior to the listing of a person or entity.

On 29 March, the Committee adopted its annual
report for 2011.

The Committee, with the participation of the
Panel of Experts, will hold, in the afternoon of 9 July,
in Conference Room 5, the open briefing that was
previously announced. The purpose of the meeting is
to present the Committee and Panel's mandates and
activities and to answer questions. Missions to the
United Nations will be officially notified of this event
in due course.

Regarding the Panel's activities, the Panel submitted
to the Committee a report regarding a previously
reported violation. As previously mentioned, the Panel
also submitted its final report on 9 May, in accordance
with paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011). The final
report will be issued as Security Council document
S/2012/395. I would also like to recall that, by its
resolution 2049 (2012), adopted on 7 June, the Security
Council extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts
until 9 July 2013.

With respect to the issue of national implementation
of sanctions measures, I would like to note that on
30 April, the Panel of Experts transmitted to the
Committee, in accordance with paragraph 1 (b) (i)
of the Committee's programme of work, a quarterly
assessment of the reports on the implementation of the
resolutions submitted by Member States pursuant to
paragraph 31 of resolution 1929 (2010), for the period
from 1 February to 30 April 2012.

On the same issue, I am happy to note that,
during the reporting period, the Committee received
communications from Viet Nam and Luxembourg
transmitting their respective reports on the
implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). On that note,
I conclude my report.

