Mr. Tarragfi (Brazil): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your work as President of the Security Council
for the month of February, as well as on your able
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

This open debate on resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006) is a timely opportunity for Member States
to underline their concern that the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as
their means of delivery, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. Preventing such
proliferation and the horrifying possibility that those
weapons may one day fall into terrorist hands requires
appropriate action by all Member States.

The risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is one of the nefarious consequences of the
very existence of those weapons, whose threat will be
definitively removed only by means of their complete,
verifiable and irreversible elimination.

As one of the countries that helped negotiate
resolution 1540 (2004) in 2004, Brazil once again
underlines that the core of the work of the 1540
Committee should be that of facilitating the provision
of technical assistance. The 1540 Committee should be
a vehicle for cooperative efforts and for facilitating the
provision of technical assistance to strengthen national
capabilities. The final result of the work of the 1540
Committee should be to provide a comprehensive
picture of the efforts being undertaken at the national
and international levels to respond to the threat posed
by non-State actors having access to weapons of mass
destruction.

It is important, however, that the Committee
continue to abide by the principle that technical
assistance should follow the formal request of a
Member State, which alone is in a position to identify
its own interests and shortcomings.

In response to specific requests, the Brazilian
Government has offered to provide assistance to States
in the Latin American and Caribbean region and to
other developing countries lacking the legal and/or
regulatory infrastructures and implementation
experience required to implement the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004). We greatly encourage the
continuation of outreach activities - in particular
regional seminars such as that held in Lima, Peru, in
November 2006 - to States of Latin America and the
Caribbean in order to promote greater awareness of the
provisions of that resolution.

With regard to the reporting mechanism, we
believe that the Committee should concentrate on
concluding the evaluation of the national reports - the
first report - and of additional information - the
second report. Countries that have not yet provided that
information should be encouraged to do so as soon as
possible. The Committee should establish a date in
order for Member States to present a third report, if
deemed necessary.

Before concluding, I refer to a recent decision
taken by the 1540 Committee to extend the contracts of
five of its experts. Two experts, nationals of permanent
members of this Council, had their contracts extended
until the end of 2007, with the possibility of a further
extension. The contracts of the three others, who are
not nationals of permanent members, were extended
for shorter periods of time.

No clear explanation was provided for such
differential treatment of the experts. Possibly, such
treatment had to do with the fact that some are
nationals of permanent members and some are not. If
that is so, it is our hope that in the future similar
decisions by the Committee will afford equal
opportunity to experts, irrespective of their nationality.

