Mr. Sahinol (Turkey): I would like to warmly thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting.
However, the theme of today's meeting indicated that
its purpose was not to revive past conflicts between
nations. Rather, it sought to find compromises between
nations for the future of the world. We came to this
meeting in that understanding. We did not want to
discuss events of a century ago.

However, it seems that we have different
understandings of the past. It is quite natural that
other delegations have different interpretations of
past events. The matter that the Armenian delegation
has raised is one such issue. It is obvious that we have
different interpretations of those events. We did not say
that nothing happened in 1915. We know about those
events but they do not fit the definition of genocide that
was set out in the 1948 Genocide Convention.

When we look at examples of rulings by
international courts, we can see that genocide is a
crime. It is clearly defined and requires high standards
of proof. Let me put forward an example. Let us look
at Bosnia and Herzegovina. The International Criminal
Court delivered its decision and said that genocide
had taken place in Srebrenica, but the Court could not
establish such a crime in other parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Why was that? It was because the Court
could not find enough evidence of such events taking
place in other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And
that happened in our time. We all witnessed those
events. Although we had the technology - television
and all kinds of communications - the Court could
not prove that there had been genocide in other parts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A delegation now raises the fact that the 1915
events amount to genocide in the absence of any ruling
by an international court. So how can we be expected
to accept such prejudices? We should not be hostage
to the past. We should look to the future. We believe
that by doing so, we can overcome past difficulties,
look at the future together, come to a compromise and
live peacefully together. That is why we would like
once again to recall that we should not hold our future
hostage to the events of a century ago.

