Mr. Almahmoud (United Arab Emirates): On
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I congratulate
China on acceding to the presidency of the Council and
appreciate its presiding over the quarterly open debate
on the Middle East. I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing this morning.

The United Arab Emirates associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

Today's debate could not be more urgent or timely,
as we are witnessing a dangerous deterioration of the
security situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The United Arab Emirates is particularly alarmed by
Israel's continued aggression towards the holy sites in
Jerusalem and the measures that it has taken to change
the status quo in the city. We strongly condemn the
closure of Al-Aqsa Mosque. The United Arab Emirates
calls for the removal of all obstructions to access for
worshippers at Al-Aqsa Mosque and full respect for the
historical and legal status of Jerusalem.

The international community must engage to
de-escalate the tensions in Al-Aqsa Mosque as well as
urge Israel, the occupying Power, to honour its legal
and international commitments and end its unilateral
actions. To that end, the United Arab Emirates
expresses its support for the tireless efforts of His
Majesty King Abdullah of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, the custodian of the Muslim holy sites in East
Jerusalem, to ease tensions and maintain the status quo
on the ground.

Israel's illegal settlement activities and other
provocative measures continue to pose major obstacles
to achieving a two-State solution that grants the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights. The plight
of the Palestinian people has endured for nearly seven
decades, and it must end. We call on the international
community and the Security Council to take all
measures necessary to reach a two-State solution that
establishes an independent Palestinian State based
on the June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, according to the Arab Peace Initiative, the
relevant resolutions and the Madrid Principles.

The paramount aim for the United Arab Emirates
is the promotion of security and stability in our region.
The continuation of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the lack of a just settlement
to the Palestinian issue have critically destabilized the
Middle East. The situation in the occupied territories
paves the way for extremist groups to spread their
messages of terrorism and violent extremism and
prey upon populations with their destructive agenda
throughout the region.

In conclusion, we call on the Security Council and
the community of nations to hold States accountable
for spreading conflict and regional insecurity by
supporting and financing terrorism and, in turn,
violating international law and this body's resolutions.
The United Arab Emirates believes that international
law and the institutions that uphold its pillars are the
key to lasting stability, and we appeal to Member
States to comply with the decisions of the Security
Council, in accordance with Article 25 of the United
Nations Charter.

