Mr. Jevremovic' (Serbia): Before I proceed to
make my statement, I would like to pay my respects to
Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
as well as to Mr. Serge Brammertz, the new Prosecutor
of the ICTY, to whom I wish much success in that post
of great complexity and responsibility.

In its session on 29 May, the Government of the
Republic of Serbia adopted a report on Serbia's
cooperation with the ICTY over the past six months
and on the framework for future cooperation. The
report has been circulated to all members of the
Security Council. However, I shall give a brief account
of the main points of the report.
Out of the 46 indictees requested by the Tribunal
for transfer, Serbia has transferred 41. One indictee
died before the transfer procedure could be completed,
while the search for the remaining four continues.
Substantial financial rewards have been offered for
information leading to their arrest.

Out of 1,671 requests for assistance made by the
Office of the Prosecutor related to the production of
documents, 95 per cent have been complied with in full
or in part, while the rest are still being processed.

Under the 2006 proposal on principles and
modalities of access to the State archives,
representatives of the Office of the Prosecutor made 20
visits to the State archives of the Republic of Serbia.
All witnesses who have been asked by the Tribunal to
testify have been given waivers. At least 123
individuals charged with committing criminal offences
in violation of international humanitarian law by
Serbian judicial authorities have been tried before the
War Crimes Chamber of the District Court of Belgrade.

Serbia has set up a team to track down the ICTY
fugitives. With additional assistance from
representatives of the Office of the Prosecutor, the
team reports regularly on its activities.

Those considerable achievements were made with
a lot of hard work and dedication. Yet, the Special
Prosecutor does not appear to appreciate these
achievements, asserting in one report that there is a
"lack of a clear concerted strategy and systematic
investigative activities directed at locating and
arresting fugitives". (S/2008/326, annex 1], para. 26).
Despite the 20 visits to the State archives of the
Republic of Serbia referred to previously, the Office of
the Prosecutor states that "no access to these archives
has been granted" (ibid., annex 11, para. 22) and that
cooperation in terms of access to archives and the
provision of documents is only "partially satisfactory"
(para. 20).

Furthermore, Serbia has done its best to protect
and ensure the appearance of witnesses. It has acted
upon each request from the Office of the Prosecutor for
witness protection. Let me point out, however, that,
like any other country, Serbia cannot intervene and
compel witnesses to testify voluntarily. The choice of
witnesses is entirely in the hands of the Office of the
Prosecutor, and the responsibility for their refusal to
testify voluntarily cannot, therefore, be attributed to
States.
Of much greater concern, however, is the
inability - sometimes even the flat refusal - of some
countries and organizations to provide witness
protection and prevent the disappearance of potential
witnesses. That problem is exemplified by the
Haradinaj et al. case. One does not have to be a legal
expert to realize that something is amiss in a trial if
counsel for the defence of an individual accused of
serious crimes can state that there was no case to
answer. Accordingly, we welcome the Prosecutor's
motion to appeal the decision in that case and the filing
of a contempt of court procedure. It is my hope that, in
the next round, the ICTY will receive appropriate
assistance from the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and other
stakeholders.

We in Serbia have been appalled by the
allegations in the book of the former Prosecutor,
Mrs. Del Ponte, about trafficking in human organs.
According to those allegations, Serbs and other
non-Albanians of Kosovo and Metohija were abducted
and transferred to the territory of the Republic of
Albania, where they were tortured and had their vital
organs removed. The Republic of Serbia has instituted
legal proceedings to investigate and try the perpetrators
of those heinous crimes and, to that end, has requested
international assistance, including from the Secretary-
General.

There is another problem highlighted by Mrs. Del
Ponte's book: the disturbing and absolutely
unacceptable practice of former high-ranking officials
of the Office of the Prosecutor of disclosing classified
information in their public statements, books or
memoirs. Serbia is very concerned about that practice.
It will take appropriate measures and will ask for
international cooperation to redress the situation.

It is only through joint cooperation that we will
be able to carry out the completion strategy by 2010.
Serbia is grateful to other countries, international
organizations and, most of all, the ICTY for their
assistance in building its national legal capacity. That
is all the more important in the light of the serious
problems that the ICTY is facing with regard to staff
retention. The building of national capacities,
especially those of the countries in our region, may
therefore be the proper way to proceed provide answers
to questions related to the question of residual
mechanisms.
The promotion of relations among the countries
of the region, their cooperation within European
processes and their integration will guarantee that they
will be prepared and capable of assuming many of the
ICTY functions beyond 2010.

