Ms. Mogherini (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great honour for me to speak once again before the
Security Council.

(spoke in English)

It is an honour to address the Security Council once
again and to do so on a very symbolic day. Today, 9 May,
is Europe Day, when the European Union celebrates
being one and united. Sixty-seven years ago on this
very day, the French statesman Robert Schumann
put forward an idea that was revolutionary for those
times - that European States could share part of their
sovereignty to prevent any future war in Europe. After
thousands of years of European wars, two World Wars,
the most devastating conflicts in human history, had
started in Europe and spread to the whole planet.

Our founding fathers and mothers imagined a
renewed European continent - a continent that, instead
of exporting war, would promote peace, democracy
and human development within its borders and in the
world. Seven years later, the union took its first steps,
and this year we celebrate 60 years of our European
Union - when Europeans simply realized that it was
by far more convenient for all ofus to cooperate instead
of fighting each other, and when they chose cooperation
over confrontation, building over these 60 years the
most successful peace project in human history.

It is therefore really not only a pleasure but an
honour for me to celebrate this historic day with the
United Nations and the Security Council. Let me say
that in recent months some believed that our sixtieth
anniversary would also mark the beginning of the
end for the European Union and the beginning of its
decline. Indeed, our British friends have decided to
leave us, which is very sad for all of us. But life goes
on, and the European Union goes on as well. Since the
United Kingdom referendum last year, we Europeans
have recommitted to be the strong and united power
that our citizens and our partners need and deserve. The
European Union is, and will continue to be, the reliable
cooperative partner - I would say the indispensable
partner-the world needs. First and foremost, we will
remain an indispensable partner for our neighbours and
our region.

Let me start with the Balkans. With our support
and constant cooperation with the United Nations,
our friends in the Balkans have taken impressive
steps forward, even at times in the most difficult
and terrible of circumstances: steps forward towards
peace and regional cooperation, economic growth and
the European Union. One thing is clear. The future
of our Union will not be at 27; we will have new
members joining our Union in the future, starting from
the Balkans.

(spoke in French)

Beyond our continent, we are an indispensable
partner for a more cooperative, multilateral and peaceful
world. We are an indispensable partner for the United
Nations and of all those that believe multilateralism
is key to a world order that works. In celebrating our
sixtieth anniversary, the Secretary-General stated that:

"In this time of global division, the vision provided
by the European Union of cooperation and
integration is more important than ever".

(spoke in English)

I would therefore like to begin with our vision. It is
what we call the European way - the European way
to peace and security, the European way to growth
and sustainable development, the European way to
international relations. This European way is also
the United Nations way. And that explains why all
our actions and initiatives are always taken in full
coordination and partnership with the United Nations.
We believe in the United Nations because we believe in
the same principles and values, and all communities are
built upon the same fundamental ideals.

First of all, we believe that security is not only about
military might. It is about finding common ground,
cooperation over confrontation, and diplomacy. It is
about human development and economic growth. It is
about democracy, the rule of law and human rights.
When Antonio Guterres highlights the importance of
conflict prevention and mediation, his words resonate
with the European way to security, and in particular
with the European Union Global Strategy and our
integrated approach to conflict and crisis.

When one reads the Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security, or on youth, peace and
security, the rationale is the same as in our own work
to strengthen resilience inside and around Europe. As
Europeans, we are turning those concepts into practice
each and every day. When a peace deal was announced
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, the European
Union was there to help open a path from peace to full
reconciliation. We have some European experiences in
that vein. When President Juan Manuel Santos went to
Europe to receive the Nobel Peace Prize, he came to us
at the European Union in Brussels straight from Oslo
and Stockholm. Together we signed a document on a
European trust fund that today is helping Colombia
reap the economic dividends ofpeace. I understand that
the Council was able to witness our work for itself, it
having just returned from a field visit to Colombia.

Take another example. Just one month ago in
Brussels we convened, together with Secretary-
General Guterres, the European Union Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. Our
primary goal was, and still is, to address the urgency
and dramatic humanitarian situation faced by Syrians,
both inside and outside of their country, and to support
host communities. In addition, in the difficult hours
after the chemical attack in Idlib province, we also
worked together with the United Nations and with most
Council members to strengthen the world's support to
the United Nations-led negotiations in Geneva and to
a political solution. Yesterday I spoke with Staffan de
Mistura, as I often do, to coordinate the United Nations
and European Union work on Syria. We are extremely
supportive of his decision to resume intra-Syrian
political talks in Geneva as of next week. The
European Union is, and will continue to be, actively
and strongly engaged and committed in supporting the
United Nations-led political process with all our means
and determination.
As we did at the Brussels Conference, we have also
prepared the ground for the international community to
start looking into the post-war reconstruction of Syria.
It is clear for us that reconstruction will begin only
when a political transition is under way and a political
agreement is achieved in Geneva. But we have lost the
peace too many times not to have learned a lesson.
We believe that, once the war is over, we will need
collectively to invest in reconciliation, stabilization and
the reconstruction of the country. That will be powerful
leverage for peace and a dividend of peace for Syrians
and for the region at large.

On each of those strands of work, the international
community will have to preserve a fragile unity in
Syria. The Council knows that better than anyone
else. To that end, the European Union is determined to
continue mobilizing all its resources in support of the
work of the United Nations to put an end to this war.
That is the European way: addressing the urgency and
the long-term humanitarian the security and diplomatic
needs at the same time.

Moving from one continent to another, the same
approach shaped the Brussels conference for the Central
African Republic, which we organized together with
United Nations and which I chaired along with President
Faustin Archange Touadera. We managed to mobilize
more than €2 billion in support of the Government's
priorities. Now it is time to implement those pledges.
The European Union is not only the largest donor, we
are also present on the ground with our military training
mission, working in close cooperation with United
Nations forces, as we do everywhere we are present. By
the way, having mentioned the need to implement the
pledges, the European Union is always the international
player that implements all the pledges it makes.

The European Union is also increasingly active
as a security provider worldwide. Our member States
contribute almost 40 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget, collectively making us the
largest contributor. In addition to that, the European
Union's 15 military and civilian operations worldwide
work in constant cooperation with the United Nations.
Let me just mention Operation Sophia, off the coast of
Libya, which the Security Council has twice endorsed
with a certain degree of unity, for which I would like to
thank members.

The tasks of European Union military operations
today include not only dismantling the networks of
smugglers operating off the coast of Libya; we have
also completed the training of the first group of Libyan
coast guard personnel. I myself was honoured to hand
out the diplomas to participants, in quite a moving
ceremony on the flagship of Operation Sophia in
Malta. We also delivered to them the first motorboats,
so that the security of the territorial waters can be in
their hands.

And, as mandated by the Security Council,
Operation Sophia is also enforcing the arms embargo.
Just last week, we seized a shipment of weapons
and ammunition. The Council's endorsement of our
Operation is a great sign of the trust that this institution
places in the men and women serving under the
European flag, doing it the European way in the context
of the United Nations.

We take this responsibility very seriously. Last
year, just days after my briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7705), I presented our Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy. The Strategy envisages
greater European cooperation on security and defence.
In less than a year's time, we have taken more steps
towards a European Union of security and defence
than in the previous 60 years. More cooperation on
European defence means more efficient spending,
better capabilities and more security for our citizens
and for the world. But it also means becoming an even
more reliable partner for our neighbours and friends,
starting with the United Nations, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and many regional organizations
with which we partner on security issues.

Yet, as I said at the outset, we consider our military
capabilities as only one element of our security strategy.
To prevent conflict, you also need good development
policies and strong State institutions. Peace is never
sustainable without decent infrastructure, good health
care and education, participation or democracy. This is
what we call resilience, and the United Nations remains
for us a fundamental partner in this kind of work.

That is why the European Union's voluntary
contributions to the United Nations funds and agencies
amount to half of its total budget. This means we
proudly and smartly invest in them as much as the rest
of the world combined. We believe that it is in our best
interests to do so. Our contributions - to the World
Food Programme to prevent humanitarian crises, to
UNICEF to help children in war-torn countries go to
school and to prevent radicalization, to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to assist
millions of displaced people - are all contributions to
our own common security.

So let me be very clear and speak directly to our
American friends. It is essential for us that we all keep
investing in these United Nations agencies. They are
as important to global peace and security as defence
spending, and sometimes even more important. And we
Europeans consider this support for the United Nations
system as crucial investments in our own security. Take
the terrible famine that has hit the Horn of Africa. It has
the potential to make a security situation that is fragile
even worse and turn it into an actual security situation.
This also serves as a powerful reminder that climate
change is real and is already having an impact on our
security environments. Everything is linked.

We therefore continue to expect that the United
States will find a way to remain committed to the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. I know that there is
an ongoing debate, which we greatly respect, but 195
countries have signed the deal on climate change and
there will be 195 different paths to meeting the Paris
goals and honouring the Agreement. I am sure there is
room for the United States Administration to find its
own path, as it is already part of what the world has
agreed together. The Paris Agreement shows the right
approach to the challenges of our era. The international
community managed to come together and seek
common solutions beyond the traditional divides.

Over the past few years, we have already
managed to overcome these divides. The Sustainable
Development Goals were a key achievement for us. This
month - next week, actually - the European Council
will adopt a new consensus on development that brings
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Agenda
to the core of our development policies, both at the
European and national levels. It will be a pleasure
for me to welcome Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed in Brussels that day.

I believe that the greatest divide in today's world
is between those who believe that international politics
are a zero-sum game and those who are working to build
win-win solutions on common ground. The European
way is in constant search for win-win solutions, and
the essence of the United Nations is to represent a
space where compromise can always prevail over
confrontation. That is why I say the European way is
the United Nations way.

This search for win-win solutions is another field
where the European way and the United Nations way
converge perfectly. We saw it last year at the United
Nations Summit for Refugees and Migrants. Instead of
focusing on what divides us, the North and the South, the
developing and developed - even ifI personally hate
these two words - we looked for cooperative solutions,
for partnerships - what we call "compacts". Since
then, the European Union has worked on partnerships
with five African countries, including Ethiopia and
Senegal, whose representatives are both sitting in the
Security Council today, able to bear witness to the
fact that this search for win-win solutions cannot be
imposed by one side on the other. Our approach is that
we can only agree together on what is good for both,
which is why we are defining different priorities for our
cooperation with each of our partners. This cooperative
approach is already producing some concrete results,
and we believe that this work can feed the discussion
on reaching a global compact for refugees and migrants
within the United Nations framework. Let me add
that our cooperation with United Nations agencies on
migration is constant and extremely positive.

I would like to mention in particular the situation
in Libya, which, as Security Council members know, is
very close to the European heart. In Libya, we see that
the conditions of migrants stranded in the country are
dramatic. For this reason, we are funding a €90 million
support package for Libya in support of the work of the
International Organization for Migration, UNHCR and
United Nations Development Programme inside Libya.
We think this is the way. Confrontational approaches
lead nowhere. Between win-win and lose-lose, the
European Union has picked sides. We always stand
on the side of dialogue and partnership. Where others
might see conflict, we look for cooperation. In times of
global disorder, when instability spreads from one side
of the world to the other, building win-win solutions is
difficult, but for us it is an absolute necessity. There is
no sustainable alternative to that.

That is certainly true in terms of counter-terrorism.
The attacks in Europe over the last year tell us that
cross-border cooperation is of the utmost importance.
We therefore support Antonio Guterres' proposal to
establish a United Nations office on Counter-terrorism,
to be headed by an under-secretary-general. His
proposal could enhance coordination and effectiveness
in our work, to the benefit of all.

Security today is a truly global issue. Let us look
at an obvious example that the Security Council has
had to deal with several times recently and in a very
important manner - the situation in the Korean
peninsula. A military escalation with North Korea
would lead to devastating consequences. We believe
that we all have an interest in avoiding confrontation
and pushing for the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to re-engage with the international community. I
have been following very closely the past few hours the
results of the elections in the Republic of Korea to see
if that will open new avenues of engagement.

This leads me to a third point before I conclude.
Another essential feature of the European way is that we
believe in a global order based on rules that are agreed
together and respected by all, as should be the case for
non-proliferation. In our chaotic era, rules are too often
perceived, globally but also in our own countries, as
a constraint for some, more than a guarantee for all.
But more power politics is the perfect recipe for further
destabilization. International rules for us are not a threat
but a protection for every nation's autonomy. These
rules include territorial integrity and the inviolability
of borders. For this reason, we do not and will not
recognize Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea. We
will continue to work to bring the conflict in eastern
Ukraine to an end, with the full implementation of the
Minsk Agreements.

When any such violations occur, we are all less
secure. When accountability is not guaranteed, the
credibility of the entire international system is called
into question. We have repeated time and again, to move
on to another subject, that after the chemical attack in
Syria, for instance, that accountability for those crimes
must be guaranteed. We therefore fully support the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in its important and delicate work. We believe that
this is the correct place, the correct forum, where
accountability should be guaranteed.

(spoke in French)

When we speak of multilateralism, it is not a
rhetorical profession of faith. It is a matter of taking
these rules seriously, investing in multilateral
institutions and seeing in the United Nations the overall
framework within which our actions take place. It is not
an ideological posture, but a calculated and pragmatic
choice at the same time. No world Power is strong
enough to put an end to the crises of our time. Each
crisis implicates too many actors and involves too many
issues. Any contribution is welcome, and no one can
contribute in a vacuum.

(spoke in English)

With regard to the conflict between Israel and
Palestine, last year we revived the Middle East Quartet
and reached an unprecedented consensus among us on
the risks for the two-State solution and on practical
recommendations. We must preserve and enlarge
that unity, for instance through cooperation between
the European Union and the League of Arab States
and between the Quartet and Arab States. I see the
representative of Egypt sitting here as one of the key
players in this respect. I was honoured to discuss these
perspectives at the summit of the League ofArab States
in Jordan last month. Of course, we need the Israelis
and the Palestinians first of all to directly negotiate with
each other, supported by the accompanying efforts of
the international community, starting with the United
States, the European Union, Russia, the United Nations
and all those that believe that peace needs the direct
involvement of the two parties but also our contribution
to help them reach a solution.

Different initiatives can make important
contributions to a peace process. In some situations,
we need to be imaginative and look for new channels
when the traditional formats seem to fail. This seems to
be the case for Venezuela, where it is vital to stop the
escalation and establish a new form of mediation that
can be agreed to by all sides. We stand ready to help in
any useful way in support of any helpful initiative that
can be put in place.

The European Union is not interested in photo
opportunities. Between a theatrical empty statement
and a silent effective mediation, we will always
choose the latter. In our view, the real impact matters
more than the headlines. In all cases, coordination
and complementarity are the key and the best way to
guarantee coordination is by working together with the
United Nations.

Peace for Syria can come only through negotiations
among the Syrian parties in Geneva. In that connection,
I would like to once again thank Staffan de Mistura for
his incredible work and leadership.

When it comes to Yemen, the European Union is
sponsoring track-two and peacebuilding initiatives, but
those efforts need to feed into a United Nations process.

In Libya, a window of opportunity has just opened.
We firmly support such an opportunity and believe
that the Libyans must seize this moment. We are fully
behind all United Nations efforts to bring a political
solution to the crisis.

Whatever the format, whatever the initiative, we
believe that the United Nations must be the centre
of gravity of all peacebuilding efforts, carried out
in an effective manner. Only the United Nations can
guarantee the coherence of the process and the strength
of the outcome and implementation.

The nuclear deal with Iran shows the way forward,
in our view. It set a milestone for non-proliferation,
making everyone more secure - in the region, in
Europe and in the world. World Powers negotiated the
deal, but the agreement was immediately ratified by the
Security Council. The deal now belongs to the entire
international community, not only to us who were in
that room in Vienna. The International Atomic Energy
Agency has certified its implementation five times.
That is the European way. Enforcing and strengthening
the rules of non-proliferation, we brought to an end 12
years of confrontation through peaceful dialogue. It is
the European way and it is the way ofthe United Nations.

A successful deal makes the whole system more
credible because it shows that we can collectively
deliver on our citizens' needs. The best way to preserve
and reinforce that credibility is by making the United
Nations system more effective. Therefore, we stand
behind the Secretary-General's reform agenda on the
peace and security pillar, the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, and United Nations
management reform. The agenda has the potential to
make the whole United Nations family less fragmented,
more united and coherent.

The European Union cares about the United
Nations as a precious tool. In 60 years, we have become
a super-Power for peace, security and democracy.
We are accompanying reconciliation processes in all
corners of the world, from Afghanistan to Myanmar.
We are helping our Eastern partners to strengthen
their economies and their institutions and bolster their
resilience - and in just a few days we will announce
a visa liberalization agreement with our Ukrainian
friends. We are finding new ways to support Africa's
growth, together with African Governments, the
African Union, the private sector and civil society.

In 60 years, the European Union has become not
only the most successful peace project in the world, but
also an indispensable partner to move beyond the current
disorder and to try to build a more cooperative world
order together. We will always return to this centre of
gravity, this pivot of a rules-based international system.
Because the European way is the way of the United
Nations. The European vision is the vision of the United
Nations. Whoever wants to invest in this system, will
find in the European Union a partner and a friend - a
reliable, constructive and cooperative partner.

