Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, both for being here today to underscore
the vital importance of this topic and, in particular, for
your very powerful statement. The United Kingdom
supports your call for a referral of the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court.

I also wish to express our thanks to the Under-
Secretary-General for his continued efforts to keep the
Security Council informed of the toll that hostilities
are having on civilians in Syria. We also thank him for
the heroic efforts of all his teams on the ground. Their
efforts are much supported by most ofus on the Council.

The Under-Secretary-General's briefing eloquently

underscores why it is essential that the Council comes
together to agree on concrete steps to allow the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to fulfil
its mandate to ensure humanitarian assistance and
protection for everybody who needs it. Ambassador
Haley has laid the situation bare, Ambassador Delattre
has set out the regime's intentions, and Ambassador
Alotaibi has focused on the need for protection and
registration. I support their calls. I will not rehearse a
catalogue of suffering that we have heard expressed so
eloquently today, but that omission should not be taken
as any indication that the United Kingdom is not as
horrified as others by what is happening on the ground.

Specifically, it is diabolical that access is actually
worse in the face of such suffering. Diabolical is a
strong word, but there are no others to describe what
is happening. The worst destruction and suffering
has continued in eastern Ghouta. Those who support
Al-Assad have not taken steps to help stop the violence.
Instead, Al-Assad and his supporters have violated the
strong words of the Security Council in resolution 2401
(2018), making mockery of the Council's authority, as
Ambassador Delattre stated.

Since 11 March, an estimated 100,000 people have
left eastern Ghouta and are in makeshift reception sites
in rural Damascus. Thousands more have been bused
to Idlib. Because there is no independent monitoring
nor provisions for civilian safety, those fleeing
and those staying remain vulnerable and at risk of
mistreatment and abuse by the regime, including being
detained, disappeared or separated from their families.
Humanitarians, health workers and first responders
on the ground report that the regime is deliberately
targeting them. That is illegal, and those who help the
Al-Assad regime are complicit in that illegality.

The situation continues even for those who are
left behind. An estimated 150,000 civilians remain in
eastern Ghouta. They suffer from acute food shortages
and lack of medical supplies. They are afraid, and
above all they remember how the regime punished the
civilians who fled from eastern Aleppo in December
2016. That is why Ambassador Alotaibi's call for
protection and registration is so urgent.

We welcome United Nations plans to scale up
support to deal with the dire situations in the internally
displaced persons camps and collective shelters. We
call on Russia to use its influence with the regime to
ensure that the United Nations and its partners can also
provide assistance and protection for those who remain
in eastern Ghouta. Whether civilians choose to stay
or leave, it is essential that they be protected against
attack and have access to the essentials to survive. This
is not just a plea on the grounds of humanity; it is a
requirement under international humanitarian law. It is
thejob of the Council and all members ofthe Council to
uphold international humanitarian law. Those who side
with the regime in its actions are themselves guilty of
violating that law.

In concluding, I would like to highlight two further
areas. The suffering of the Syrian people continues in
Idlib, where civilians have been under attack by regime
forces for many years. More than a million internally
displaced Syrians live there, including those who have
fled eastern Ghouta. In Afrin, we recognize Turkey's
legitimate interest in the security of its borders, but at
the same time we remain concerned about the impact of
operations on the humanitarian situation, and my Prime
Minister and Foreign Secretary have raised the need
for protection of civilians and access with President
Erdogan and his Ministers. It was good to hear from the
Under-Secretary-General that there may at last be signs
of progress in Afrin.

After seven years ofconflict, over 13 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria. The
Al-Assad regime has created the situation and is now
preventing humanitarian actors from relieving some
of the horror it has inflicted. We call on Russia to use
its influence to ensure that at a minimum the United
Nations can fulfil its mandate to ensure humanitarian
assistance and protection for Syrians on the basis of
need, regardless of any other considerations.

I was at Geneva in 2012. I think we all feel that that
was a huge missed opportunity, in the light of events.
The situation has escalated every year since that time,
and, as the Under-Secretary-General said, the level of
access is worse. The Council has a small opportunity to
put measures in place to reduce the risk of reprisals. As
you said, Mr. President, if the Security Council cannot
do it, who can?

