Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in Russian): AS this is
the first time that I address the Security Council this
month, I want to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your country on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf ofthe European
Union and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

Ithank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2015/684) on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security. I
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing
and assure him of our continued full support for his
mission. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his statement and for the very good cooperation we
have had over the years. We look forward to working
with him closely in his new capacity.

I would like to reiterate the European Union's full
support for the continued important role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and all the United Nations agencies working
to support the Afghan people and to coordinate the
assistance provided by the international community.

The role of the United Nations in facilitating
consensus and support for the National Unity
Government's reform agenda has been particularly
helpful when preparing the senior officials meeting held
in Kabul on 5 September. The new self-reliance-oriented
mutual accountability framework provides important
benchmarks and timelines for deliverables in key
priority areas. It is particularly encouraging to see that
the new framework includes indicators with regard to
human rights, and in particular the rights of women
and children, as well as indicators with regard to the
continued development of accountable institutions
and electoral reforms. With regard to the latter, the
European Union welcomes the progress made by the
Special Electoral Reform Commission, which has
presented its initial recommendations. The capacity
of Afghan institutions to deliver results that reach its
citizens will make the difference.

The past months have seen a new spike in the exodus
of refugees and migrants from Afghanistan, many of
them well educated. Continuous insecurity threatens
the progress made in stabilizing the country. It is all
the more urgent that the Government of Afghanistan,
with the support of the international community and
all regional stakeholders, provide a secure and stable
environment. We remain committed to Afghanistan.
It is crucial that the Afghan people be able to regain
confidence in the future, especially through the urgent
implementation of reforms aimed at creating economic
opportunities.
I am honoured to announce that the European Union
accepts the invitation by the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan to co-host the next ministerial
conference in Brussels. It takes Afghan leadership,
along with continued international solidarity and
support, to make this effort a success and to advance
the long-term objective of Afghan self-reliance. On that
path, the Brussels conference can send a strong signal
of hope, confidence and change.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
sustained conflict, which has grown both in intensity
and geographic scope. It recalls the continued and utter
disregard on the part of the Taliban and other insurgent
groups for Afghan lives. We need to be clear: the
insurgency continues to plan and target attacks against
Afghan civilians. The European Union condemns
the insurgent groups that continue to directly attack
civilians, democratic institutions and civil society,
causing record numbers ofcasualties. It is also vital that
humanitarian aid agencies and aid workers be allowed
unhindered access to the most vulnerable affected
population, in line with basic humanitarian principles.

The European Union is confident that the National
Unity Government will prevail in the struggle, backed
by all the support that we can collectively muster. The
initiation of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process remains the key objective. Earlier this year, we
encouraged direct meetings between the Government
of Afghanistan and representatives of the Taliban.
We now face a deadlock owing to the continuous
insurgency attacks. We call on all countries, especially
on Afghanistan's neighbours, to support an inclusive
settlement that eschews oppressive violence inflicted
on so many Afghans, disavows any link with terrorism
or terrorist groups and respects human rights, in
particular the rights of women.

We welcome the launching of Afghanistan's national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, for the period 2015-2022. We
fully support the National Unity Government in that
endeavour, and we have put in place a special support
programme for the implementation of those efforts.
We must protect the gains made by Afghan women
since the fall of the Taliban regime, as their active
involvement in rebuilding the State remains crucial.
It is also our wish, with a view towards strengthening
women's empowerment in all sectors of society, to see
women actively involved in negotiations on the future
of their country.

We believe that increased regional economic
cooperation, in particular the development of
intra-regional trade and infrastructure, will provide
benefits to all of the countries in the region. We
therefore support all efforts to maintain and improve
such regional relations. So far, credit must go to
President Ghani and other leaders in the region for their
endeavours to reach out to each other.

Regional connectivity and improved economic
cooperation can provide an important basis for
stability and prosperity. The full implementation of the
Afghanistan and Pakistan trade and transit agreement
and other agreements can play a valuable role in
stimulating economic activity. We continue to support
the Heart of Asia Process and other processes that are
owned by the countries in the region. We look forward
to the concerted efforts of the main stakeholders to
show leadership and invest both political and financial
resources to that end.

In conclusion, let me say that the European Union
will work with, and render support to, the National
Unity Government during this difficult transformation
period, and will stand at its side while further
promoting an inclusive dialogue on reconciliation and
political participation. Lasting peace can come only
with the constructive engagement of all neighbouring
countries. The European Union will work with the
leading members of the international community to
support that outcome. UNAMA's role in promoting
peace and security for all Afghans will be a vital one,
and we reiterate its importance.

