Mr. Seyoum (Eritrea): I am grateful for the
opportunity that has been given to my delegation to
participate in the Council's open discussion this
morning on the agenda item on the situation between
Eritrea and Ethiopia. My delegation is delighted to see
Norway, the very country that led the Council mission
to Ethiopia and Eritrea at the end of February 2002,
presiding over this organ of the United Nations for the
current month of March. I wish to begin, therefore, by
congratulating the presidency both for its indispensable
guidance and for a job well done in leading the
purposeful mission to our troubled region.

At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank the
Security Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea for its
extensive report of 27 February 2002, contained in
document S/2002/205, which is under consideration at
this meeting. Indeed, the report reflects the success of
the mission and my delegation shares the joy of this
remarkable success. My delegation notes with
satisfaction that the mission was able to visit a great
many places and meet with a great many people in a
very short time.

My delegation wishes to thank the Security
Council members for the visit that they undertook to
my country. This was an eloquent demonstration of the
goodwill and commitment of the international
community to the peace process between my country
and Ethiopia. We are thankful for your continued
support, Mr. President. We notice with pride that the
mission met with His Excellency Mr. Isaias Afwerki,
the President of the State of Eritrea, in Asmara, and
was able to adequately address many, if not all, of the
issues directly related to the peace process. Having
given that assurance, therefore, I do not wish to repeat
myself. However, I feel duty-bound to say that I will
re-emphasize a couple of points later in my statement.

My delegation notes with great interest that the
main focus of the mission was to create awareness of
the importance of looking to the future - looking to
the crucial tasks to be carried out following the
Boundary Commission's decision later this month. My
Government highly commends the Council for its
wisdom, and could not agree more with the proposal
for the swift implementation of the Boundary
Commission's decision, as stated in paragraph 35 (a) of
the report. In this regard, I am pleased to report to the
Council that, on 25 February 2002, my Government
responded positively, to the Commission's request for
Eritrea's permission for the overflights for aerial
photography.

The people and the Government of Eritrea are
looking forward to a bright future. Their optimism was
well expressed by President Isaias Afwerki, when he
addressed the mission on 24 February in Asmara. He
said,

"My optimism is based on the hope that the
Boundary Commission's decision, in accordance
with the principle of the sanctity of colonial
boundaries - a fundamental principle that cannot
be tampered with on this continent - will shortly
set to rest the underlying causes of this
unfortunate war. If, indeed, it was
misunderstanding about location of the colonial
boundary that caused the conflict, both countries
should soon be able to move beyond the current
atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust and to
restore mutually beneficial bonds of good
neighbourliness between their two sisterly
peoples. Under such circumstances, demarcation
based on the colonial boundaries should not be
expected to pose serious problems."

The international community has watched the
Eritrean people endure a struggle for peace for over 30
years. They thought they had found it in 1991, when
the war between their country and Ethiopia ended for
the good of the two peoples. Unfortunately, that peace
was cut short by another round of conflict in 1998,
arising out of a territorial claim. That is the conflict
whose lasting resolution the Security Council and other
partners are engaged in helping to bring about.

A remarkable woman of inspiration,
Helen Keller, once said, "I do not want the peace that
passeth understanding. I want the understanding which
bringeth peace". This time, the Eritrean people are
looking not for a peace which is merely the absence of
war, but for a lasting peace in abundance. This time, it
cannot be a "hit or miss" business; it should be a "hit",
with pure justice. The Eritrean people have been
longing for that precious peace for many years. I
fervently hope that they find it this time, and keep it
forever. We should not fail them.

Allow me now to underline two issues that
President Isaias Afwerki raised in his meeting with
you, Mr. President, and with the members of the
mission, in Asmara. These two issues deserve the
utmost attention because they both have humanitarian
implications.

First, as members of the Council are aware, the
Temporary Security Zone, which is the cornerstone of
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement of 18 June
2000, could not be established due to Ethiopia's refusal
to redeploy its troops, in violation of article 14 of the
Agreement. As a result of that violation, more than
60,000 Eritrean civilians remain stranded in makeshift
camps to this day, making it impossible for them to
return to their homes and villages. My delegation is
thankful and pleased to note, in paragraph 32 of the
report, that the mission was able to visit some 5,000 of
those internally displaced persons around the Senafe
area.

The mission was witness to the conditions that
those men, women and children are living in. It saw
them and talked to them. They communicated their
horrible conditions in a very powerful way. I believe
the mission came back convinced that their living
conditions are unacceptable. We should send them
home to their villages. It would be unjust to continue to
keep them in those camps. I appeal to the Council and
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) to help us create the conditions for those
people to return.

Secondly, article 8 of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement provides for prompt demining activities by
both parties

"with a View to creating the conditions necessary
for the deployment of the Peacekeeping Mission,
the return of civilian administration and the return
of the population as well as the delimitation and
demarcation of their common border".
(S/2000/601, annex, art. 8)

That vital treaty obligation remains unfulfilled by
Ethiopia, which, for no justifiable reason, has refused
to provide UNMEE with detailed landmine
information. Therefore, my delegation cannot help but
join the mission in its appeal to Ethiopia to submit
detailed landmine information. Provision of that
information assumes added urgency today because the
task of expeditious demarcation - and ultimate peace
between the countries - will depend on rapid
completion of mine clearance, especially along the
common boundary.

We note with deep concern the Security Council's
appeal for an orderly transfer of administration and for
population returns and its caution against unilateral
action without urging Ethiopia to respect its treaty
obligations. Ethiopia has already violated those
obligations and has frustrated the implementation of
the Agreements by dilatory tactics such as those of the
last two years. My Government would simply like to
flag the practicality of that intention, as we already
know of one party's unilateral violation of prior
agreements. My delegation begs the Council's
understanding in this matter.

While I am on the issue of landmines, my
Government wishes to thank all those who contributed
to the demining project.

I wish to conclude my statement by recalling that
the Council is meeting this morning at the eleventh
hour in the delivery of the decision of the Boundary
Commission. I bring this up not to make it sensational
or to add more anxiety, but to share my delegation's
optimism and that of the President of Eritrea. The
peoples of Eritrea and Ethiopia are earnestly waiting
for that decision with hope, in anticipation of "opening
a new page in the history of their relations" in genuine
peace and freedom. In that respect, we cannot agree
more with former President Herbert Hoover, who said,
"Peace is not made at the Council table or by treaties,
but in the hearts of men", and, I would add, women.

Finally, the Government of Eritrea wishes to
thank all our partners and the actors in the peace
process for their invaluable effort. The same goes to
those who contributed to the United Nations Trust
Fund in Support of the Delimitation and Demarcation
of the Ethiopia/Eritrea Border. My Government appeals
to the international community to contribute more to
the Trust Fund. The recent announcement of a $1
million contribution by the Government of Norway is
most gratifying.

Again, my warmest congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on a successful mission.

