Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's debate, which addresses important
issues that deserve our attention and consideration.

I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.

In my statement, I would like to focus on two issues
that are highlighted in the concept note (8/2016/223, annex) prepared for this debate. The first is the role
that elections play in contributing to durable peace,
reconciliation and development. The holding of regular,
inclusive and transparent elections is vital for credible
democratic governance. Crucial to the success of
any electoral process is the political environment in
which elections take place, and creating a conducive
environment involves working closely with a wide
range of stakeholders.

Unfortunately, the environment in which last July's
presidential elections took place in Burundi could not be
judged as conducive to inclusive and credible elections.
The situation in the country is now characterized by
pervasive violence, human rights abuses and forced
displacement. We would urge the Government of
Burundi, in the interest of its people, to move forward
urgently on an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue,
which is essential to restoring peace and stability.

We are also following closely the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, particularly in the
light of the upcoming elections in the country. We have
taken note of the comments made by the African Union
and the United Nations in stressing the importance of
peaceful, transparent and timely elections, which would
serve to consolidate much of the progress made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past decade.
In this pre-electoral period, it is especially important
that the rule of law and human rights be respected and
that arrangements respect constitutional provisions.

More broadly, we recall that the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance provides clear
standards for governance. We urge all Governments
in the Great Lakes region, as elsewhere in Africa,
to adhere to those standards in order to build truly
inclusive and resilient democracies, the foundation for
durable economic and social development.

The second issue I would like to address is the
critical role of women in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations, peacebuilding and governance. As
noted in the three high level reviews in 2015, and at
the Security Council debate (see S/PV.7533) held here
last October, the participation of women is key to
sustainable peace. Women must participate and have an
opportunity to demonstrate leadership in all areas of
peace and security - as mediators and interlocutors, as
peacebuilders and as active participants in economic,
social and political spheres. From our own experience
of conflict on the island of Ireland, we know first-hand
the importance of the promotion and empowerment of
women as peacebuilders in opening up a pathway to
sustainable peace.

Finally, the Great Lakes region has many examples
of the particular impact of conflict on women and girls,
including the devastating impact of sexual violence. We
remain deeply concerned about grave reports, in both
scale and nature, of acts of sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as other human rights violations, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular in
the east of the country. We are also concerned about
reports of sexual violence perpetrated by security forces
during house searches in Burundi. Such violations are
completely unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. We
encourage the authorities in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to further build on progress to combat
sexual violence and to continue to work to ensure the
full implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2122 (2013).

Ireland strongly supports the work of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Said Djinnit and his
predecessor Mary Robinson. In particular, we welcome
his commitment to promote a participatory approach to
the development of gender-related policies. We believe
that engaging with a broad range of actors in support
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region offers the best chance for success, and that
engaging with civil society will help address all issues
surrounding sexual and gender based violence.

