Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to acknowledge the presence among us of
the Ministers from Nigeria, Luxembourg and Libya, as
well as the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Argentina,
the Director General for Foreign Policy of Chile and
Ms. Marinaki, Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues of the European External Action
Service. I should like to convey the regret of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
would have wanted to be present and this meeting but
could not owing to other obligations.

Allow me to reiterate our warm congratulations to
the Republic of Chad on his accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December, as
well as to thank it heartily for organizing this second
high-level open debate on the crucial issue of terrorism
and transnational crime. This initiative is particularly
relevant as it focuses on the relationship between those
two phenomena on the African continent, where the
terrorist threat continues to worsen, as well as on the
impact on international peace and security.

My thanks and congratulations also go to the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his detailed briefing and for
the leadership he has shown since taking office as head
of the Department of Political Affairs, including the
coordination of efforts in the fight against terrorism.

Let me first of all reiterate the African Union's
unequivocal rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, ans well as to strongly condemn all
terrorist acts, which no circumstances can justify.

(spoke in English)

The African Union welcomes this debate as a
unique opportunity to examine how the intersection
of cross-border crime and terrorism pose serious
challenges to conflict prevention and resolution efforts,
especially in Africa. It is certainly no coincidence,
Mr. President, that under your country's presidency
of the Security Council this month the question of
terrorism has been given a prominent place among the
priorities of the Council's programme of work. This
is simply a reinforcement of the importance Chad
attaches to addressing this scourge. In that context,
we are reminded of the particular leadership role of
your country, Sir, as Chair of the African Union Peace
and Security Council in the convening, in Nairobi on
2 September 2014, of the special summit devoted to the
issue of terrorism held.

Cross-border criminal activities on the continent
have both contributed to the onset of conflicts as well
as further complicated subsequent management and
resolution efforts. As we are all well aware, the situation
in northern Mali, characterized by limited Government
presence and services along its border, provided a
conducive environment for cross-border trafficking
to flourish and further expand into dangerous forms
of criminal activities, such as kidnapping-for-ransom,
arms- and drug-trafficking and mercenarism. That
environment subsequently became an ideal haven
for terrorist groups, exacerbating political strife and
ultimately leading to the hijacking of the uprising by
criminal and terrorist groups, which had established
strong presences in the region.

In the Sahel region, consistent reports indicate
that drug- and arms-trafficking, human smuggling,
kidnapping-for-ransom, the illicit proliferation of arms
and money laundering - all of which are variants
of transnational organized crime - have become
intimately intertwined with terrorist groups' activities
and sources of financing. Groups such as the Movement
for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO),
Boko Haram, Ansaru and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb (AQIM) have benefitted substantially from
the kidnapping of foreigners and affluent nationals
for the purpose of securing ransom for their release.
The MUJAO, an offshoot of AQIM, which is mostly
financed by narcotics-trafficking, illustrates well
the lucrative support that the drug market brings to a
number of terrorist groups. Furthermore, kidnapping
for ransom in the Sahel belt has emerged as an integral
financing model for the furtherance of terrorist
activities in Africa and globally. It has now developed
into an industry that includes the terrorist organization
at the core, interacting with a chain of intermediaries,
criminal groups and local tribesmen and sympathizers.

In Somalia and the Horn of Africa, cross-border
crime facilitated Al-Shabaab's terrorist activities in
Somalia and beyond, placing civilians and troops of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
at great risk. The group's extended control over the
port of Kismayo enabled it to profit from the illegal
charcoal trade and the procurement of weapons through
international illicit trade networks.

The situation in Central Africa is another example
of the deadly convergence of threats. The Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) is increasingly implicated in
the poaching of elephants and illegal trade in ivory,
highlighting the emerging threat of exploitation of
natural resources by terrorist groups. We should be
alarmed by the irrevocable damage this can have on
the environment and the many livelihoods that depend
on it. To further emphasize the intersection of cross-
border crime and terrorism, the LRA is believed to be
using arms emanating from as far north as Libya, which
indicates the wide-ranging illicit trafficking networks
that continue to operate across the continent.

The African Union has not remained idle in the
face of these threats. The innovative approaches and
mechanisms deployed by the AU serve us today as
good starting points and lessons we can share with the
Council to its benefit as to that of other relevant organs
and bodies of the United Nations.

The mechanism for enhancing security cooperation
and the operationalization of the African Peace and
Security Architecture in the Sahel region, also known
as the Nouakchott Process, recognizes the multifaceted
and multidimensional approach required in dealing with
transnational threats in a sustainable and collaborative
manner. The Nouakchott Process has to date facilitated
interactions at multiple levels, including the policy
and operational levels. The Heads of intelligence and
security services of the region met in six sessions
to discuss enhancing cooperation and exchange of
intelligence, including collaboration with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Border and customs
officials also held two meetings in Tripoli, in 2013, and
in Ndjamena, last month, to discuss and agree on basic
measures and areas of cooperation to combat illicit trade
and trafficking in humans, arms and drugs. This is in
addition to three ministerial meetings and the Summit
held yesterday in Nouakchott, Mauritania. This process
is further enhanced by the multidimensional AU
strategy for the Sahel region, which addresses conflict
prevention and resolution, security and development.

The Nouakchott Summit considered the political
and security situation in the Sahel-Saharan region as
well as efforts aimed at overcoming the challenges
at hand and promoting lasting peace, security and
stability. In their final declaration, the participants
expressed in particular their full readiness to
contribute, in consultation with the United Nations,
to the strengthening of MINUSMA, through the
establishment of a rapid intervention force to contribute
to the fight against armed terrorist and criminal groups
and to facilitate the successful completion of the
stabilization efforts in Mali.

It is worth mentioning that in her report presented
to the 455th meeting of the AU Peace and Security
Council, held at the level of Heads of State and
Government on 2 September in Nairobi, Kenya, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Her
Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, outlined
the following six main reasons for the emergence and
redeployment of terrorist groups in Africa and, in
particular in the Sahel-Saharan region. First, poverty,
illiteracy and the high rate of unemployment among
young people and the general population render them
vulnerable to the manipulative messages of terrorist
groups and their promises of quick gain. Secondly, the
poor working conditions and insufficient training and
discipline of law enforcement personnel make them
easy prey for corruption. Thirdly, criminal networks are
seeking safe haven and refuge in a zone characterized
by vast territorial expanses, low and insufficient
security coverage and administrative presence.
Fourthly, they are seeking new sources of funding,
especially through smuggling, drug-trafficking and
illegal migration. Fifthly, there is a need to conquer
new areas for recruitment and redeployment with
the objective of expanding the field of confrontation
beyond their traditional zone of operations. And
sixthly, the weakness of Government institutions and
the existence of long stretches of porous, Largely ill-
monitored and poorly-controlled borders, combined
with vast, ill-administered spaces of territory, facilitate
the illegal cross-border movement of people and goods
and provide fertile ground for exploitation by terrorists
and transnational organized criminals.

In the Horn of Africa, AMISOM. and the countries
of the region have long recognized the need for a
collaborative approach to address the threat posed
by the cross-border criminal and terrorist activity
of Al-Shabaab and thus established the regular
information-sharing and coordination mechanism
bringing together the countries affected, neighbouring
countries, the troop-contributing countries and the
Committee of Intelligence and Security Services in
Africa.

The Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the LRA is one of the AU's most
recent innovative approaches. The AU is currently
working through its Post-conflict Reconstruction and
Development programme to support Member States
in extending basic infrastructure and services to the
populations most affected by the LRA so as to increase
their resilience and mitigate their vulnerability to
predation by the group. That includes addressing the
integration of ex-combatants.

At the operational level, the African Union
Commission has remained actively engaged at the level
of solutions aimed at addressing this scourge, which
includes steps to mobilize member States towards the
full and effective implementation of the AU normative
counter-terrorism framework. The Commission also
continues to work closely with the African Centre for
Studies and Research on Terrorism in capacity-building
support, notably for training and assistance in the
elaboration of the requisite legislation on the basis of
the AU model law adopted in July 2011.

Based on those experiences, the African Union
wishes to share a few observations and to offer some
recommendations, which we believe could further
enrich the debate and provide ideas on the way forward.

First, addressing cross-border crime in conflict
situations should be a priority intervention, especially
when it has the potential for further exacerbating
it. Whether we are working through a peacekeeping
mission or mediation efforts confined to a particular
geographical region, we should have an inclusive
approach that brings together the concerned
neighbouring States to devise and implement measures
to mitigate the potential for the internationalization and
prolongation of the conflict.

Secondly, border communities remain our first line
of defence against cross-border crime and transnational
terrorist activity. They should be actively engaged and
provided with the alternatives, through both quick-
impact projects and long-term rehabilitation and
development strategies, as a disincentive to crime and
terrorism. In that connection, we have to emphasize
the critical need for establishing and restoring trust
between the State and border communities.

Thirdly, terrorist groups, regardless of the
ideologies they subscribe to, remain calculating
interest-driven entities that will continue to seek
safe havens and resources to survive and fund their
activities. Judging by our experience, border regions
that are poorly governed, where communities have
limited or no alternatives, and in which cross-border
crime flourishes, remain their optimal choice. We must
therefore strengthen our early-warning mechanisms to
identify potential situations of conflict that could be
exploited by terrorists groups, and take the necessary
preventive action.

We would like to be clear: the African Union does
not advocate closing or restricting bordersm nor does it
seek to infringe on the sovereignty of States with regard
to the management of their territories. The porous
African borders have long served to bring communities
together and facilitate trade and have contributed
to the prosperity and the enriching diversity of our
people. But "porous" needs not translate into threats
and risks of crime and terrorism. That is precisely
what the AU Convention on Cross-Border Cooperation
aims to achieve. The Convention was adopted by the
June 2014 Summit of the African Union and provides
a cooperative framework to transform border areas
into catalysts for growth, to enable socioeconomic and
political integration, to ensure efficient and effective
integrated border management and to collectively
address cross-border crime and terrorism.

In conclusion, it is important to recognize that,
over time, cross-border criminal activity becomes
a self-sustaining enterprise in which the rewards
are much higher to be offset by traditional conflict-
resolution measures. There is therefore a need for
innovative, collaborative and inclusive approaches that
are led by the concerned States, based on confidence
and transparency among them and without hindrance
or restrictions on legal cross-border flows ofpeople and
trade.

I thank the Council once again for providing us this
opportunity to share our perspective at this debate. As
this is the last open meeting of the Security Council
this year, I would like to thank the outgoing members
of the Council - Argentina, Australia, Luxemburg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda - for their valuable
contributions to the work of the Council. Likewise, I
would like to extend our warmest congratulations to
the new non-permanent members - Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela - and to reiterate
our full confidence in their commitment and ability to
bring added value to the Council in the discharge of its
mandate to maintain international peace and security,
including in Africa.
