Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
join those who have spoken before me in thanking the
Permanent Representative of Colombia, Ambassador
Nestor Osorio, for his briefing. We would also reiterate
our gratitude for his leadership in heading up the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for the work accomplished
by the Committee during the period covered by his
briefing.

The Committee continues to diligently accomplish
the tasks that have been mandatedto it with transparency,
impartiality and objectivity and without violating its
mandate. We believe that this should continue in the
future. We recognize the importance of the assistance
and cooperation that the Committee provides to
Member States, and it is essential that it continue to
provide support. We commend the Committee for its
work. Together with the support of the Panel of Experts,
it has continued to respond to national reports, requests
and complaints regarding alleged Violations on the part
of Member States, while intensifying its awareness-
raising activities in order to prevent future sanctions
violations.

We underscore the importance of training activities
and of dissemination and awareness-raising activities,
which are essential for the effective implementation of
the sanctions adopted by the Security Council.

In that regard, we are grateful for the support
of the Panel of Experts, which, as indicated in the
report, briefly visited Guatemala at the beginning of
this month in order to discuss the measures adopted
by our country for the implementation of resolution
1737 (2006) and to inform us of the work being carried
out by the Committee. During their visit, they held
fruitful meetings with the competent authorities and
visited relevant institutions in order to verify the
implementation of security controls.

Moreover, we would like to emphasize the
importance of disseminating information on the nature
of the Committee's sanctions to the other entities of
the United Nations system, so that they are all kept
informed and can thus ensure that all of their technical
assistance programmes are in keeping with the relevant
resolutions.

As regards the current political situation, we
are concerned by recent events, by the threatening
statements, by the confrontation and by the lack of
dialogue. We therefore appeal for calm and for the
rapid restoration of diplomatic dialogue in order
to find a negotiated and sustainable solution to the
Iranian nuclear question. We recognize that the lack of
transparency in the nuclear development programme
of the Islamic Republic of Iran is the source of the
problem. At the same time, we recognize the right of
that country to develop its nuclear capacity for peaceful
purposes.
Guatemala calls upon Iran to cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and to fulfil its
obligations to ensure that all pending matters can be
clarified so that confidence regarding the peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme can be restored.
A sustainable solution would restore international
confidence regarding the peaceful nature of the Iran
nuclear programme while respecting Iran's right to
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in
accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which Iran has acceded to. In this
regard, the recent meeting held in Istanbul between
Iran and the European Union is a positive step.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the work of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts, and we stand ready
to continue to participate creatively and constructively
in its future deliberations.

