Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): In today's briefing, I
would like to focus my remarks on the principal areas
of work of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities since the joint Council briefing in May 2016
(see S/PV.7686). I shall focus mainly on the following
three elements: the evolving threat to international
peace and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh, Al-Qaida and affiliates;
the response from the Committee; and the Committee's
engagement with Member States.

My statement today will be made available on the
Committee's website.

Since the joint Council briefing in May 2016, the
threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and affiliates
has further evolved. In its latest report, the Monitoring
Team finds that ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates continue to
present a complex and diverse challenge to international
security. ISIL remains under sustained military
pressure, and in response it has conducted a range of
attacks outside conflict areas. Many ofthe ISIL-inspired
attacks were initially reported as lone-actor attacks, but
subsequent investigations revealed that in most cases,
individuals received support from other extremists and
criminal groups. ISIL's finances have declined, and it
now operates on a crisis budget. Al-Qaida affiliates
also maintain a significant level of terrorist operations
in their respective regions. In some regions, Al-Qaida
affiliates remain stronger than the respective ISIL cells
and groups. Therefore, the emergence of ISIL has not
strategically weakened Al-Qaida.

The Monitoring Team further reported that the
overall flow of foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic appeared to have slowed
as a result of increased control measures put in place
by Member States and military pressure. A growing
challenge involves returnees and relocating fighters. The
travel of these persons entails the risk of concentrating
individuals who potentially pose a considerable threat
in particular regions. South-East Asia and West and
East Africa are experiencing a rising level of risk
emanating from ISIL or Al-Qaida affiliates.

A growing challenge involves returnees and
fighters whose travel to conflict zones has been
frustrated by the efforts of national authorities. These
two groups represent a growing security risk. Of
particular concern, too, are returnees and relocators
who hold multiple nationalities. Therefore, the
Monitoring Team highlighted the continued need for
enhanced information-sharing among Member States
in this regard. In addition to the reduced flow of foreign
terrorist fighters, sanctions measures levied against
asset streams of ISIL have begun to take effect. This
relates in particular to the trade in antiquities illegally
removed from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
Member States have begun to report seizures of such
items on their territories. Concerning Afghanistan, the
Monitoring Team notes that ISIL has lost significant
amounts of territory in Nangarhar province. Even
though there have been military successes against ISIL
in Nangarhar province, which have degraded their
numbers and fighting ability, the group has been able
to regenerate battlefield losses and launch at least one
high-profile attack in July 2016, causing large loss of
life against an ethnic Hazara demonstration in Kabul.
The Al-Qaida core, as well as Al-Qaida in the Indian
Subcontinent, continue to act as advisers and trainers
for the Taliban. A significant number of fighters related
to other Al-Qaida affiliated groups that previously
operated in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region
have joined the Taliban and led to an increase in Taliban
fighting capabilities.

The evolving threat is also reflected in the adoption
of a number of new resolutions by the Council that have
expanded the work of the Committee and the Monitoring
Team. In December 2016, the Council adopted resolution
2331 (2016) to curb the financing of terrorists from acts
of sexual and gender-based violence, and trafficking
in persons. The resolution noted that that those acts were
part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain
terrorist groups, such as ISIL and Al-Qaida, and were
used as a tactic of terrorism and as an instrument to
increase their finances and power through recruitment
and the destruction of communities. In the context
of the resolution, in December 2016, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict sent a report to the Committee on
ISIL's use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism.
In addition, the resolution tasks the Monitoring Team
with collaborating with Member States to see whether
further information could be obtained.

Resolution 2347 (2017), concerning the protection
of cultural heritage in armed conflicts, not only
builds on the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida regime, but
also mandates a range of concrete measures. Those
measures are based on the recommendations made by
the Monitoring Team in various reports throughout
2016 and to which the Committee had agreed.
Resolution 2347 (2017) also asked the Monitoring Team
to cooperate with the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNESCO on a
report concerning the implementation the resolution, to
be delivered at the end of 2017.
For both resolutions, it is crucial that Member
States engage with, and provide updated information
to, the Committee and the Monitoring Team on the
evolving nature of the threat, listed individuals and
entities and the status of the implementation of then
sanctions measures.

To enhance the full and effective implementation of
the sanctions, the Committee also undertakes visits to
selected countries. In that context, the 1267 Committee
Chair Visited Afghanistan from 11 to 13 November
2016. The Chair was accompanied by a representative
of Kazakhstan in our capacity as incoming Chair of
both Committees, delegates from the Committee and
representatives of the Monitoring Team. The visit was
facilitated by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, with the objective of obtaining first-
hand accounts regarding the implementation and
effectiveness of sanctions measures and to promote
enhanced dialogue and engagement of Afghan
interlocutors with the Committees. I look forward to
conducting more of such visits as Chair.

As part of the Committee's engagement on the
latest developments in Afghanistan, on 3 February, the
Committee decided to remove Gulbuddin Hekmatyar
from its sanctions list, with a view to facilitating ongoing
efforts in Kabul towards national reconciliation.

Resolution 2344 (2017) expressed serious concern
about the presence and potential growth of ISIL (Da'esh)
affiliates in Afghanistan posing serious threats to the
security of Afghanistan and the countries of the region,
including in Central Asia.

The Committee continuously strives to ensure that
its list is as updated and accurate as possible in order to
facilitate the implementation of the sanctions measures.
Since the last joint briefing, seven individuals were
listed. No entities were listed. Twelve individuals were
delisted. No entities were delisted. The Committee
approved amendments to the existing entries of 24
individuals and two entities on its sanctions list. As of
today, there are 254 individuals and 75 entities on the
Committee's sanctions list.

Since the lastjoint briefing to the Security Council,
the Committee decided to delist six individuals and
retain two individuals, on the basis of reports submitted
by the Ombudsperson. In addition, one comprehensive
report of the Ombudsperson is under consideration
by the Committee, and the Ombudsperson has four
cases in the dialogue phase and two cases in the
information-gathering phase.

On 8 May, the Chair held an open briefing on the
work of the Committee for interested Member States. I
plan to continue to hold such open briefings regularly.
I encourage Member States to share any queries and
concerns with the Committee and its Monitoring Team.

I would like to take this opportunity to call upon
Member States to continue their engagement with the
work of the Committee and the Monitoring Team, as that
is essential for maintaining an up-to-date and dynamic
sanctions list, and fundamental to the effective operation
of the sanctions regime. In that regard, I would like to
note that the Committee is in the process of concluding
its current annual review, which considers if names on
the list, especially those not reviewed for three years,
remain pertinent, and to address cases where sufficient
identifiers do not exist, individuals are deceased or
entities are defunct. I thank the Member States that
provided information, as it has provend challenging to
obtain responses from all relevant Member States. We
urge all Member States to engage with the Committee
in a timely manner on the next annual review to support
this key due-process function.

In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates list entries based on information provided
by Member States. We encourage Member States to keep
the Team informed. I also urge those Member States
that have not done so to submit their implementation
reports mandated under the relevant resolutions.

As Chair, I would like to thank all Member States for
their cooperation with the Committee, its Monitoring
Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson.

