Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Lithuania, Mr. Audronius Azubalis, and thank him
for his detailed and very comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to extend our congratulations to him
and his country on holding the chairmanship this year.

These regular briefings by the Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to the Council
underscore the importance of an effective partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in countering new and
evolving threats to international security.

Building comprehensive and lasting security is a
common strategic interest, and also one of the goals of
the OSCE. With its 56 participating States, the OSCE
is a broad-based and credible forum where each State
maintains active relations based on its own interests.
Such a forum has a number of political and diplomatic
advantages, enabling States to resolve internal issues
and those of shared concern.

Furthermore, member States can engage in
dialogue on European security and cooperation on an
equal footing. As for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we will
continue to promote the same priorities in the work of
the OSCE, focusing mainly on counter-terrorism, arms
control, the protection of human rights and minorities,
freedom of the media, human trafficking, corruption
and all other forms of criminal activity.

In addition, we recognize and support the OSCE
as a forum and an organization with a mandate for the
early prevention of all conflicts. We are fully
committed to actively contributing to the early
prevention and neutralization of situations that could
lead to conflict in the OSCE region.

Lastly, allow me to briefly reflect on the OSCE
Summit held in Astana last December. The Summit
only confirmed our awareness of the urgent problems
that States are facing, including such transnational
threats as terrorism and trafficking. We recognize that
the OSCE is one of the adequate forums for analyzing
those issues and finding solutions. The Summit also
opened new paths for long-term cooperation among
member States and set high expectations for important
new decisions to facilitate such cooperation.

In addition, the adoption of the Astana
Commemorative Declaration (see A/65/668)
reconfirmed the OSCE's comprehensive approach to
security, which is based on trust and transparency.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly supports that
approach and the joint initiatives of member States
aimed at building a higher level of trust and
strengthening security in Europe.

In conclusion, I would like to once again
underline the importance and encourage further
enhancement of cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter.

