The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, Italy, Norway and Pakistan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
2
European Union to the United Nations to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2010/318, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
40 of resolution 1917 (2010). I also wish to draw the
attention of members to document S/2010/325, which
contains a letter dated 14 June 2010 from the President
of the Security Council addressed to the Secretary-
General.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and by
Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan, Permanent Representative
of Turkey, who led the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan. I now give the floor to Mr. de Mistura.


