Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the Presidents of the
two Tribunals, Judge Pocar of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
Judge Byron of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. We also thank the Prosecutors, Ms. Del Ponte
and Mr. Jallow, for their written reports and their
presentations this morning and, above all, for all the
work they are doing in their various departments.

We are grateful for the progress made by the
Tribunals to prosecute those who committed atrocious
crimes in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
Efforts to complete the work within the deadlines are
laudable. However, we feel that in cases where that is
not possible, the Security Council will have to assess
the way to make the resulting necessary adjustments.

The work of these Tribunals necessarily requires
the full cooperation of States in order to overcome
impunity and provide justice to the victims. We are
encouraged by the fact that between June and October
of this year, four fugitives in cases before the Tribunal
for Rwanda were arrested. However, it is disgraceful
that to date Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and
Felicien Kabuga, among other important leaders
accused of having commited serious crimes, are still at
large.

It is not acceptable that as time goes by and
deadlines pass, impunity can be established. That is
why it is both indispensable and urgent that all States
meet their international obligations to detain and
transfer the accused to the relevant Tribunal. The
Security Council should take this situation into account
when it considers the future of the Tribunals so that
when the fugitives are finally arrested, there will be
mechanisms in place for them to be brought to justice.

In another aspect relating to cooperation, the
Office of the Prosecutor for the ICTY referred in its
report to the need for the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) to cooperate with
it in the protection of witnesses. We once again urge
UNMIK to work with the Prosecutor's Office, and we
hope that the situation referred to in the report will
cease.

The transfer to competent national jurisdictions
of trials of accused of medium and low rank is an
integral part of the completion strategies. We recognize
the work being done by both Tribunals in that respect,
particularly with regard to strengthening the capacity
of local judicial systems. The impact of those tasks is
not exhausted with the prosecution of the accused but
generates an important long-term repercussion for the
rule of law and for the improvement of the
administration of justice in the countries concerned.
That is why we join the call for States involved in
those cases to be given the necessary international
help.

With regard to the legacy of the Tribunals upon
finishing their tasks and creating a mechanism to deal
with residual issues, we are grateful for the valuable
contributions of the Tribunals. We continue to feel that
the Security Council should consider those matters
with the necessary anticipation, taking a broad View
that includes the States directly involved, similar
tribunals and civil society. Regarding specifically
financial implications, that consideration should also
be expanded to include the other Members of this
Organization.

Those administrative and financial matters are
more important that they may appear. As was pointed
out by the Presidents of both Tribunals, the Tribunals'
work could be affected if qualified and experienced
staff leave to look for more stable employment. We
therefore feel that those concerns should be given due
regard in the relevant administrative requests.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once again
the firm commitment of Peru to the current work of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda and to their important task of
combating impunity.

