The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Benin, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Egypt, the Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Kenya, Morocco, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa and the
United Republic of Tanzania in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took seats at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to welcome the participation of the Minister of
International Relations and Cooperation of South
Africa, who is not here with us yet but will be joining
us, Her Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special Representative and Director
for the World Development Report on Conflict,
Security and Development of the World Bank.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Cliffe to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Serrano to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now being its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2010/371, which
contains a letter dated 9 July 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. The
Council recalls Articles 33 and 34 of the Charter
and reaffirms its commitment to the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means and the promotion of
necessary preventive action in response to
disputes or situations the continuation of which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.

"The Security Council recalls that the
prevention of conflict remains a primary
responsibility of Member States. As such, actions
undertaken within the framework of conflict
prevention by United Nations entities must be
designed to support and complement, as
appropriate, the conflict prevention roles of
national Governments.
10-45412

"The Security Council notes that, consistent
with its functions in relation to international
peace and security, it seeks to remain engaged in
all stages of the conflict cycle and in exploring
ways of preventing the escalation of disputes into
armed conflict or a relapse into armed conflict
and the Council recalls that, in accordance with
Articles 99 and 35 of the Charter, the Secretary-
General or any Member State may bring to the
attention of the Council any matter which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.

"The Security Council recalls that early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive
deployment, mediation, practical disarmament
measures and post-conflict peacebuilding are
interdependent and complementary components
of a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy.
The Council notes the importance of creating and
maintaining peace through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and re-integration.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and
reiterates its call to increase the equal
participation, representation and full involvement
of women in preventive diplomacy efforts and all
related decision-making processes with regard to
conflict resolution and peacebuilding in line with
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), and 1889 (2009).

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of a comprehensive strategy
comprising operational and structural measures
for prevention of armed conflict, and encourages
the development of measures to address the root
causes of conflicts in order to ensure sustainable
peace. The Council reaffirms the central role of
the United Nations in this regard.

"The Security Council recalls its previous
presidential statements concerning the various
factors and causes that play a role in inciting,
worsening or prolonging conflicts in Africa, and
in particular the factors and causes that have been
highlighted and addressed by the Council. The
Council also notes that, especially in the context
of Africa, implementation of effective security
sector reform programmes, strengthening of
10-45412

human rights and the rule of law, protection of
civilians, ensuring accountability, meaningful
progress in sustainable economic development
and poverty eradication, support for elections and
the building of democratic institutions and
effective control of small arms, inter alia, have
become important elements of conflict
prevention.

"The Security Council also recognizes the
increased material, human and financial resources
required by peacekeeping operations over the last
decade. Accordingly, the Council acknowledges
the potential benefits and efficiencies that could
be achieved through an integrated approach to
preventive diplomacy efforts similar to the
approach to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
methods, which underscores the interrelationship
between political, security, development, human
rights and rule of law activities.

"The Security Council encourages the
development of peaceful settlement of local
disputes through regional arrangements in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter and
reiterates its support for the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern
Africa Development Community (SADC), the
East African Community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
as regards conflict prevention. The Council
acknowledges the need for closer and more
operational cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in Africa to build national and
regional capacities in relation to the preventive
diplomacy tools of mediation, information
gathering and analysis, early warning, prevention
and peacemaking, and in this context the Council
recognizes the important role regional United
Nations offices, such as UNOWA, can play and
stresses the valuable contribution of mediation
capacities such as the Council of Elders, the
Panel of the Wise and good offices of the
Secretary-General and his special envoys, and of
regional and subregional organizations, to
ensuring the coherence, synergy and collective
effectiveness of their efforts.
3

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of continually engaging the potential
and existing capacities and capabilities of the
United Nations Secretariat, regional and
subregional organizations as well as national
Governments in preventive diplomacy efforts
including mediation, and welcomes the
promotion of regional approaches to the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

"The Security Council further reiterates its
support for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission (the Commission) and recognizes
the need for greater coordination with the
Commission. The Council further recognizes the
need for greater coherence with all relevant
United Nations entities in relation to the most
effective use of preventive diplomacy tools at
their disposal. The Council recognizes the
important role of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Offices in supporting national
efforts to prevent conflicts and in addressing
cross-border threats. The Council also recognizes
the value the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa continues to
add to the process of embedding preventive
diplomacy practices into the Organization's
conflict management architecture. In this
connection, the Council recalls the role of the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in matters relating to the
prevention and resolution of conflict. The
Council emphasizes the need for the full
engagement of all relevant actors, including civil
society, to sustain the momentum and perspective
for a meaningful preventive diplomacy
framework.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of enhancing efforts, including
coordination among relevant bilateral and
multilateral donors, to ensure predictable,
coherent and timely financial support to optimize
the use of preventive diplomacy tools, including
mediation, throughout the conflict cycle.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit, within 12 months of
the adoption of this statement, a report making
recommendations on how best to optimize the use
of preventive diplomacy tools within the United
Nations system and in cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and other actors."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under symbol S/PRST/2010/l4.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Nigeria.

Let me begin by saying how pleased and
honoured I am to be presiding over this very important
debate on the item on this morning's agenda,
"Maintenance of international peace and security:
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools:
Prospects and challenges in Africa". I believe that this
is an auspicious time to revisit the concept and practice
of preventive diplomacy.

I also wish to especially acknowledge and to
express my Government's appreciation to Council
members and to all participants for the cooperation and
support given to Nigeria during our presidency of the
Council. Let me also especially extend a welcome to
the Deputy Secretary-General and to Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
Special Representative and Director for the World
Development Report on Conflict, Security and
Development of the World Bank.

The theme of today's debate aims to capitalize on
the extensive work under way throughout the United
Nations to promote and preserve peace in an ever-
changing world. It attests to my country's
acknowledgement of the multifaceted challenges
presented by the growth in scope, complexity and cost
of current peacekeeping operations and the need to
maintain the momentum gained over the past few
decades in the field of conflict management through
the use of preventive diplomacy. We are encouraged by
the support we have received for this initiative from
fellow Council members and others.

We live in a world in which violent conflict is an
all too common feature in the daily lives of too many
Africans. Fragile constitutional frameworks, limited
natural resources and economic disparities can together
render a State vulnerable to conflict.

The costs of such an outcome are high in terms of
both human suffering and economic loss. Moreover,
the socio-economic advances achieved through
development efforts are also often Iost. Add to this the
price of warfare and peacekeeping operations, and the
resulting figures are staggering.
10-45412

In unanimously adopting resolution 1625 (2005),
the Council expressed the need to adopt a conflict
prevention strategy that addresses the root causes of
armed conflict. Aspects of preventive diplomacy have
since found their way into several peacebuilding
programmes. An example of this is the Department of
Political Affairs mediation assistance amid Kenya's
post-electoral unrest in 2008. Furthermore, the United
Nations has undertaken or supported regionally led
political interventions to quell constitutional crises in
Madagascar, Niger and Guinea within the past year
alone. Indeed, Nigeria itself benefited from the
preventive diplomacy efforts of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, when he mediated between my country and
Cameroon after the ruling of the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) on the Bakassi peninsula dispute.

However, the humanitarian crises that persist in
such places as the Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo illustrate what the Secretary-General, in
his 2008 report on conflict prevention (S/2008/18),
characterized as a gap between rhetoric and reality.

While these developments are noteworthy, it is
time to take stock. As at April 2010, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations estimated that its annual
resources should rise from $7.87 billion to $8.4 billion.
This uplift places additional strain on contributing
nations in these already challenging times. It is our
considered View that the potential savings for humanity
make a compelling case for optimizing the use of
preventive diplomacy tools.

The elements of the preventive diplomacy tool kit
do not function in isolation, and the means of their
application is obviously highly context-specific. The
strategies are by their nature anticipatory, relying upon
early warning to be effective. Efforts must therefore be
made to establish trust with key local, national and
regional actors, well before a crisis reaches the tipping
pomt.

While there may be obstacles to cooperation,
such as sovereignty sensitivities, these are not
insurmountable. As was recognized in presidential
statement S/PRST/2009/3, it is crucial that the
expertise of such bodies as the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Southern African Development Community
10-45412
(SADC) be harnessed and supported by the United
Nations.

The Department of Political Affairs is well placed
to steer this initiative. Yet, it would benefit from
having its capacities strengthened through the
Council's commitment to Chapter VI of the Charter
and preventive diplomacy strategies. The Security
Council has the potential to be a fulcrum in the process
of generating political will, securing pre-positioned
funding, building capacities on the ground and
promoting the use of the full range of preventive
diplomacy tools. Accordingly, Nigeria believes that the
time has now come for the United Nations to use its
resources to act an ex ante as well as an ex post facto
agent for peace. In unanimously passing resolution
1625 (2005), this body committed itself to a preventive
approach to conflict management, as a complement to
the peacekeeping activities more frequently in use
today. We are now honour-bound to make the
statements therein real, by putting the full weight of
the Council behind the preventive diplomacy initiative
contained in today's presidential statement.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Let me again acknowledge and welcome the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migoro, and invite her to
take the floor.


