Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over
this important debate.

(spoke in English)

I wish at the outset to thank the Secretary-General,
President Sang-Hyun and Mr. Mochochoko for their
statements, which were very useful indeed, as is the
excellent concept note (S/2012/731, annex) prepared by
the Mission of Guatemala.

For many years now, international justice has gone
hand in hand with peace and security, with the Security
Council playing a pivotal role in building the legal
framework necessary to bring to justice those most
responsible for the gravest of international crimes, such
as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The Tribunals established by the Security
Council - either directly, such as the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, or under its oversight,
such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone - all have
made important and useful contributions, through their
practice and jurisprudence, to international criminal
justice in general and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in particular.

As we watch those international tribunals
discontinuing their activities as they gradually fulfil
their mandates, we see the ICC becoming firmly rooted
in their important legacy and rising as a permanent
global Court to fight impunity for the most serious
crimes.

We must remind ourselves that while the ICC is a
treaty-based body, its model was clearly influenced by
the Security Council, its recent history and its strategic
approach to countering impunity and upholding
accountability, as reflected in its resolutions. That is
why this Security Council debate is fully justified, and
we thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative.

The ICC was established as a result of open
intergovernmental negotiations. That was also the
case with the negotiation of the Statute amendments
recently agreed in Kampala on the crime of aggression
and article 8 of the Statute. There also, States parties
and non-parties both had the opportunity to interact
to achieve an outcome which, in our view, managed to
successfully fill the gap left open in Rome on the set of
crimes covered by the Statute. In Kampala, the Security
Council was yet again called to play an important role in
the exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court as concerns
the crime of aggression.

With such an influential background and with
the number of States parties growing - there are
now 121, almost two thirds of the United Nations
membership - the ICC can claim today to be an
instrument of peace and justice representing a broad
international convergence. Yet efforts must continue
to bring the ICC closer to universality, which is an
important goal that we all in the general membership
have an interest in pursuing.

First and foremost, States parties have a role to that
effect: by preserving the integrity of the Rome Statute,
making sure that the ICC has the appropriate resources
to work with, and ensuring that justice is served through
a widely recognized independent judicial system, with
highly qualified judges, prosecutors and staff.

But the Security Council also has a role to play,
for instance, through the way in which it exercises its
referral powers and how it follows up those decisions
in terms of supporting the Court in its functions, in
particular in matters related to cooperation, and when
cooperation is failing, in full respect, naturally, for the
independence of the Court.

Moreover, it is important that the general
membership, on behalf of which the referral decision is
taken by the Council, be called on to share the financial
burden resulting therefrom, not leaving it exclusively
to States parties, as if the decision affected only them.
Here the Security Council and the General Assembly
also have a role to play in ensuring, as is the case with
other Council decisions, the distribution of the costs
associated with a referral decision that is taken on
behalf and in the interest of the general membership.

These matters have been discussed recently in
various forums, prompted by the experience of recent
Council referrals. Last year we organized, with the
International Peace Institute and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, a workshop
where those issues were tackled and recommendations
were made to have an indicative checklist to guide
the Council's engagement with the ICC at the time of
its consideration of referrals. Those were some of the
issues identified, and we think that they merit further
consideration by the Council. It is not only the credibility
of the ICC that is at stake, but also the efficacy of a
decision of the Council on a matter ofpeace andjustice.

Finally, I would like to highlight an important
aspect concerning the ICC as a privileged preventive
tool in conflict situations under the Council's agenda.
Indeed, at a time when the Council is increasingly
focused on prevention, this is an important aspect that
merits special attention.

Indeed, the potential application of the Rome
Statute, as has been highlighted in several recent
reports of the Secretary-General, can have an important
deterrent effect, discouraging potential perpetrators of
criminal acts or altering their behaviour because they
fear they may be subject to investigation by the Court,

because they know that once they are caught in the net
of justice, justice will proceed until it is done, either
through the ICC or through national courts under the
complementarity mechanisms of the Statute.

There is a huge potential for the ICC, as an
instrument of prevention, as was mentioned earlier today
by the representative of the Prosecutor, to complement
Council action in its pursuance of peace. Successful
prevention, in these particular situations, means lives
effectively saved. That is the most important reason
for the Council, States parties and the international
community to join hands in strengthening the ICC and
supporting it on its path to universality.

Portugal remains fully committed to the following
objectives: strengthening the rule of law in the
international sphere and fighting impunity and bringing
all those responsible for the gravest international
crimes to justice, independent of any political
consideration. That is an indispensable path on the way
to strengthening peace and security in the world.

