Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join other Council
members in thanking Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
of Spain, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), for his briefing to the Council. I wish to
also take this opportunity to commend and express my
delegation's appreciation to the Chair and his team for
their able stewardship of the Committee.

Against the background of the historic breakthrough
and the progress on resolving questions related to Iran's
nuclear programme, the work of the Committee and its
Panel of Experts remains of interest to the Council.
Looking ahead, we are of the view that the work of
the Panel of Experts should progressively include
more activities on outreach to all United Nations
States Members, interested partners and stakeholders
so as to explain and clarify provisions of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Alongside
other Council members, we understand that, since the
conclusion of the JCPOA and the subsequent adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), in July, the Committee and
its mandate remain in place until the day known as
implementation day, as stipulated in the JCPOA.

In that connection, Malaysia notes the findings and
conclusions by the Panel of Experts on alleged violations
of the sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), as outlined in the Chair's report. We would urge
caution and prudence when deliberating on that issue.
We reaffirm our commitment to work constructively
with other Council members, while being fully mindful
of the need to preserve the Council's unity on the matter.
At the same time, Malaysia takes this opportunity
to reaffirm the call on all the parties concerned to
continue engaging and working constructively with the
Committee, including on resolving outstanding issues
and questions. In our view, positive cooperation and
sustained engagement in that regard would build further
confidence and pave the way for a smooth transition to
the processes envisioned under the JCPOA.

The Chair's previous briefing (see S/PV.7522),
in September, came at a time when the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was reviewing the
structural framework in place to ensure that Iran would
arrive at the completion of the initial steps outlined in
resolution 2231 (2015). In that regard, we welcome the
IAEA's preliminary report on Iran's implementation
of the road map. With regard to implementation, we
welcome, and are encouraged by, the cooperation and
positive steps taken by Iran to date, including, among
others, on the removal and storage of enrichment
centrifuges. In addition, we welcome the agreement
reached on the redesign and reconstruction of the Arak
nuclear reactor, announced on 22 November.

While noting that some challenges remain in
clarifying certain issues and questions related to Iran's
nuclear programme, Malaysia believes that a positive
outcome on the full and timely implementation of the
road map is still achievable, provided that all parties
engage earnestly and in good faith. On that note, we
would reaffirm the sovereign right of all countries,
particularly those from the developing world, to pursue
and develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes
with the appropriate safeguards. As such, we reiterate
the call upon those States with the relevant capabilities,
skills and expertise to support such aspirations, in
line with the principles enshrined under article IV of
the Treaty on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its belief
in the importance of matching the progress on nuclear
non-proliferation with similar progress on the nuclear
disarmament side. Stalled efforts aimed at achieving
that goal in recent years remains a cause for concern,
particularly for non-nuclear weapons States. We urge
renewed commitment and action, particularly on the
part of the nuclear weapons States, aimed at achieving
the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.

