Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia is pleased to participate in this open debate.
In that regard, I would first like to thank the United
States, as President of the Council for the month of
July, for convening this meeting. My delegation is also
grateful to the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert
Serry, for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.

In making these remarks, Indonesia would also like
to associate itself with the statements delivered by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Djibouti on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

The Middle East region continues to undergo great
instability, with tragic human consequences, a dire
humanitarian situation and an uncertain conclusion.
Indonesia remains deeply committed to, and concerned
about, the prospects for peace in the Middle East. The
question of Palestine, which is a key concern for my
country, has dragged on both as a fact and as an agenda
item in the Council for far too long.

We are deeply appalled that the Israeli policy
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, has continued with little regard for the need
to create conditions conducive to peace and a resolution
of the conflict. In that regard, it remains our concern
that nothing poses as obvious an obstacle to progress as
the construction of illegal settlements, which constitute
a strong symbol of Israel's lack of commitment to
meeting the Palestinians on a productive playing field.
Similarly, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
Israel has continued with such policies and practices
as the construction of the separation wall, home
demolitions, residency revocations and the closure of
Palestinian institutions. In Gaza, the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. Israel's blockade,
which has continued for five years, is asphyxiating the
economy, as it frustrates the movement of people and
goods, thereby increasing unemployment and shrinking
private-sector businesses.

Indonesia has always been deeply supportive of
the two-State solution, based on the conviction that
an independent State of Palestine, with rights and
responsibilities that are coterminous with those of
other States, will contribute to the attainment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
and not detract from it.

We believe that peace on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Palestine, is the irreducible minimum basis for
negotiations. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the ongoing efforts being made by the United States,
including through Secretary Kerry's visits to the region
in the past three months. We furthermore welcome the
plans for a resumption of direct talks and look forward
to that historic process.

In order to give that initiative a good chance of
success, Indonesia urges Israel to halt any conduct that
might impair the effort. To that end, my delegation
would like to underline that Israel must be prevailed
upon to recognize the futility of ignoring the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinians with regard to the
core issues, namely, illegal settlements, the status of
Jerusalem, refugees, security and permanent borders.

If true progress is ever to be made on the Middle
East file, it is essential that Israel act as a responsible
partner and member of the international community.
It is critical that Israel abandon the impunity through
which it has ignored and defied United Nations
resolutions and international law for more than 60 years.
To put it simply, no nation should be immune from
the consequences of violating international law, and
that includes Israel. Indonesia therefore welcomes the
European Union's (EU) new guidelines on the eligibility
of Israeli entities and their activities in the occupied
territories for grants, prizes and financial instruments
funded by the EU. Under the new guidelines, the EU
will not recognize any changes to pre-l967 borders
other than those agreed by the parties to the Middle
East peace process. In accordance with our belief that
violations of international law should not be rewarded,
we support that approach and commend it to other
members of the international community.

Permit me now to turn to Syria.

As my delegation observed during the last
debate (see S/PV.6950), the catastrophe in Syria has
regrettably continued to evolve, with no response from
the international community, including the Council.
As members of the Council know only too well,
however, the situation on the ground has become so
dire that it now threatens the stability of the region.
We have on our hands a grave humanitarian crisis in
Syria that involves refugees and displaced persons,
which calls for immediate attention. On the question
of refugees, it is self-evident that the spillover of more
than 1.7 million people, including 71,000 Palestinian
refugees, to neighboring countries is an issue of great
concern for the Governments involved. Those refugees
require further assistance through international relief
organizations. We should see to it that they receive the
help they need.

Without doubt, part of the response to the situation
in Syria is political. In that regard, Indonesia reiterates
its call for a political process that will lead to a
permanent solution to the conflict in accordance with
the aspirations of the Syrian people. In that connection,
members of the Council must put their differences aside
in fulfilment of their mandate and must commence
earnest measures to bring the violence to an end.

