Mr. Santos (Mozambique): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and on the
brilliant manner in which you have conducted the
affairs ofthe Council during the month of February.

I also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, on his excellent work
during the month of January.

We commend your decision to dedicate special
attention to African issues during the first two months
of this year.

We want to thank Ambassador Richard Ryan,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning Angola, for his eloquent presentation of the
final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
sanctions.

We thank the members of the Mechanism, under
the able leadership of Ambassador Larrain, for their
outstanding report and contributions.

I would also like to recognize the presence of
Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for External
Relations of Angola, and thank him for his
comprehensive and lucid intervention.

The persistent refusal of UNITA, led by Jonas
Savimbi, to comply with the Lusaka Protocol and its
continued attempts to pursue its political objectives
through military means constitute the sole reason for
the protracted conflict in Angola. This situation has
brought devastating effects to the Angolan people in
the social, economic and humanitarian fields. UNITA,
led by Jonas Savimbi, is responsible for the large
number of internally displaced persons and for the
ensuing problems of food security and reduced access
to potable water, health care, education and other basic
needs, affecting drastically the efforts for sustainable
human development.

It is within this context that we consider the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against
UNITA the most appropriate means to force the UNITA
of Jonas Savimbi to abide by the Lusaka Protocol. In
this regard, we welcome the reports of the Monitoring
Mechanism on Angola sanctions because of its
comprehensive and thorough approach to the sanctions
on UNITA, with a view to further strengthening them.
The reports of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
sanctions clearly indicate that sanctions, combined
with firm military action by the Government of
Angola, have resulted in a substantial reduction of
UNITA's warfare capability. It is therefore necessary to
maintain the pressure and continue the process of
persuading the rebels to abandon their arms and join
the country's democratic process.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Angola sanctions. We regard them as appropriate for
improving the implementation of sanctions imposed
against UNITA and making them more effective. We
welcome in particular the Mechanism's
recommendation that the Security Council consider
applying sanctions against Governments violating
sanctions against UNITA. This measure will certainly
enhance the credibility ofthe Security Council and will
make a significant contribution to our efforts to reduce
UNITA's ability to wage war.

The effectiveness and efficiency of sanctions
against UNITA depend on the continued commitment
of the international community in the implementation
of the sanctions. They also depend on the introduction
of a mechanism to prevent their violation with
impunity. In this regard, we call upon all countries to
promptly comply with all relevant resolutions adopted
by the Security Council imposing sanctions against
UNITA. The international community must remain
vigilant and exercise tight control on the
implementation of the sanctions, assisting in forcing
UNITA to lay down its arms and fully comply with the
Angolan peace process.

The Angolan Government has continuously made
efforts to bring lasting peace to the people of Angola
and achieve national reconciliation. In this regard, we
welcome the initiative by President Jose' Eduardo dos
Santos of offering amnesty for crimes committed
during the conflict as a measure to encourage the rebels
to abandon the war and take the road of peace.

We also welcome the reaffirmation by the
Angolan Government of the validity of the Bicesse
Accords and of the Lusaka Protocol as the political and
juridical framework for the attainment of a lasting
peace in Angola.

The Tripartite Summit of Angola, Namibia and
Zambia, held on 10 February 2001 in Luanda, is also a
commendable initiative by President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos. This is a clear demonstration of the efforts of
the leaders of the region towards bringing peace,
stability and security to the subregion.

The efforts towards economic integration in
southern Africa will greatly benefit from an
atmosphere of peace and stability in Angola. To this
end, Mozambique stands ready to continue to give its
full support to the genuine efforts by the Angolan
Government to bring peace and stability to its country,
both on a bilateral basis and within the regional
context. The Security Council, the United Nations and
the international community as a whole must support
the continued determination of the Angolan
Government to bring about the peace, stability and
prosperity that its people deserve.

It is high time for all of us to unite and fight
against organized crime, including the traffic in blood
diamonds and small arms, which are fuelling conflicts
in many parts of the world.

We believe that the work of the Preparatory
Committee for the Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
the Conference itself, will greatly contribute to
meaningful action towards curbing access to these arms
by armed groups such as Jonas Savimbi's UNITA.

Finally, we would like to commend the continued
efforts and dedication of the Secretary-General and
Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari to the
Angolan issue. We equally commend Mr. Mussagy
Jeichande, the Secretary-General's Representative and
head of the United Nations Office in Angola, for his
work in the ground, in consultation with the Angolan
authorities. It is our sincere hope that the focus on
Africa in the agenda of the Security Council will be
translated into concrete action in support of the
continent's efforts to restore peace and stability in the
region.

