Mr. Lucas (Angola): Sir, please accept our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. You may count on our full support and
cooperation. We take this occasion also to congratulate
Ambassador Lavrov and the Russian delegation for the
excellent work performed during the Russian
presidency of the Council during the month of June.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo for his comprehensive
report on the situation in the territory. We praise the
outstanding work done by Mr. Michael Steiner as head
of the mission and the remarkable achievements of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under his leadership, with a view to
laying the foundations for the future definition of the
territory's status.

My delegation is continuing to follow closely the
situation in Kosovo, and we acknowledge the progress
that has been made in the political process since the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). In this respect, we
would like to make some brief comments.

We recognize that Kosovo still has a long way to
go before it achieves the goal of establishing stable and
effectively functioning multi-ethnic and multicultural
democratic institutions allowing the full participation
of minorities, which are an integral part of the social
matrix of Kosovo.

The current transfer of responsibilities from the
United Nations Interim Administration to the
Provisional Institutions is an encouraging development
towards self-government in Kosovo, notwithstanding
the continued fragility of these institutions.

The Assembly of Kosovo, according to the
Secretary-General's report, has improved its functional
performance significantly. The adoption of several
pieces of legislation and an apparent understanding of
legislative limits within the responsibilities determined
by the Constitutional Framework give credit to the
enhanced quality of its work.

A fundamental issue is the rule of law as a
prerequisite to the realization of a democratic State,
entailing respect for fundamental human rights and
freedoms. In this regard, we strongly condemn the acts
of violence committed against members of the Serbian
community and particularly the killings that took place
last month in Obilic.

We take note of the increasing number of returns
by members of the minority, reflecting the greater
commitment of local authorities and the improvement
of structures facilitating the returns. We fully share the
view expressed in the Secretary-General's report that

"the process of return and reintegration can be
successful and sustainable only if coupled by a
genuine willingness on the part of the majority
community and minority communities to work
together" (S/2003/675, para. 63)

and with a common sense of purpose.

We urge Kosovo's leaders to ensure the necessary
revitalization of the peace process in all its dimensions
with a view to implementing the agreed framework. We
deem it essential that a constructive dialogue on
practical matters of mutual interest between Belgrade
and Pristina be intensified and further extended to
political issues, and that concrete results are achieved.

We encourage the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the Special
Representative to maintain their consistent position and
to continue working for the attainment of the goals set
in resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.

I shall conclude by reiterating that the policy of
"standards before status" is, in our view, a consistent
strategy in framing the future of Kosovo. We encourage
all parties involved in the process to work for peace
and stability with a view to creating a multi-ethnic and
democratic society embracing all the people and ethnic
communities of Kosovo.

