Ms. McAskie: On behalf of my colleagues in the
humanitarian community, I should like to thank you
very much, Madam President, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council on such an
important matter. National reconciliation in post-
conflict situations is a complex issue that we all know
needs to be addressed comprehensively, taking into
account a wide range of issues and perspectives. It is
for this reason that I am pleased to be able to put
before the Council some humanitarian perspectives on
post-conflict reconciliation.

Why is post-conflict reconciliation of concern to
the humanitarian community? The simple answer is
that it is an issue upon which our humanitarian work
can have a significant impact. Conversely, it is an issue
that can have a direct and significant impact on our
humanitarian work.

I will probably touch in my statement on some
issues that have already been raised by my colleagues
Mr. Malloch Brown and Mr. Kalomoh, but I will try to
do so from the point of View of the humanitarian
consequences and the humanitarian context.

As we are all aware, post-conflict reconciliation
is not an event, but an ongoing process. It can begin,
and should be nurtured, in the immediate humanitarian
response phase of a conflict, and can be informed by
the neutrality and impartiality that humanitarians bring
with them. Their message is one of putting the
individual - the woman, the man, the child - at the
centre of what the United Nations is there to do.

When we hear the phrase "post-conflict
reconciliation", we first think of formal reconciliation
processes, some of which have been mentioned - truth
and reconciliation commissions and so forth - and
their role relative to criminal justice processes. These
formal processes are undeniably critical to national
reconciliation and sustainable peace. But some of the
most powerful forms of reconciliation, in terms of
restoring the social fabric and regaining national unity,
will be found in everyday life: children of different
ethnic groups sitting together at school, neighbours
working together to rebuild their villages and health
clinics, despite the fact that they were on opposite sides
during the conflict. Indeed, formal reconciliation
processes and these grass-roots forms of reconciliation
must be seen as complementary and mutually
reinforcing. One can grow and evolve from the other.

In the same way, we cannot afford to focus
exclusively on political developments and peace
processes in countries that are in transition from
conflict to peace. Here I would refer to Mr. Malloch
Brown's very good analogy at the end of his statement
about the operating theatre; that has been very much
the focus of our work. The broader humanitarian
concerns must be addressed properly, and we must
ensure that the international humanitarian response
supports - and does not undermine - efforts to foster
national reconciliation and the consolidation of peace.
Getting humanitarian assistance right is an important
building block for post-conflict reconciliation.

The starting point must be to ensure that adequate
levels of humanitarian assistance are available in the
most critical situations. The inability to ensure even
minimal levels of assistance in immediate post-conflict
situations will serve only to increase tensions and
foster grievances, thereby undermining efforts at
reconciliation. If we are not there to provide that
assistance, the people remain at the mercy of warlords
for their basic survival. Sadly, it is in the "forgotten"
emergencies that the risks are greatest. The serious lack
of attention and material support to countries such as
the Republic of the Congo have consistently
undermined local and national efforts at reconciliation.

The humanitarian assistance itself must be
provided equitably and efficiently, on the basis of
demonstrable need. This fundamental humanitarian
principle can frequently be the most challenging,
particularly in situations where we are denied access or
where factions seek to manipulate and misuse
humanitarian assistance to their own ends. The
legitimacy of a faction's engagement in peace
processes should be based on its commitment to
unhindered humanitarian access.

A very blatant example of this was the situation
last year in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
when the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
Democratie-Goma (RDC-Goma) was requesting
protection from the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) - for it to come down to Kinshasa - even
as it was perpetrating the most blatant violations of
human rights, including sexual abuse, on the
population in its own area. There was an example of a
case in which we could have insisted that the United
Nations should not provide protection until they
themselves were providing protection to their own
people.

The humanitarian community must also ensure
that it works with people and communities that are the
victims of conflict, rather than acting on their behalf.
Humanitarian assistance needs to be seen as an
investment that enables people to rebuild their lives
and sustains the very fabric of society, which will be
essential to peace and reconciliation processes.

A principled and strategic approach to
humanitarian assistance is therefore required, so as to
ensure that it is delivered in a way that does not
perpetuate grievance or hamper longer-term societal
and institutional development, the restoration of
livelihoods and the strengthening of State legitimacy.
The responsibility for this lies as much with donor
countries and the international community as with
humanitarian agencies. Mr. Malloch Brown referred to
the work that the United Nations is doing on transition.
I will not repeat his words here, but this is an important
element in that respect.

Post-conflict situations exemplify the importance
of ensuring that adequate funding is provided not only
for life-sustaining humanitarian assistance, but also for
other programmes that will have a significant impact
on national reconciliation. Effective peace and
reconciliation processes require effective social and
administrative structures. It is important, therefore, that
schools and their teachers, health centres and their
workers, local administrative offices, and local welfare
and community structures not be neglected by the
international humanitarian community, but that every
effort be made to engage and sustain them through
times of conflict. Rapid and effective responses to key
transition needs are critical to national reconciliation
efforts. If people are denied the fruits of peace - such
as shelter, education, health care and employment -
national reconciliation will be much harder to achieve.

Our experience with the consolidated appeals
process, however, reveals that, while donor countries
are willing to support initiatives that address immediate
humanitarian needs, the longer- or medium-term tools
of reconciliation, such as education, health care and
demobilization and disarmament, are often under-
funded. This can serve to undermine post-conflict
reconciliation in a number of ways. Inadequate
resources for education programmes can result, for
example, in generations denied access to education and
left with poor prospects for the future, thus
perpetuating the social divisions at the root of conflict.
Burundi is an unfortunate salutary case in point.

I believe that there is considerable scope to look
further into ways to channel reconciliation efforts into
the programmatic work of our agencies, bearing in
mind the fact that the impartiality and neutrality of
humanitarians provides us with a unique base from
which to play an important bridging role. The United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the World Food Programme (WFP) and
other humanitarian agencies already play this role in
their everyday work.

The impact of reconciliation on the work of
humanitarian agencies is the other side of the coin. A
fundamental concern to humanitarians in post-conflict
situations is the risk of a return to armed conflict if
peace processes and reconciliation measures fail. The
need for massive humanitarian assistance will remain if
reconciliation issues are not handled effectively and
swiftly. It is therefore critical to ensure that
reconciliation measures do not inadvertently exacerbate
tensions and encourage a return to conflict. This could
happen, for example, through inconsistent application
of measures related to justice and impunity, property
restitution, and reintegration. These are problems that
have plagued peace processes in various countries, and,
once again, I would use Burundi as an example.

Indeed, consistency must be seen as one of the
cornerstones of reconciliation in post-conflict
situations. Humanitarian aid must be consistently and
equitably provided; legal and judicial mechanisms,
international humanitarian law, property restitution,
reintegration, reparations - all must be consistently
applied if reconciliation is to have a solid base.
Effective post-conflict reconciliation requires us
to address not only institution-building, but also the
root causes of the crisis, and Mr. Kalomoh has spoken
on this issue. But at the root of most conflicts are
issues of poverty, corruption, deliberate manipulation
of minority groups, social inequity and exclusion, with
certain elements of society denied access to political
and social processes, property and education. We must
ensure that we do not perpetuate socially divisive
institutions that leave no scope for reconciliation,
either by inadequately funding and implementing
humanitarian assistance or through the manner of our
engagement in local capacity-building.

As the Council is aware, humanitarians are often
present in conflict situations when no one else is. It is
our experience that, in countries recovering from
conflict, peace and national reconciliation ultimately
depend on attitudinal and behavioural changes within
society. This is particularly the case where society has
become polarized. Far too often, peace processes are
seen as the prerogative of combatant forces, but lasting
peace and national reconciliation will depend on
developing a social climate that seeks to sustain peace.
All sectors and elements of society - not just the
fighting forces - need to be brought together to that
end.

In terms of the work of the Security Council, I
think that this is an issue on which we could usefully
focus: that political processes - peace processes -
tend to ignore the vast swath of communities that have
been affected by the crisis and that have a stake in the
future; they should be at the table, not just the parties
in conflict.

The earliest possible involvement in
reconciliation efforts of local community leaders -
representing the range of interests and perspectives
within a society - is critical. Civil society
organizations in particular, which provide important
channels for understanding the key concerns of various
sectors of a society, can help to build bridges between
divided and disaffected communities.

Post-conflict situations also provide an
opportunity to recognize and promote the important
role of women in reconciliation efforts, as well as to
address the gender inequality that prevails in many
societies. Women's lack of equality in Africa, for
example, is too often their death sentence, as they are
forced to adopt survival strategies that increase their
risk of contracting HIV. Women are also central to the
response to HIV/AIDS and to other aspects of
emergencies, but entrenched gender hierarchies all too
often hinder appropriate responses. If we are serious
about reversing that situation, we must return to
women's control over their livelihoods and their
bodies, and we must bring their needs and concerns
into humanitarian planning and post-conflict responses
at the strategic level.

Before closing, I should like to touch very briefly
on some key issues of concern for humanitarians as
they relate to reconciliation. Foremost among
humanitarian concerns are issues surrounding the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons and
their reintegration into their communities. When
members of ethnic minorities choose to return to still-
fragile communities emerging from conflict, there is no
more important role for the humanitarian community
than ensuring that they are safe and protected and that
they are helped to remain in their homes.

Over the past 10 years, there have been
successful and well-targeted humanitarian and recovery
programmes to foster the commitment to reconciliation
in practical ways. I am thinking here, for example, of
the UNHCR's Rwandan and Bosnian Women's
Initiatives, in which women from across ethnic and
party lines were offered the opportunity for vocational
training and microcredit funding so that they could
collectively begin the process of recovery and
reconciliation themselves. We also have positive,
practical lessons to learn from the reintegration of
internally displaced persons in East Timor, where
reception ceremonies based on traditional practices
were held to foster the acceptance of those persons into
their communities. In Angola, the regulamentos have
proved an important tool for the restoration of property
rights to the former internally displaced.

Similarly, effective disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation (DDRR) can provide
vital support to national reconciliation efforts. The
culture of youth violence witnessed in the Mano River
Basin and in Cote d'Ivoire, for example, will continue
to impede reconciliation efforts unless well-designed
and well-resourced regional DDRR programmes are
introduced to address the particular needs of young
people brutalized by war and now left with no means of
survival but the gun. In line with the mutually
reinforcing nature of these issues, DDRR initiatives
depend on reconciliation efforts for their success,
because the reintegration of combatants is critically
dependent on the ability of societies to accept them
back into the community.

The recognition of rape and other forms of sexual
violence as weapons of war raises particularly difficult
issues of reconciliation. Only now is the extent of
deliberate, broad-based attacks on women and girls
being acknowledged. Beyond the devastating physical,
psychological, emotional and social traumas suffered
by women and children who are brutally attacked,
those egregious crimes undermine cultural values and
community relationships, and they can destroy the very
ties that bind society together. I have already
mentioned the particularly horrifying consequence with
which many are faced: the spectre of HIV/AIDS.
Helping the survivors of sexual violence - and their
communities - to heal requires a concerted response
by the humanitarian community. Humanitarian
programmes that provide health, medical, nutritional
and psychosocial support, trauma counselling,
education and advocacy therefore become vital to
reconciliation efforts. Given cultural and social
sensitivities, it is especially important that this work be
carried out through local non-governmental
organizations and women's initiatives, but with the full
support of the political process and not as something
separate.

Finally, I should just like to refer briefly to the
fact that one of the most disturbing aspects of the
widespread sexual and other violence perpetrated
against innocent civilians in armed conflict is that
those crimes are committed in a climate of impunity -
a topic that was fully addressed by my colleague
Mr. Kalomoh. In post-conflict situations, reconciliation
must be tempered with a clear commitment to ending
impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Effective conflict
resolution and longer-term national reconciliation
depend on processes of reconciliation and justice -
something on which we are all agreed. Indeed, justice
and reconciliation - as Mr. Kalomoh pointed out -
must be seen as complementary. Both are vital to
effective reconciliation in the broader sense. And,
while amnesties provide an important measure for
dealing with lower-level perpetrators, they must never
be granted for serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

In conclusion, we cannot expect reconciliation to
be an easy or straightforward process. In many post-
conflict countries, the brutal memories of past abuses
take years to heal. Indeed, one of the most difficult
challenges of reconciliation in post-conflict situations
is how to focus on the future without ignoring the past.

It has long been clear that humanitarian
assistance alone will not provide a solution to crises.
Unless proper and timely attention is paid to
reconciliation, rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development, countries will slip back into the horrors
of war, and the efforts of the humanitarian
community - often at great peril for humanitarian
workers, I should add - will be lost. As we know, 65
per cent of the countries emerging from conflict in
Africa are slipping back into violence, and we cannot
afford to be complacent on that front. It is therefore
vital to have an effective, broad-based, international
support strategy to ensure that humanitarian activities
are reinforced with corresponding reconciliation,
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts. We must also
recognize within that context, however, that each
country must find its own path to reconciliation.
Humanitarian actors are in a position to begin that
process, and it is important to recognize that reality
within such an international strategy.

