Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for joining us to preside over
today's meeting of the Council for an open debate on the
humanitarian aspects of the work of the Security Council.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
statement he made to us early in the meeting.

The holding of open debates, with the participation
of countries that are not members of the Council, is
something that my country values because it allows the
Council to acquaint itself with the views of a large
number of Members of the United Nations. The benefit of
these debates is even greater when the topics under
consideration are closely linked to the functions of the
Council itself.

We acknowledge and share in the legitimate concern
of the Council and of the international community at the
magnitude and frequency of recent humanitarian
emergencies. Some have been the result of deep-rooted
social conflict; while others have given rise to conflicts
that have, on various occasions, drawn the attention of the
Council in its capacity as the organ responsible for the
maintenance of peace. In either case, humanitarian
emergencies challenge human solidarity and cry out for
the right response.

We are convinced, however, that the Council will be
unable properly to fulfil its mission of preserving
international peace and security if it assumes the role,
outside the scope of the Charter, of directing the response
of the entire United Nations system to humanitarian
emergencies. The attention paid to emergencies associated
with any conflict must extend beyond the peacekeeping
operations available to the Security Council. The approach
must also encompass actions aimed at promoting
economic and social development for the population that
fall to other organs of the United Nations system, in
particular the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council.

Any humanitarian activity is ultimately an individual
or collective response to human suffering. That is why
there is a range of different responses to humanitarian
emergencies. Some come from States themselves, others
from the United Nations, the International Committee of
the Red Cross or various humanitarian organizations. As
far as the United Nations is concerned, General Assembly
resolution 46/182 clearly reflects the Organization's ideal
of humanitarian assistance, spelling out the criteria of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as well as the prior
consent of States receiving assistance.

We need to emphasize that action to address
humanitarian emergencies requires both the consent and
the cooperation of the State affected. Thus, when the

 

Council acts through peacekeeping operations, it should
take a number of factors into account. First, it must
consider each case on an individual basis. Secondly, it must
ascertain whether the circumstances are attributable to the
State itself or to non-state actors. Thirdly, it must draw a
clear distinction between States that cooperate with the
international community and are part of the solution in
overcoming a humanitarian crisis and those that do not and
are therefore a part of the problem.

We should also ask ourselves whether the international
community bears a special responsibility in remaining
indifferent to manifest humanitarian emergencies even when
a State has given its consent to action. Certain emergencies
seem to attract more attention and resources than others, not
always commensurate with the scale of the humanitarian
situation; sometimes, they depend on the region in which
the emergency takes place or on the publicity it receives in
the communications media.

In order to bolster existing emergency response
mechanisms, we need to hold the debate in an arena in
which all Members of the United Nations participate.
Otherwise, the actions of the Council could lead to
confusion among States Members and other organs of the
system, and might even exacerbate existing conflicts. Let us
remember, for example, the ongoing debate on the
humanitarian consequences of the sanctions imposed by the
Council.
In conclusion, allow me once more to express my
thanks for the opportunity to participate in this debate. I
should like once again to express my delegation's wish that
the matter be debated within the General Assembly, where
all States Members can work together to give humanitarian
action the proper guidance that the United Nations currently
requires.

