Poland would like to thank France for organizing today's important open debate on children and armed conflict. I extend our thanks to the briefers - the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF and Mariam from civil society - for their briefings. Poland welcomes the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict for 2019 (S/2020/525) and reiterates its full support for the children and armed conflict agenda. We welcome the focus of today's debate on the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We consider it important to acknowledge the progress achieved in the last 15 years. Data collection on the grave violations has greatly improved since the launch of the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism in 2005. This data provides the basis for the annual report of the Secretary-General and the listing in its annexes of perpetrators of violations, which has proven powerful in influencing warring parties' behaviour and promoting accountability and compliance with international law. The listing process has led to the signing of action plans by more than 30 parties to conflict, of whom 12 have fully complied with their commitments and been delisted. With regard to the report of the Secretary-General and the challenges that remain for the children and armed conflict agenda, the report for 2019 identifies more than 20 countries, including Iraq, Syria and Yemen, with verified cases of grave violations against children, including an alarming number of instances involving State actors. It proves that we must call for the protection of children to be considered in all phases of the conflict cycle. Only a concerted effort by the international community in its entirety, including the United Nations, Member States and civil society, can put an end to the issue of children in armed conflicts. The abduction of 1,683 children, rape and other forms of sexual violence continued to be vastly underreported, with 735 verified cases; these, together with the approximately 4,400 incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children and 927 attacks on schools and hospitals, are only few of violations to be named in this year's report. These numbers should be a call o States Members of the United Nations to make concerted efforts towards ensuring, first and foremost, the safety of all children. Poland calls upon all parties to allow safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access in order to aid children and ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and assets. To prevent grave violations against children, Member States must fight impunity and ensure accountability, including through such mechanisms of international justice as the International Criminal Court. Alongside justice and accountability, we must ensure psychosocial support for survivors who are victims of grave violations. We cannot forget that, even with professional help, victims' trauma will endure for years. Moreover, Poland is concerned about the streamlining of mandates and budget cuts affecting child protection advisers. Today, more than ever, dedicated child protection advisers are needed to monitor and report on grave violations, operationalize action plans and strengthen the overall child-protection architecture in United Nations missions. We consider dedicated child-protection-adviser posts in United Nations peace operations and political missions to be essential for the effective protection of the rights of children. With respect to our priorities and activities, the protection of children and persons with disabilities in humanitarian crises was one of Poland's priorities during its term as a non-permanent member of the Security Council. Poland prioritized protecting children in armed conflicts and placed a major focus on children born of sexual violence, the reintegration of children formerly associated with armed groups and armed forces, and the protection of children with disabilities. In the light of the outrageous phenomenon of child recruitment by armed forces or armed groups, Poland recognizes the importance of constant psychological support for children and youth. Poland is especially concerned about the increase of violence against educational facilities, students and teachers. We welcome and support initiatives aimed at putting an end to the use of schools and universities for military purposes, including the 2014 Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict. To confirm our commitment to the effective implementation of the Guidelines, Poland signed the Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that such initiatives constitute an important step towards the protection and promotion of the rights of the child, especially in the conflict situations. Poland welcomes the decision of the General Assembly to establish 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack (General Assembly resolution 74/275). It is especially relevant that the Warsaw process, which is an initiative inaugurated last year by the United States and Poland to tackle security problems in the Middle East, is also discussing humanitarian and refugee issues, with emphasis on vulnerable groups. The refugee crises and forced displacements in the Middle East are among the most pressing issues to be addressed by the international community and are still causing a dire humanitarian situation, especially in Syria, Iraq and Yemen. Children and young people are particularly affected. These conflicts deprive children of one of their basic needs and rights - safety. Children are being maimed, abducted and attacked, recruited to fight and sexually abused. They are also being denied access to education and humanitarian aid. Such traumas deprive them of their childhood and their dignity and leave permanent marks on their adult lives. Violations of the rights of the child not only endanger their lives, but also undermine the overall stability and welfare of our societies. Those issues were further developed during the meeting of the Warsaw process working group on humanitarian issues and refugees that took place from 4 to 6 February, in Brasilia. The main purpose of the meeting was to work out political solutions, better coordination and structural interventions leading to the reduction of the impact of the humanitarian crises on children and youth in the Middle East. Due to the disproportionate impact of conflict on children, the Warsaw process working group on humanitarian issues and refugees focused its attention on the issues of education and child protection in a broad sense, acknowledging that mental health and psychosocial support are critical components of humanitarian responses. To this end, delegations discussed key child-protection and education challenges and solutions for displaced populations in the Middle East and focused on innovative practices enabling children to continue education and find psychological support during displacement. One of Poland's priorities in the development-cooperation field in Lebanon is supporting human capital by improving the quality of formal and informal education, in particular by improving teaching conditions, strengthening the language skills of Syrian students and increasing access to social services of those at risk of exclusion. Almost 54 per cent of Syrian children of school age do not attend school in Lebanon, mainly due to poverty and major differences in school curricula. Since 2016, the Polish non-governmental organization the Polish Centre for International Aid has been implementing a humanitarian project focused on providing financial support for the health and education centre in Al-Bireh, some four kilometres from the Syrian border. The centre is used by Syrian and Lebanese children and youth attending vocational classes. Provided that the number of available places is not exceeded each year, children of Syrian refugees are admitted without any prerequisites. In total, the programme will benefit over 15, 000 people. Last year, together with its German counterpart, Poland implemented a project that focused on renovating six public schools in northern Lebanon. The scope of work included, inter alia, reconstruction of classrooms, roof repairs, water-sanitary installations, and providing access to the buildings and classrooms for children with disabilities. Poland's total budget for the project was €3 million. Finally, with regard to the coronavirus (COVID-19) disease, it is noteworthy that the ongoing pandemic brings additional concerns, as children affected by war face heightened vulnerabilities owing to the fragile contexts in which they live. We are particularly concerned about the growing scale of sexual and gender- based violence and the lack of access to education, in particular for girls. While the outbreak has exacerbated humanitarian need, restrictions to mitigate its spread also challenge the delivery of assistance and hamper efforts to monitor, report and respond to violations of children's rights. It is imperative that child protection and well-being be prioritized in the COVID-19 response and that efforts to document and respond to grave violations continue.
