The Secretary-General: I am delighted to take part
in this Vital meeting on one of the greatest challenges
facing the United Nations, and one that, since the beginning
of my role as Secretary-General, I have made a priority
of my work: preventing armed conflict.
It is clear that prevention is one of the main tasks of
this Organization. And yet, far too often, we find
ourselves dealing with the effects of conflict rather than
its roots. As I wrote in the introduction to this year's
annual report on the work of the Organization, we need
to move "from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention". (A/54/l, para.61)

The case for prevention hardly needs restating. Quite
simply, it is cost-effective, in financial as well as human
terms.

Most people now recognize this as a general
proposition. But in a particular case, cogent arguments for
refusing or delaying preventive action can always be
found.

Those directly involved may be unwilling to see the
danger, or may resent interference from outsiders. This is
especially likely to be true of States threatened with
internal conflict. In some cases, one or more of the
parties may actually believe that conflict will serve its
interests.

Outsiders, for their part, may well believe that the
proposed action is unnecessary, or indeed that it will
make matters worse. Thus, as Hamlet put it,

"... the native hue of resolution

Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,

And enterprises of great pith and moment

With this regard their currents turn awry,

And lose the name of action." (Hamlet, Act Il], scene I)

That is what we mean when we say that the crucial
element of political will is lacking.

There is no substitute for the recognition by the
parties themselves that their actions are moving towards
conflict, and that preventive action is needed. But there
are ways in which we, as an Organization, could and
should do more to make that clear to them.

Over the past two years, I have tried to strengthen
our capacity for preventive diplomacy, preventive
disarmament, preventive deployment and both pre-conflict
and post-conflict peace-building.

 

In particular, we are seeking to improve our early
warning and analysis capabilities; improve coordination
between the various departments, funds and agencies and
intensify our cooperation with Governments as well as with
regional organizations and non- governmental organizations.

Our efforts, however, will fall short unless they are
complemented by a renewed commitment to effective
prevention on the part of the Council and of all Member
States. I hope the Council will use this meeting to examine
how it can make prevention a tangible part of its day-to-day
work.

Among the steps which the Council could take are the
following: greater use of fact-finding missions, either by the
Secretary-General or by the Council itself, at much earlier
stages of a dispute - in accordance with the Council's
Charter responsibility to "investigate any dispute, or any
situation which might lead to international friction or give
rise to a dispute" and "endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security"; encouraging States which
become aware of potential conflict within or among their
neighbours to bring the issue promptly to the Council's
attention; giving urgent attention to the problems of States
which suffer acute economic, environmental and security
strains, with consequent risks to their internal stability,
because they are hosting large refugee populations from
neighbouring countries - Guinea, with 500,000 refugees
currently in its territory from Liberia and Sierra Leone,
would be a strong candidate for such attention in the
immediate future; establishing an informal working group,
or a subsidiary organ, to study early warning and
prevention issues and report back; and instituting regular
meetings on prevention, at which the Council would
identify areas that will require urgent preventive action.

Finally, the United Nations needs to address the issue
of resources. Cost-effective preventive action is not cost-
free, yet, regrettably, there is an endemic paucity of
resources for it.

I think we all realize that operational preventive
measures such as I have just outlined, while they must
always be tried, will often be too late to make much
difference. In the longer term it is even more important to
address the deep-rooted causes of conflicts, which often lie
in the social and economic sphere. Poverty, repression and
undemocratic government, endemic underdevelopment,
weak or non-existent institutions, political and economic
discrimination between ethnic or religious communities:
these are the long-term causes of many conflicts.

The past decade has provided ample evidence that
when dissent and differences are channelled through
peaceful means conflict can be avoided. But when they
are met with repression and Violence they grow stronger,
more powerful and more violent. Ultimately, therefore, it
is the responsibility of each and every Member State to
prevent conflict by practising good governance.
It is Member States that must resolve internal
differences peacefully and through negotiations. It is they
that must allow dissent, establish the rule of law, protect
the rights of minorities and ensure that elections are free
and fair. It is they that must adopt enlightened economic
and social policies that do not allow any group of the
population to feel they are systematically excluded from
their share of the country's wealth or denied any say in
decisions affecting their lives.

While war is the worst enemy of development,
healthy and balanced development is the best form of
long-term conflict prevention. If any of those present
recognize that statement, it is because I said it last month
in an address to the staff of the World Bank. That was, I
believe, an appropriate forum in which to broach that
subject.

For all its awesome authority, the Council alone
cannot help Member States to remove the long-term
causes of conflict. Many of these fall within the terms of
reference of other parts of the United Nations system,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Economic and
Social Council and even the International Court of Justice.

Effective action will often require joint action by
many different organs and agencies, just as it requires
joint action by different government departments within
Member States. These different agencies often have
separate agendas, and in the past have not been used to
thinking - let alone working - together. This is now
improving, but there is still scope for much closer
coordination of policy among them, and also, in many
cases, between them and non-govemmental organizations
or the private sector.

The Council may wish to take the initiative in
organizing discussion of the many and complex issues
involved at the highest level, perhaps at a meeting to be
held during next year's Millennium Summit.

Allow me to conclude with one final thought.

 

In the domestic affairs of our Member States, conflict
prevention is usually described as the maintenance of order.
A key role in maintaining order is played by deterrence.
Citizens are deterred from disturbing the peace by the
knowledge that if they do so they are liable to be arrested
and brought before a court. I believe deterrence also has an
important role to play in maintaining international order. On
the individual level, we are seeking to do that through the
Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. And I
hope that before long we shall be able to do it worldwide
through the International Criminal Court.

But it is perhaps even more important to do it on the
collective level - and that is where the Council has its
gravest responsibility.

I really believe that, thanks to the prompt and effective
decisions taken by the Council in 1990 and 1991, States all
over the world are today in less danger of being treated as
Kuwait was then. But we have also observed that these
days many of the gravest conflicts which come to require
the attention of the Council year after year occur not
between States, but within them. That is why in my address
to the General Assembly two months ago I appealed for a
new consensus on intervention, defined in the broadest
sense. In that address I noted that armed intervention is
itself a result of the failure of prevention, and I stressed the
value of deterrence in preventing conflict. Let me repeat,
then, that nothing would be more effective in deterring
States and other parties from resorting to the extreme
measures that characterize too many present-day conflicts
than a clear demonstration that the Council is indeed
prepared to take decisive action when faced with crimes
against humanity.

It is my hope that this meeting today will help the
United Nations forge a consensus on these Vital questions
and restore prevention to its rightful place as the first
responsibility of the Security Council and of the
Organization as a whole.

