Major General Iqbal Asi: I am greatly honoured

to be here this morning, sharing my thoughts on how
planned inter-mission cooperation can impact mission
crisis management capability. During my discourse,
I will briefly dilate upon the existing framework of
cooperation between the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL), highlight opportunities for further
cooperation, identify challenges and recommend a way
forward.

Inter-mission cooperation optimizes the use
of available assets for peacekeeping operations
by facilitating, through pooling or the temporary
redeployment of equipment and personnel in
geographically contiguous missions on a short-term
basis, as well as strategic gains. When unforeseen
events threaten to destabilize a country, inter-mission
cooperation can be an adaptive and effective response
to help provide key assets in a timely and efficient
manner.
The concept is not new, as initial efforts to stimulate
it began as early as 2005 under the sponsorship of the
United Nations Office for West Africa, headquartered
in Dakar, Senegal. That regional office initiated the
practice of convening regular meetings of Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) missions based
in three West African countries, namely, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. Those meetings are
considered to be pioneering efforts in that particular
direction.

Today, there is greater need for coordination and
cooperation among United Nations missions operating
in geographic proximity. The current global economic
environment necessitates a more efficient approach
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Although
the concept has been practiced, and UNOCI has first-
hand experience in benefiting from inter-mission
cooperation, areas for further expansion exist.

I shall now identify the dividends of inter-mission
cooperation accrued from the cooperative framework
of UNOCI and UNMIL. The temporary redeployment
of three infantry companies from UNMIL to UNOCI
in late 2010 helped UNOCI to fill a critical shortage
of personnel needed to protect Abidjan. In December
2011, one infantry company was temporarily redeployed
from UNMIL to reinforce UNOCI during legislative
elections in Cote d'Ivoire. That shifting of personnel
within the region saved precious time, as well as the
cost ofbringing in troops during the crisis. The shifting
of three armed and two military utility helicopters from
UNMIL to UNOCI for the two elections just mentioned
provided UNOCI with the mobility required to enhance
monitoring of the sensitive areas surrounding the
borders, as well as the ability to quickly respond to
cross-border violence.

A number of reconnaissance sorties are being
conducted on a required basis by UNMIL armed
helicopters on both sides of the border. Recently, prior
to regional and municipal elections in Cote d'Ivoire in
April, regular reconnaissance and security sorties were
flown along the border by UNMIL armed helicopters.
Thus, the United Nations aerial platforms available in
the region were optimally utilized and the show of force
dissuaded the miscreants from acts of violence.

Another area of inter-mission cooperation is
joint border surveillance. Under that framework, two
operations, generally called "mirror patrolling", each
of one week duration per month, are conducted on
both sides of the border in selected areas. The practice
enables the establishment of the United Nations
footprint in remote border regions, which effectively
deters border crossings of miscreants in large numbers.

Enhanced local cooperation at the tactical level is
yet another area of cooperation with obvious benefits.
I am referring to Operation Mayo, in which border
meetings are held twice a month. Representatives
of all components of the two missions, national
law enforcement agencies and local administrative
authorities participate in those meetings. They provide
a forum for liaison, coordination, the exchange of
information and review of progress on agreed action
points.

Lastly, the ability to take counter measures in
terms of intelligence-sharing is a valuable outcome of
inter-mission cooperation. An effective intelligence
sharing mechanism exists between UNOCI and UNMIL
at the force headquarters, sector and unit levels. To cite
a couple of examples among many, vital information
provided by UNMIL made it possible to take counter-
measures and thereby avert attacks against Blolequin
and Guiglo in May 2012, and against Djouroutou in
April.

Having indicated workable and constructive
effects accrued from cooperation between UNOCI
and UNMIL, I shall now identify a few areas where
opportunities exist to further enhance such cooperation.

As a physical presence along and monitoring of an
extended border is not possible, for obvious reasons,
shared monitoring and surveillance of border areas
through technological means is another achievable
field of cooperation. To compensate for a paucity of
troops, technological means can be jointly employed by
missions located in geographic proximity.

Rapid surge capability is another area of
opportunity. The identification and earmarking of a
quick reaction force based in one mission, but able to
deploy to operate in neighbouring mission areas, need
to be pursued. The earmarking of such a flexile force
could have a considerable impact in crisis situations
and provide a strong United Nations presence in areas
where it otherwise has limited troop presence.

The establishment of a joint information and
analysis centre is a possible field of cooperation. A
centre could be established for UNOCI and UNMIL
and fed through all internal and external resources to
provide a clearer picture for decision-makers in order
to achieve well-thought-out and informed decisions.
It will improve the quality of information and assist
in its speedy dissemination to all concerned. Such an
arrangement would be beneficial for both missions, for
better crisis management.

The successful execution of inter-mission
cooperation has certain challenges, which I shall
briefly highlight here. Legal and political constraints
are a major challenge as the shifting of assets across
national borders requires the prior approval of the host
country and troop-contributing countries, which can
be an organizational and administrative challenge.
Invariably, it results in the delayed deployment of
troops and assets.

The second challenge emanates from restrictive
mission mandates. Protection, privileges, immunities,
exemptions and facilities in missions, the respective
status-of-forces agreements, as related to United
Nations personnel and property, must be worked out
in a timely manner with host countries in cases where
United Nations personnel and material may required to
deploy and operate.

The non-availability of standard means at the
tactical level is also another impediment. The use of
maps to share operational information 4 especially
contiguous locations - becomes time-consuming due
to lack of standard maps. Moreover, lack of standard
communication means is another area of concern that
needs to be addressed for coordinating important
operational activities, such as patrolling along the
border.

On the way forward for the future, I shall proffer
certain recommendations.

First, DPKO should negotiate prior agreements
between the United Nations and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) that allow TCC units to be utilized
during reinforcing missions. That would ensure timely
deployment of assets when needed.

Secondly, status-of-mission agreements, status-
of forces-agreement, memorandums of understanding
and rules of engagement should be worked out with
the Governments concerned, providing legitimacy
for crossing into neighbouring mission areas and
facilitating cross-border operations in cooperation with
the Office of Legal Affairs.

Thirdly, the commercial provision of some of
the military capabilities required to make efficient
use of technology to implement mandates in a cost-
effective manner should be considered from a regional
perspective. Such means would be made available on a
cost-sharing basis among different missions.

Finally, the joint mapping of armed groups and
criminality across the borders should be carried out by
contiguous missions, which would prove useful to an
effective response against miscreants. The availability
of standard maps and communication means should be
examined to facilitate cross-border operations and the
sharing of operational information.

Inter-mission cooperation needs to be strengthened
and expanded. Obviously, there is no one-size-fits-
all solution, each mission being a unique case. But
there are important opportunities and sometimes even
compulsions to enhance cooperation and coordination
among them, thereby maximizing available resources.
Such cooperation is becoming increasingly important
as a tool to ensure the optimal utilization of limited
resources in an environment characterized by the
regional nature of conflicts and fiscal considerations.

