Mr. Laher (South Africa): We extend our
appreciation to Pakistan for having convened this open
debate on this very important global issue, which has an
impact on international peace and security. It is a timely
reflection and an added contribution to enhancing the
visibility of the United Nations in the international
campaign against terrorism.

My delegation continues to support the approach
that places the United Nations at the centre of
multilateral efforts to counter terrorism, as we are firm
in our belief that no country can address this challenge
on its own and that terrorism cannot be defeated by
military means.

South Africa is of the view that international
efforts aimed at countering terrorism should be
comprehensive in addressing collateral concerns,
including development. We have always maintained that
the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy must be implemented in a balanced
and integrated manner. The Strategy, as affirmed in
the high-level Symposium on International Counter-
Terrorism Cooperation hosted by the Secretary-
General in 2011, remains the most credible and relevant
international mechanism that enjoys the widespread
political support of all Member States to counter the
scourge of terrorism globally.

In addition to the strides that have been made
in preventing and combating terrorism, as well as
measures to build States' capacity in that regard,
a balanced approach would mean renewed efforts
and commitment by the international community to
addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. There is an urgent need for the international
community and the United Nations to step up efforts
to resolve long-standing conflicts in accordance with
international law and international human rights law,
and to adopt strategies that limit political exclusion and
reject socioeconomic marginalization.

A balanced approach to counter-terrorism efforts
would imply that the international community remains
steadfast in its commitment to ensure the timely
and full realization of the development goals and
objectives so as to eradicate poverty and promote
sustained economic growth as well as sustainable
development and global prosperity for all. In the
prevailing international economic and financial
climate, the international community must reinforce
development and social-inclusion agendas, especially
on youth unemployment, as such efforts can contribute
to the reduction of marginalization and to countering
the potential appeal of extremism and recruitment by
terrorists.

We concur with the Secretary-General's view that
human rights protection should not be viewed as an
obstacle to effectively countering terrorism, but as an
essential element of any sustainable counter-terrorism
strategy. The strengthening of the international legal
architecture, the rule of law and the criminal justice
system constitute the fundamental basis of our common
approach to counter-terrorism. In that context, the
promotion and protection of human rights for all
is essential to all components of the Strategy. This
approach is complementary and reinforcing.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights should continue to play a leading
role in examining the question of protecting human
rights while countering terrorism. That area requires
renewed attention given the concerns expressed by the
High Commissioner regarding the erosion of respect for
due-process guarantees, including those related to the
Security Council's individual sanctions regimes and
other practices that impede the right to a fair trial in the
context of counter-terrorism.

In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
enhancement of the Ombudsperson's mandate and the
institutionalization of the sunset clause as a step towards
due-process standards, and remains fully supportive
of the work of that Office. The Office of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism complements all counter-terrorism efforts
and must be fully supported. It contributes to an
integrated and balanced approach by interacting with
all the relevant stakeholders.
The joint initiatives of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force that are
already under way should be further strengthened in
order to synchronize and make effective the United
Nations agenda to implement global counter-terrorism
measures. Such an approach contributes substantively
to the optimal use of resources and capacities. The
international community must maintain its unity of
purpose in the global fight against terrorism, upholding
the centrality of the United Nations in the process.
Duplicating United Nations initiatives or drawing focus
and resources away from multilateral efforts should be
avoided.

Additionally, countering the financing of terrorism
is a key component of a comprehensive strategy to
combat terrorism. While that requires collective action
by all States, it is also an area where there is a dire
need for capacity-building among States. Against that
background, we welcome the recent collaboration
aimed at leveraging the expertise and the reach of
United Nations structures and other regional and
subregional bodies, so as to enhance States' ability
to protect their financial systems from exploitation as
sources or conduits for material and financial support
for the perpetrators of terrorist acts.

The commendable counter-terrorism efforts of the
international community should be carried out with
due care, planning and foresight. We remain mindful
of the fact that the lack of an appropriate response or of
the political will to address longstanding and complex
conflicts will have a negative impact on our collective
efforts to root out terrorism. We have witnessed the
unintended consequences of weapons proliferation
in the Sahel, following actions by the international
community in the subregion recently. That has given
rise to the resurgence of terrorism networks, rendering
the countries in the region unstable and more vulnerable
to the threat of terrorism. Similar situations must be
avoided in future.

It is important for the international community
and the United Nations in particular to place emphasis
on the root causes of terrorism as well as on those
factors that contribute to the inflaming of passions and
resentment, which promote incitement and the spread
of this scourge in different parts of the world. Such a
reflection would additionally indicate the necessity of
addressing the political situation of people living under
occupation and the need for political will to address
long-standing conflicts.
Let me say in conclusion that in the action plan that
we collectively adopted in 2006, we undertook to make
every effort to conclude a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism that would also address
the current gaps in the international legal arena that
might exist, while also encouraging Member States to
become parties to existing international conventions
and protocols. We believe that the adoption of a
comprehensive convention should not be delayed any
further.

