Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this quarterly debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. We welcome the briefing by
Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the statement
by Mr. Tanin, the representative of Afghanistan.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its firm commitment to peace and the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. We therefore welcome
the fact that in September 2014, the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan decided to leave its history of foreign
intervention behind and resolved, through an electoral
process, to take its destiny in its own hands as a free
and sovereign people. We welcome the formation of a
Government of national unity under the leadership of
President Ghani at a time when the country is facing
the task of consolidating its national institutions in the
post-conflict period. It is important to reiterate that the
Afghan people should have ownership of that process
with the help of the international community.

We would like to highlight the work done by
UNAMA in strengthening the peace process, including
the help it provided in 2014 to establish the presidential
commissions. We recognize the contribution that it
has made and believe that UNAMA should continue
to carry out its work in coordination with the Afghan
Government.

The resolution that we adopted today (resolution 2210 (2015)) is a clear example of the joint work of
Security Council members and the Afghan Government.
The extension of the UNAMA mandate takes into
consideration the new realities and challenges facing
the country over the next decade.

National reconciliation should continue to be one
of the priority objectives and must include the various
sectors of Afghan society in efforts to consolidate
democracy. Venezuela hopes that the Afghan people
will participate actively in bringing about lasting peace,
which can be achieved with the participation of the
international community and regional neighbours. The
Afghan political leaders should face those challenges in
the context of the transformation decade 2015-2024, as
established at the recent Kabul Conference and, most
recently, the 2014 London Conference.

One of the most important challenges facing the
current Government in the peace and reconciliation
process is that of the economic situation. We call upon
the Afghan authorities and the international community
to take the steps necessary to bring about the economic
stability that is so vital to addressing the many changes
the country must make.

The security situation is of great concern, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/151). We believe that the political process,
which is aimed at achieving peace and stability,
requires the Afghan people's full participation. In
that regard, Venezuela supports strengthening the
institutional capacity of the Afghan State, including
its armed forces, in order to neutralize the impact of
extremist armed groups on the civilian population.
The international community's support and that of
neighbouring States is essential to strengthening
internal security in Afghanistan. We appreciate, in that
regard, the dialogue held between China, Pakistan and
Afghanistan in February as a significant step towards
peace and security in the region.

The existence of terrorist groups is not only an
Afghan problem. The spread of such groups' reach
is also currently affecting neighbouring countries,
as those groups threaten to extend their presence and
control over other territories. That is why we believe
that all the measures taken by the Afghan Government
to contain the impact of such groups within its territory
are important.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Afghanistan and international agencies
to combat drug production. While the drug trade
continues to be significant, the progress made by the
Government in that regard is a further step towards the
strengthening of the institutions of the State. In order
for the fight against the scourge of drugs to be more
effective, we believe that it is crucial that the Afghan
Government coordinate its related activities among
all agencies of the State in order to ensure that both
domestic drug consumption and the export of drugs by
criminal gangs to other countries are reduced.

We are concerned about the high number of
internally displaced persons and refugees resulting
from the internal conflict. The most recent numbers
show that there has been an 8 per cent increase in those
numbers, which means that there are more people in
need of assistance. In that respect, we welcome the
work being done by humanitarian agencies and call
upon the Afghan authorities to remain committed to
solving that problem.

In conclusion, Venezuela hopes for peace and
security in Afghanistan and for all its ethnic groups to
live in harmony. That will require joint efforts by the
Government and the people of Afghanistan, with the
assistance of the international community.

