Ms. Keita: I begin with the tragic news of the car
bomb explosion that took place in Benghazi today.
There were a number of casualties, including United
Nations staff working and living in Benghazi. We are
now in a position to confirm that three United Nations
staff members were among the fatalities. Two others
were injured and are now being treated. Scores of
Libyans are also among the injured.

This horrific attack came as the people in Benghazi
were preparing for the Bid Al-Adha holiday, in an area
supposedly under the full security control of General
Haftar's Libyan National Army (LNA) forces. It serves
to highlight the continued danger of terrorism across
the country and the limits of effective security control
in the absence of one Government and one military
and police force working across the country. It also
confirms that this latest bout of hostilities is creating a
vacuum that is easily exploited by radical elements that
thrive on chaos and violence. The United Nations does
not intend to evacuate from Libya. For the foreseeable
future, our place remains alongside the Libyan people,
like our brave colleagues who gave their lives today.

There are other significant developments today
in Libya. It is a positive development that both Prime
Minister Serraj and General Haftar's Libyan National
Army forces have agreed to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General's 29 July call for a truce for
the period of Bid Al-Adha to begin this evening. I can
only hope that both sides will genuinely abide by their
public commitment in good faith. This senseless and
absurd violence needs to stop.

We have made it clear on several occasions, in
front of this same audience, that no party can emerge
as the winner from the current conflict. Today is
clear evidence that there are already many losers, the
majority of whom are innocent Libyan civilians. This
message has resonated both with Libyans directly party
to the conflict and to those international and regional
stakeholders in Libya, who have seen that after more
than four months of conflict there is no quick military
win capable of resolving the complex situation on the
ground. Terrorism cannot be effectively fought under
the current circumstances on the ground, the tragedy
of illegal migration cannot be adequately addressed
and Libya's substantial economic potential cannot be
realized for the benefit of the Libyan people or as a
stabilizing influence in the region and beyond.

In the days leading up to the truce, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya worked hard to
build confidence between the parties. The proposed
immediate humanitarian measures, including the
exchange of prisoners, the exchange of mortal remains
and visits to prisoners or phone calls, can re-establish
contacts and lower tensions to enable a truce. We urge
the parties to seize this opportunity. This is the first
step in returning to a political process. It is essential
that the truce be deepened and strengthened through
these important confidence-building measures and
that the parties quickly participate in an international
meeting to recommit to a road map to transition the
country from conflict back to a peaceful, democratic
process. Consistent with the Special Representative's
initiative, such a meeting would then be followed by a
meeting of Libyans themselves.

The Council's press statement of 5 July (SC/13873)
in support of the call for a truce was certainly an
important element in demonstrating the renewed
unity of the international community, its faith in the
Special Representative and its commitment to his
three-point initiative to end the conflict. The public
and private support of key Member States has also
played a considerable role in building the credibility
and necessity for the truce that is now about to start.

The situation on the ground necessitates a
countrywide truce. The continued brutal descent of
southern Libya into chaos and intercommunal feuds
is a disturbing harbinger of what may ensue should
the wider conflict persist. Simmering intercommunal
tensions between Tebu and Ahali groups in Murzuq,
exacerbated by countrywide political polarization,
took a turn for the worse. On 4 August, three LNA
air strikes against Tebu elements, including a number
of civilians, resulted in approximately 45 fatalities.
Murzuq suffers from the same environment as much
of Libya - an absence of State institutions manifested
through the absence of services, an almost total lack of
governance, a lack of impartial security forces and an
absence of hope.

It is a tragedy that so many have died in a town where
there are deep-rooted grievances that, in the current
circumstances, risk taking on a national dimension. It
is essential that the intracommunal violence in Murzuq
not spread to other towns in the south. I therefore ask
the Council to express its emphatic support to ensure
that the truce takes place not only in the areas under
the clear control of specific security forces but also in
areas where there is no clear security actor. The United
Nations family has been active in trying to address the
urgent humanitarian priorities in Murzuq through the
provision of safe passage for the injured and emergency
supplies of food, shelter and medicine.

I would like to conclude by raising an issue that
the Special Representative and many Member States
have been following closely, that is, the fate of abducted
lawmaker Siham Sergewa. Ms. Sergewa was abducted
from her home in Benghazi on 17 July and has not been
heard from since. This unacceptable attack on a female
lawmaker constitutes a serious crime against women
and the prospect for women playing a role in political
life in Libya. We are grateful to those Member States
that have continued to follow the case closely and
reiterate our demand that the authorities in Benghazi
assume their responsibility and find those responsible
for this cowardly abduction of a female parliamentarian
in front of her family.

