Ms. Chen Peijie (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank President Pocar, Prosecutor
Del Ponte, President Byron and Prosecutor Jallow for
their briefings on the work of the two Tribunals.

We note the ongoing progress made in the work
of the two Tribunals, including their continued
improvement of procedures to achieve high efficiency
in the trying of cases. The Tribunals attach great
importance to cooperation with national judicial organs
and have made the referral of cases to national
jurisdictions a core element of the completion strategy.
All such achievements should be fully acknowledged.

The progress has also led to confident optimism
about the Tribunals" implementation of the completion
strategy. We hope that the two Tribunals will place
greater trust in concerned countries in the respective
regions and give them greater opportunities. We appeal
to Members in a position to do so to provide further
financial and technical support so as to allow the
countries concerned to gain the required capacities as
soon as possible so that they may assist the Tribunals
in making referrals in as systematic and timely a
manner as possible. In that respect, the assessment
prepared by President Pocar notes that
"[t]he international community must not
underestimate the importance of the courts in the
States of the former Yugoslavia having the
capacity to carry on the legacy of this
International Tribunal long after it has completed
its mission" (S/2007/663, para. 39).

Of course, the two Tribunals are also facing
certain problems and difficulties, including witness
protection, cooperation with all States and staff
retention, among others. We wish to express our
concern in that regard and hope that the Tribunals and
all sides concerned will make the most strenuous
efforts to enhance cooperation and resolve those
problems appropriately.

As to the Tribunals' legacy, we welcome the fact
that they have again submitted an amended joint report.
We will participate in the consideration of the follow-
up programme in that regard. In our View, the
principles and time frames for the completion strategy
established by the Security Council should be
scrupulously adhered to. The Tribunals should continue
to formulate their work programmes with the
achievement of that objective in mind. At the same
time and on that basis, they should consider how best
to address the issue of residual functions and prudently
offer an appropriate plan thereto.

In the course of implementing the completion
strategy, the two Tribunals are sure to encounter
obstacles and complications. We believe, however, that
so long as all sides demonstrate good faith and
strengthen cooperation, those problems can be readily
resolved.

