Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his briefing on the
historic developments that took place recently in East
Timor.

These first elections in the history of East Timor
confirm once again the will of the Timorese people to
go forward in laying the foundation for a pluralistic
and democratic State. In this regard, my delegation
emphasizes with satisfaction the exemplary way in
which these elections were held. We would like to
recall at this time that the parties committed
themselves, when they the signed the Pact for National
Unity, to respecting the verdict of this vote. We remind
them of this commitment today in order that they
should adopt a policy of tolerance and mutual respect.

What is important today is not the success of one
party or another, but rather the success of a process that
has benefited from the support of the United Nations,
its agencies, non-governmental organizations and the
international community as a whole. We must continue
to lend support, particularly at this crucial stage, as the
first constitution of that country is being drawn up,
which will lay the foundation for the new East
Timorese society, as well as the principles that will
further guide it in its subsequent choices.

These elections make it possible for us to move
from a Transitional Administration to an independent
East Timorese Government. It will probably have to
face a number of problems and challenges that it will
have to meet in order to govern the country in a viable
way and promote a climate favourable to development.

A United Nations presence, reinforced by
substantial international financial assistance, will
therefore be essential. We therefore hope to receive
further details in the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on the form that the United Nations
presence will take in East Timor after independence.

In our View, however, two concepts are of crucial
importance. At this and subsequent stages, we must
have a strategy for withdrawal and for consolidating
peace. We believe that East Timor must initially
establish relations of good neighbourliness with the
countries of the region. We would also like to
emphasize the importance of consolidating trust and
reconciliation between Indonesia and East Timor. The
Indonesian authorities, for their part, have frequently
demonstrated their readiness to establish friendly
relationships and to set up a machinery for dialogue
and concerted action in order to resolve pending
questions. We are very grateful to them.

Finally, we would like to congratulate the Under-
Secretary-General on the success of the United
Nations. We would also like to congratulate Mr. Vieira
de Mello, all the men and women of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor and all the
volunteers for their efforts throughout this process to
guarantee the orderly conduct of these elections, which
is so important for the future of the people of East
Timor.

