Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. We are
well aware of the wisdom and skill you bring to bear in
guiding the work of the Council. I also thank your
predecessor, my brother, the Permanent Representative of
Kenya, for the excellent way in which he led the work of
the Council last month.

There is no doubt that a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East is the goal of all peace-loving States, a
goal which those countries seek to reach on the basis of the
principles of justice and equity. The failure to live up to
commitments entered into is inconsistent with a genuine
desire for peace, and undermines efforts to achieve that
peace. The destruction of the chances for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace owing to the practices of the Israeli
forces of occupation in territory that does not belong to
them constitutes one clear proof that occupation and peace
are incompatible.

The decision taken by the Government of Israel on
26 February 1997 to build a new 6,500-unit settlement at
Jabul Abu Ghneim in East Jerusalem - in occupied
Palestinian territory -~ adjacent to lands expropriated in
1991 and 1992 is part of an Israeli policy to build a series
of settlements encircling Al~Quds with a View to isolating
the other Arab areas of the West Bank. The purpose is to
judaize Al-Quds and to change its legal status and
demographic composition, in contravention of Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980). Nor
can we forget Israel's other systematic steps in the same
direction, such as the opening of a tunnel west of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in Al-Quds, and the ensuing violent
repression of innocent protesters.

Israel has not complied with Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions; it has ignored international

declarations and broken commitments it has itself
undertaken; it continues to disregard the views of the
international community. All of this reflects Israel's
refusal to comply and its lack of respect for the peace
process. It will inevitably lead to severe consequences
with respect to the other States of the region and will
have a negative effect on the peace process and on world
peace and security.

Sudan expresses its concern over the steps taken by
the Israeli Government. Based on the need to respect the
international agreements, instruments and conventions
concluded between the two parties and freely consented
to by them, Sudan asks that the Security Council shoulder
its responsibility fully and, in order to safeguard
international peace and security, ask Israel to rescind its
decision and put an end to any steps that might harm the
city of Jerusalem, a city where the holy places of the
faithful of three religions can be found.

For all these reasons, we must work together to
preserve the special nature of that city, which is so dear
to the hearts of all who cherish the holy places and who
are imbued with the spirit of peace. That is why the
Council must adopt specific, concrete measures to compel
Israel to go back on its decision and to put an end to any
steps that might constitute acts of provocation in the
occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem, the
occupied Syrian Golan and occupied southern Lebanon.

Sudan, on the basis of its solidarity with the struggle
of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights and
for justice, and to strengthen the right to justice and
fairness, asks the Council to shoulder its responsibility
and not adhere to a double standard, and to strengthen its
credibility by working to implement the resolutions
relevant to the Israeli-Arab conflict, with the goal of
achieving a just and comprehensive peace. This is the
only way to guarantee stability in the region and
throughout the world.

