Mr. saenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): This formal meeting is of special importance
and interest to Costa Rica because since our election as a
member of the Security Council we had not had an
opportunity to participate in the process of considering
and approving a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Therefore, we are pleased to make our statement at this
meeting in which the Council will approve the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA).
From the moment when the crisis in the Central
African Republic became a subject for the Security
Council's consideration, my delegation has consistently
expressed its full support for the regional initiative and
the work done by the Inter-African Mission to Monitor
the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Costa Rica recognizes the important work MISAB
accomplished as the mechanism of conflict management
and prevention that achieved normalcy in that country.

We commend and are grateful to all those who
participated in that Mission, including the International
Mediation Committee and the International Monitoring
Committee, and we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
support for regional initiatives, which, in the case of
Africa, have played and continue to play a crucial role in
conflict resolution. We also take this opportunity to
acknowledge and highlight once again the major
leadership role played by France, as well as the important
efforts made by President Omar Bongo of Gabon.

This does not mean that the situation in the Central
African Republic has been fully resolved or that the
original causes of the crisis of the last two years have
been eliminated. To the contrary, there is general
agreement that fragility is the key characteristic of the
current situation in that country. Indeed, the period of
political and security crisis has been overcome; however,
the new stage of peace-building will determine the
sustainability of the achievements attained. This
presupposes, of course, the continuity of the international
presence in the Central African Republic and the

 

maintenance of international cooperation for the economic
and social reconstruction of the country.

In this connection, my delegation supports the concept
of multifunctional operations and is pleased that MINURCA
will be added to the list of such missions. The Mission we
propose to approve today will serve as an example of
United Nations activities in the area of peace-building.

In its initial mandate, MINURCA will be responsible
for maintaining and improving security and stability in
Bangui and its surrounding areas. This aspect, in our view,
is essential to ensure that, once this condition has been met,
the other work necessary for the development of the Central
African Republic, such as humanitarian assistance and the
work of financial institutions, can proceed uninterrupted.

My country believes that the assistance MINURCA
will provide to the authorities of the Central African
Republic, as set forth in its mandate, in protecting and
monitoring the key installations in Bangui and the weapons
retrieved during the disarmament exercise and in advising
on the restructuring of the national police force and the
special police forces, is of major importance. My country
agrees with the Secretary-General that it is important that
MINURCA be able to offer technical and political advice
to electoral bodies so that legislative elections and, in the
future, presidential elections, which are fundamental in all
sovereign and democratic countries, can be held.

In this regard, my country recognizes and emphasizes
the great importance of the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to coordinate all
United Nations activities in the Central African Republic
and to establish direct channels of communication with the
Government of that country.

My delegation trusts that this will constitute an
appropriate management and coordination body for the
work of the various specialized agencies and organs of the
United Nations system, in order to ensure the proper
application and implementation of the measures identified
by the international community to foster peace and
development in the Central African Republic.

As has been stated here, the economic and social
situation in the Central African Republic continues to be of
particular concern and interest to us. Recent statistics show
the figures to be alarming, particularly with regard to social
issues. Some of them show that 75 per cent of children
between the ages of 2 and 12 years are malnourished and
that 65 per cent of adults live in conditions below the
poverty level. Furthermore, the interruption in the
functioning of public institutions and the delay in the
payment of salaries to civil servants have caused many
strikes, which on several occasions resulted in acts of
violence and which, as we all recall, were one of the
causes of the conflict.

That is why, in our firm opinion, and as we have
said on several occasions, it is essential that the
international financial institutions adopt a new vision and
a new attitude with regard to the situation in the Central
African Republic. With the support of the region and of
this Council, that country is carrying out a major political
peace-building effort, and we believe that this requires
exceptional and comprehensive treatment by the
international financial institutions, which should consider
giving clear support for and participating actively in the
process of reconstructing the country. Otherwise,
achievements will be jeopardized and we will run the risk
of losing what has been gained.

We are aware that the Central African Republic is
now at a crucial stage and that the active presence of the
United Nations will help the country move ahead and
become again an active member of the international
community. That is why my delegation will support the
draft resolution before us, which is an essential instrument
for the achievement of these objectives.

