Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I would like to thank both the briefers this afternoon. The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary- General's first report (S/2020/123) on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). The United Kingdom is encouraged that BINUH is making a good start despite the complex and challenging operating environments that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and many other Council members this afternoon have described. First, with regard to the transition from the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti to BINUH, we welcome the pace at which BINUH has staffed its office and the steps taken towards greater United Nations integration. We are looking forward to the finalization of the integrated strategic framework, which is an opportunity to translate the global United Nations reforms into a more strategic approach on the ground in Haiti that will be more able to support Haiti in addressing the root causes of instability. With respect to the benchmarks and targets, we welcomed the United Nations efforts to establish baselines and incorporate the benchmarks and targets into the integrated strategic framework. Clear delineation of responsibilities will be critical. Turning to the substance of the Secretary-General's report, the ongoing political impasse in Haiti remains a source of enormous frustration for the Security Council and, above all, for the Haitian people. It is vital that all parties now re-engage in direct talks to find a solution to the political deadlock. The issues of constitutional reform and credible, transparent elections should be a fundamental element of these talks. With other State institutions paralysed, maintaining the functionality of the Haitian National Police is absolutely critical. We welcome the progress made in this area by previous United Nations mission, but as other speakers have noted, significant challenges remain. In particular, sustainable solutions are needed to resourcing the Haitian National Police, and we encourage the Haitian leadership to address this challenge as a priority.On the humanitarian front, the United Kingdom is relieved that there have been no new cases of cholera reported since February 2019. However, we remain deeply concerned by the broader humanitarian situation and especially the acute vulnerability of women and children. The United Kingdom welcomes the validation of the national action plan for human rights. However, we also remain deeply concerned about the overall human rights and rule-of-law situation in Haiti, in particular with regard to prison conditions, pretrial detention, court functionality and the scant progress in pursuing accountability for recent violations. We also share South A frica's concern regarding incitement to violence on Haitian media. Such incitement risks undermining prospects for progress on the political front and puts Haitian lives at risk. In conclusion, this new United Nations configuration provides, as we see it, the opportunity for a fundamentally new era of United Nations cooperation with Haiti - one geared towards sustaining peace and advancing development. We urge all parties to do everything possible to ensure that this opportunity is not lost.
