The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Netherlands.

I join other delegations in commending
Ambassador Ward of Jamaica for his effective
chairmanship of the Security Council Working Group
on the Brahimi Report.

By adopting the draft resolution submitted by the
Working Group, the Security Council has sent a clear
message that it is determined to do much better in the
field of peacekeeping. In the context of the resolution,
the Security Council has made two decisions which
constitute major qualitative improvements and show
that lessons are in fact being learned.

The first decision is the resolve of the Security
Council to give peacekeeping operations clear, credible
and achievable mandates. Such an undertaking means
that potential troop-contributing countries will be able
to decide on firmer grounds whether, and if so to what
extent, to participate in a peacekeeping operation.

The second decision - very much related to the
first - is to involve the troop-contributing countries in
a more serious and structured way. In the annex to the
resolution we have just adopted, specific mention is
made of holding private meetings with troop-
contributing countries, including at their request.
Troop-contributing countries will from now on be
consulted not only on the setting up of new
peacekeeping operations, but also - and even more
importantly - during the implementation phase, when
a change in a peacekeeping mandate is being
considered, or when a rapid deterioration of the
situation on the ground threatens the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers. This
provision holds special appeal for my delegation,
because seven weeks from today the Netherlands will
no longer be a member of the Security Council, but it
will be an important troop-contributor.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
has made all the right decisions that it could at this
time, seizing the momentum created by the excellent
Brahimi Report and the Security Council's summit
meeting last September. As the Secretary-General has
already begun implementing other recommendations in
the Brahimi Report and has issued a report on this
implementation, we now look forward to the support of
the General Assembly, whose early decisions will
underline the common responsibility of the United
Nations and its Members for improving the role of the
United Nations in peace operations.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.
