The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2006/585, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
2

prior consultations. Members of the Council also have
before them the reports of the Group of Experts,
contained in documents S/2006/53 and S/2006/525.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, contained in document
5/2006/389, and the report of the Security Council
mission on the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, contained in document
S/2006/434.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1698 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

I now invite members to consultations following
the conclusion of the meeting.

The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
06-44977

