Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting Special Representative Jan Kubis and take this
opportunity to thank him for his comprehensive
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2012/133). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his insightful
statement.

The present debate comes at a time of sorrow for
my country. Just a couple of days ago, we lost 12
Turkish soldiers in a helicopter crash in the Afghan
capital. Our soldiers were in Kabul to help their
Afghan brothers build a secure and stable Afghanistan.
We are all united in this common goal. I would like to
express our sincere appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his statement of condolence and sympathy.
On this occasion, I would like to reaffirm our strong
commitment to Afghanistan.

Important events relating to Afghanistan have
taken place over the past six months. The Istanbul
Conference for Afghanistan, held on 2 November,
presented a new vision for regional cooperation and
good-neighbourly relations across the region that
surrounds the country. Recognizing the crucial role
played by Afghanistan in connectivity and cooperation
across the region, the Istanbul process recommits
Afghanistan and its neighbours to a new vision of
partnership for peace, stability and prosperity.

Let me repeat that in Istanbul, the parties
recognized the central role of the United Nations. They
also welcomed Afghanistan's willingness and
determination to use its regional and historical position
to do its part to promote security and peaceful
economic cooperation in the region. It is a regionally
owned process for our common future that has
Afghanistan at the centre.

Since the Istanbul Conference, Afghanistan has
been actively leading the follow-up process. We are
encouraged by the regional support for the Afghan-led
follow-up steps on the Istanbul process. Within that
framework, the senior officials meeting of 29 February
in Kabul took place in a very constructive atmosphere.
At the preparatory meeting, regional actors continued
to confirm their ownership of the process for building
greater confidence and cooperation in the region. They
worked on the concept paper drafted by the Afghan
side with a view to shaping a new vision of regional
cooperation. We sincerely believe that this regional
vision will enable Afghanistan to play its long-desired
role as a regional hub for trade and transit.

We are now looking forward to the ministerial
conference to be held on 14 June in Kabul. That
meeting will enable Afghanistan and its regional
partners to continue to shape a forward-looking agenda
for regional cooperation. We think that the Istanbul
process, together with the long-term international
engagement confirmed at the Bonn Conference, will
further contribute to our success in Afghanistan.

We will continue to extend our support to
Afghanistan in order to consolidate the gains of the past
decade and to realize greater security and economic
sustainability in the future. Therefore, in the lead-up to
two major events on Afghanistan this year - the
Chicago summit and the Tokyo Conference - the
international community should work on a clear
message to strengthen the hopes and expectations of the
Afghan people. In this context, I would like to express
our satisfaction with the Afghan-led security sector
transition, whereby the Afghan National Security
Forces now have full responsibility for nearly half of
the population.

We welcome the review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
mandate, conducted in consultation with the Afghan
Government and related partners. UNAMA plays a
crucial role in supporting the Afghan Government and
will continue to coherently assist and strengthen
Afghan institutions in order that they may fulfil their
mandated responsibilities to the Afghan people. The
realities of the transition process, Afghanistan's
political and development agenda, and the priorities of
the Afghan Government in the coming years should
continue to guide UNAMA in its activities.

We believe that Afghan ownership and leadership
should be at the centre of our collective efforts. In that
regard, the United Nations should continue to be a
strong partner for Afghanistan in the Afghan-led peace
and transition processes. In the meantime the United
Nations should also continue to support regional
cooperation and to promote a coherent international
engagement behind the Government's development
agenda.

Before I conclude, I would like to acknowledge
once more the dedicated and outstanding work
UNAMA is carrying out in fulfilment of its mandate, in
the face of very real and serious threats in Afghanistan.
We are particularly grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubis. We trust in his wisdom
and leadership at the helm of the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan. UNAMA's work in
Afghanistan is critical now and will remain so. The
Mission has our full support.

