Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic,
keen on improving the draft resolution contained in
document S/2002/532 and dated 13 May 2002, had
earlier submitted the following constructive proposals.

First, the objective of the proposals was to avoid
the shortcomings in the performance of the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) that have emerged
in recent years, especially with regard to contracts
whose values exceed $5 billion. It was our hope that
the new measures would include actual alleviation of
the previous procedures and would compose a sound
mechanism that would facilitate the work of contracts,
stop their blocking for political reasons and improve
procedures, in particular with regard to contracts
relating to humanitarian materials.

Secondly, the proposals were intended to ensure
that Iraq is not denied its natural right to acquire means
for self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter, provided that they do not include weapons of
mass destruction.

Thirdly, we wished to ensure that the Iraqi people
were not prevented from acquiring the technology
necessary to reconstruct their infrastructure, which has
been destroyed, and to guarantee their sustainable
development by including the necessary text in the
draft resolution.

Fourthly, we meant to overcome the bureaucratic
restraints that could arise as a result of the
implementation of the resolution and the list of
measures annexed to it; to expedite the arrival in Iraq
of supplies and commodities in general, in particular
humanitarian supplies; and to endeavour not to increase
costs for exporters, because such encumbrances will be
a heavy burden on the Iraqi people. For that reason, we
should include in the draft resolution modalities that
would ensure meeting the needs of the Iraqi people,
who have already suffered enough because of the
sanctions.

However, since discussion on the Syrian
proposals reached an impasse during the experts
meetings held to consider those proposals, my
country's delegation believes it has a duty to explain its
vote on the draft resolution.

First, Syria believes that it is high time to lift the
sanctions to which the brotherly Iraqi people have been
subjected for 12 years.

Secondly, we believe that necessity compels us to
encourage Iraq to continue its dialogue with the
Secretary-General in order to reach a positive outcome
that will lead to the final lifting of the sanctions
imposed on Iraq. In our view, it is incomprehensible
that the Council continues to impose sanctions for
unlimited periods of time.

Thirdly, Council members undoubtedly appreciate
the difficulty of Syria's position, especially in the light
of Arab public opinion. On the one hand, the Council
has lost its credibility by compelling some countries,
and not others, to implement its resolutions, owing to
the positions of some permanent Council members that
have helped Israel to disregard those resolutions and
have encouraged it to refuse to comply with
international legitimacy. However, what is required of
Syria now is to vote for a draft resolution that will
extend the sanctions imposed on the Iraqi people - an
Arab people who have already suffered greatly.

Fourthly, in the light of double standards in this
situation, Syria totally rejects the policy of double
standards that has manifested itself clearly during this
period, whereby Israel carried out its policy of blatant
aggression against the Palestinian people, despite the
statements of United Nations representatives
concerning the war crimes that it committed in Jenin.
Nonetheless, the Security Council failed to dispatch the
fact-finding team and could not secure respect for
resolution 1405 (2002). Is there a clearer example of
double standards than that?

Fifthly, my delegation will follow closely the
implementation of this resolution and its implications
for the brotherly Iraqi people. We will pursue the
matter during the coming six-month review of this
programme.
In the context of this explanation, I should like to
reaffirm that the Syrian Arab Republic, as a result of its
concern for the real unity of the Security Council and
its commitment to be an example with respect to the
resolutions of international legitimacy, and in an
attempt to give the Council a new opportunity to regain
and rebuild its credibility, and despite the difficult and
critical position that it is now taking, again for the sake
of Council unity, will join the consensus and vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

