Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and to express my appreciation for providing us
with this opportunity to address issues related to East
Timor and the prevailing situation in East Nusa
Tenggara. Our felicitations go to the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom for the manner
in which he conducted the work of the Council last
month. Permit me also to welcome wholeheartedly to
the Council our dearest friends, Mr. Xanana Gusmao
and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta.

Before proceeding further I should like to take
this opportunity to reiterate and reaffirm the position of
my Government with regard to building a strong
foundation for future relations between the peoples of
East Timor and Indonesia and to cooperating with the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) in facilitating the territory's
transition to independence. To that end, the Indonesian
Government remains fully committed to steadily and
constructively resolving the outstanding issues once
and for all.

Those efforts are reflected in the fifth round of
meetings held between Indonesia and UNTAET, which
took place at Bali on 15 and 16 May 2001, to address
questions relating to registration of refugees,
citizenship, pensions for former civil servants and
agreement on airspace and postal services, including
the Oecussi transit agreement. With regard to the latter,
it has been agreed that the issue will be discussed at the
next meeting Joint Border Committee. There was also
agreement regarding payment arrangements for
pensions, including the launching ofa joint appeal for a
special fund. At the end of the meeting, the agreed
minutes were subsequently signed by both delegations.

With reference to the interim report, I should like
to share some observations as to its contents.

On the issue of East Timorese refugees, the
Indonesian Government along with UNTAET, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) jointly conducted an information
campaign from 9 to 11 April 2001. We sincerely hope
that this undertaking will expedite the repatriation
process, as it has proved successful in providing the
refugees with first-hand information on the situation in
East Timor and in enabling them to make an informed
decision as to whether to be repatriated to East Timor
or to be resettled in Indonesia. At the same time, the
refugees are entitled to the right to voice their opinions
freely concerning the popular consultations, for this is
indeed the true meaning of democracy.

We question the report with regard to the
allegations of disinformation. The report refers to such
uncorroborated sources as an Indonesian newspaper
citing an unnamed local administration official in East
Nusa Tenggara as if such actions were attributable to
my Government.

Yet, the continued imposition of the Phase V
security category by the United Nations has indeed
impeded the return of the refugees. My delegation
therefore trusts that the United Nations Security
Coordinator will dispatch his team to the area no later
than this month. Meanwhile, the registration planned
for 6 June is expected to take place as scheduled. That
is to be preceded by a socialization process that will
take place from 21 May to 5 June, in which UNTAET
is invited to participate. Similarly, invitations have
been extended to 32 diplomats from Jakarta to witness
the registration process on 6 June. This can be
undertaken due to the improved security in and around
the refugee camps.

Thus we fail to understand the assertion that the
security situation "remains unpredictable". Let me
assure this body that, for its part, the Indonesian
Government has done its utmost in promoting security,
law and order, and will continue to do so.

These results have been widely acknowledged in
such places as the report of the Portuguese
parliamentary delegation on its Visit to Australia,
Indonesia and East Timor from 22 February to 8 March
2001. Similar observations were made at the last Bali
meeting by the head of UNTAET's political affairs
department, Ambassador Galbraith, who stated that
occurrences of security incidents have been minimal.
With regard to cross-border incidents, the
responsibility to prevent such incidents from occurring
rests with both Indonesia and UNTAET, as manifested
through the holding of regular coordination sessions to
maintain law and order in those regions. Regretfully,
five United Nations peacekeeping soldiers recently
entered East Nusa Tenggara and went so far as to
question local Indonesian people and to check their
identifications. Fortunately, the prompt intervention of
the local military commander prevented the incident
from getting out of hand. Indeed, there can be no
justification for any party to overreach or go beyond its
mandate.

On the issue of justice and impunity, let me once
again reiterate my Government's unswerving
commitment to bring to justice those responsible for
human rights violations. It should be noted that
presidential decree No. 53/2001 has established ad hoc
human rights courts to adjudicate documented cases of
human rights abuses in East Timor in 1999 and in
Tanjung Priok in 1984. It is also to be noted that the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
regarding cooperation in legal, judicial and human
rights matters requires the consent of the Parliament to
be in full conformity with the Indonesian legal system.

With regard to the criminal trials of the six
persons accused of the killings of the three UNHCR
workers in Atambua in September 2000, despite the
verdict handed down by the North Jakarta District
Court, I wish to emphasize that their trials have not
been concluded. On the contrary, the judicial process is
still underway, as the prosecutor is now appealing the
matter to the High Court, with the possibility of again
appealing to the Supreme Court - the highest court in
the Indonesian justice system. It is therefore prudent
for all concerned parties to refrain from making hasty
judgements until a final decision is taken.

Closely linked to the problems of refugees and
justice is reconciliation, which my delegation considers
as the key element in resolving comprehensively the
issue of East Timor. It is the firm position of my
Government that a genuine reconciliation between and
among the East Timorese will become the solid
foundation whereby an atmosphere conducive to peace
and harmony can be promoted, thereby eradicating the
root causes of conflict. It is important to emphasize
that reconciliation and retribution do not go hand-in-
hand. To be truly successful, the process of
reconciliation requires bridging vast differences while
leaving past tragic incidents to history.
Therefore, true justice and stable peace have to be
achieved in tandem and in a balanced manner.
Ultimately it is only for the East Timorese people
themselves to determine the path to be taken in order to
be one nation and people. Thus, it is incumbent upon
the international community to support and promote
such endeavours. In other words, its implementation
must not be relegated to a future date but must be
pursued as a matter of urgency. It is in this context that
at Bali on 5 and 6 May this year the Government of
Indonesia yet again facilitated reconciliation talks
between representatives of the National Council of
Timorese Resistance (CNRT) and the East Timorese
refugees in East Nusa Tenggara.

By promoting and enhancing direct people-to-
people contact between and among the East Timorese,
it is hoped that the refugees can gain confidence in the
reception that awaits them on their return to East
Timor. It is therefore legitimate in this context to also
address the refugees' genuine concerns regarding their
security in East Timor, particularly taking into account
the recent brutal acts of Violence against returnees.

One of the results of the aforementioned
reconciliation talks was the request that UNTAET
respect the political rights of the East Timorese
refugees to participate in the democratic elections in
East Timor and not exclude them for technical reasons.
As East Timorese, it is their fundamental and basic
human right to participate in determining East Timor's
future. Moreover, we also welcome the planned visit of
Monsignor Basilio do Nascimento to the camps by the
end of this month as another step to further promote the
reconciliation process. In this context, we sincerely
hope that the reconciliation talks between the CNRT
and Uni Timor Aswain (UNTAS), scheduled to be held
on 24 and 25 May 2001, will make significant progress
as a follow-up to a similar event held in Bali last year
that was considered a milestone, as it was the first time
that both sides had the opportunity to meet and foster
harmony and cooperation.

Before concluding, I would like to allude to a
specific point - that to satisfactorily resolve any
dispute, including that of East Timor, it is essential that
the reports of the United Nations be impartial,
balanced, objective and based on reliable sources of
information. Biased and contradictory statements of
facts, as well as references to unverifiable sources of
information, can also be prejudicial to the interests of
Member States. Similarly, we would expect media
sources and so-called unnamed sources to demonstrate
a greater sense of ethical responsibility.
As Indonesia is in the transitional period towards
full democracy, my Government has, through a process
of dialogue and cooperation with the international
community, worked to strengthen legal mechanisms. At
present Indonesia is in the process of finalizing, with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, technical assistance for the
enhancement of the capacity of the Indonesian
administration of justice for the prosecution of human
rights violations.

Finally, over the long term and in anticipation of
post-UNTAET East Timor, my Government seeks to
establish a durable, wide-ranging and mutually
beneficial relationship with East Timor. Trade and
investment, as well as cooperation in the socio-cultural
fields, will be central to this effort. Therefore, the
creation of conditions conducive to the interaction of
the people of East Timor and the people of the
neighbouring Indonesian province of East Nusa
Tenggara is important, for the legal and political
separation of East Timor from Indonesia cannot erase
the reality of the centuries-old societal and family links
between them. Hence, when UNTAET completes its
mandate, it is our sincere hope that these links will
flourish.

