Mr. Pereira (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of inviting me
to attend and speak at today's meeting of this important
body of the United Nations.

Guinea-Bissau is a country that, on the international
stage, is emerging from a climate of relations with the
international community characterized by multiple
conditions and sanctions. Our presence andparticipation
in the work of this important body for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the symbolism
it projects is of critical importance for my country, and
indeed for all the people of Guinea-Bissau.

Guinea-Bissau has returned to this forum of
dialogue and political consultation at a time of
complete renewal - with new political authorities,
fresh commitment and a hope that we can build a State
and a society that are better positioned to pursue our
major national aspirations. That return also signals
that we have completed yet another phase in restoring
the framework for dialogue and cooperation with the
outside world, as well as a growing affirmation of
Guinea-Bissau as a stable and credible partner in the
regional and global security system.

Ultimately my presence in this forum also
represents a unique opportunity for me, on behalf
of His Excellency Mr. Jose Mario Vaz, President of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, all of our national
political stakeholders and our wider society, to thank
the members of the Security Council and, indeed,
the entire United Nations system, for the efforts and
support provided over more than a decade to assist the
stabilization process in our country.

Despite ongoing political instability, the United
Nations has continued to maintain Guinea-Bissau on
its agenda while pursuing ways and means to promote
political dialogue and reinforce the institutional
framework for the rule of law. I would like to suggest
some features that, in the view of our Government,
should characterize the new framework for dialogue and
cooperation with our international partners, especially
with the United Nations.

Guinea-Bissau is experiencing a new cycle full of
hope and expectation that is responding to the dreams
of its people to build a State capable of achieving the
necessary internal and external conditions for good
governance and development.

The understanding reached among the major
national political parties, especially the African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde and
the Party for Social Renewal - the two main parties
in the Parliament - is both a pillar of inclusive
governance and a factor in pursuing the necessary
reforms in the basic State institutions and essential
legal and constitutional elements in building stability
and strengthening a foundation for development.

Ensuring legitimate governance and social stability
and rebuilding our economy are essential in establishing
political and governmental stability in the country.
To achieve those results, Guinea-Bissau urgently
requires robust external aid to enable us to shore up
the foundation of an already fragile State with limited
resources and persistent social instability, where scars
are still visible in essential social sectors, including,
among others, education and health.

Despite significant progress in the reform
process - for some people it called for great
courage - the Government admits, given the
reality, that major threats and vulnerabilities remain,
warranting further attention and an appropriate
response. We welcome the outstanding work of the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau in maintaining security on behalf
of our institutions and political representatives. To
that end, Guinea-Bissau expresses its unequivocal
determination to ensure that its mandate is continued.
We therefore call on the Security Council and all
international partners to provide the requisite financial
support.

The current phase of stabilizing and rebuilding
our State, the rule of law and our economy requires the
continuing presence of Guinea-Bissau on the agenda of
United Nations, as well as its continued support and
political assistance. To that end, we would advocate
in favour of immediately continuing the presence of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau and United Nations support, based on
strategic collaboration between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. That concern was
also expressed during the recent visit of the strategic
assessment mission deployed by the United Nations in
our country.

Similarly, Guinea-Bissau needs United Nations
support to organize the donor round table scheduled to
take place in Brussels in February 2015. The successful
convening of the round table for development partners
would be a fundamental achievement in maintaining
the Government's momentum in the medium term.

The new Guinea-Bissau - which is currently
under construction - intends to establish a strategic,
fresh partnership with the United Nations that is geared
towards success as a platform for sustainability. That
new framework will include the commitment of the
political leadership - having confirmed their political
compromises - and of all sectors of civil society.

I also welcome the re-establishment of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau,
established under the auspices of the United Nations in
2006, which has now held its first meeting after two
years of interruption. My country views that forum as
a framework for interaction of critical importance in
breathing fresh life into the dialogue between Guinea-
Bissau and its international partners and in supporting
our Government's efforts to mobilize international
assistance. I would therefore like to express my deep
appreciation for the presence of the representatives
of the States members of the Security Council in that
forum.

In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to the United
Nations, its bodies and its agencies for the attention and
assistance that they have tirelessly provided to Guinea-
Bissau.

