Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for calling this meeting
at which the Council heard reports from the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia.
My delegation will confine its remarks to the report of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR).
First of all, we would like to congratulate the
President of the ICTR, Judge Erik Mose, and the
Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow and to thank
them for their reports.

This November, it is 10 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 995 (1994), establishing the
ICTR. This is the right time for us to take stock and to
make an assessment of the Tribunal's performance so
far. We recognize and commend the Tribunal for the
work done this year. We hope that the Tribunal will
improve its efficiency and effectiveness and will
identify areas for further improvement. Continuous
improvement is particularly important given the
relatively short period of time remaining for the ICTR
to complete its mandate.

Originally, the Office of the Prosecutor had
identified more than 300 "big fish" for prosecution
before the Tribunal completed its mandate. We note
that today the workload of the Office of the Prosecutor
has been reduced from the initial number of "big fish"
to a bare minimum. As a result, we now see that such
notorious suspects as Callixte Mbarushimana are no
longer being targeted for prosecution. Instead, he is
being compensated for lost income from his United
Nations employment. My Government considers this to
be not only a slap in the face of the international
community, but also a mockery of justice. We urge the
Tribunal again to consider bringing that individual to
justice.

Based on the numbers provided by the Tribunal,
we note that by the end of its mandate the Tribunal will
have completed its work on only 25.6 per cent of the
number of suspects originally considered to be "big
fish" by the Tribunal itself. But for even that work to
be completed, the Tribunal will have to ensure that all
trials and appeals currently under way are expedited
and completed. The Tribunal must ensure that it
commences proceedings on all cases not yet begun. It
has to ensure that all indictees still at large are arrested
and prosecution started. The Tribunal has to rationalize
its internal management systems, although there has
been tremendous improvement in organization in
recent days. All States must cooperate fully with the
Tribunal.

We are concerned that late or non-payment of
assessed contributions of Member States to the
Tribunal has resulted in serious financial difficulties.
This has resulted in recruitment freezes and
consequently slowed down the Tribunal's work. This
slowdown comes at a time when we expect the
Tribunal to be working steadily towards implementing
its completion strategy. It is imperative that Member
States make their contributions on time, in full and
without conditions, if we are to realize the goals
outlined in the completion strategy.

Rwanda is concerned not only about the
Tribunal's efforts to meet the expected level of
delivery, but also that the Tribunal's completion
strategy should not become an escape strategy for
suspects not yet brought to justice. The idea of
transferring cases from the Tribunal to Rwanda, as
envisaged in the Tribunal's completion strategy,
addresses our concerns. The Government of Rwanda
considers the transfer of cases to Rwanda a key factor
in ensuring that all major genocide suspects and
perpetrators face justice, even after the completion of
the Tribunal's mandate.

The Government of Rwanda is ready to receive
all cases that will not have been completed at the end
of the Tribunal's mandate. We therefore urge the
Tribunal to expedite the process leading to an effective
transfer of those cases.

Rwanda commends the efforts of the Tribunal in
tracking fugitives. We also appreciate the commitment
by some Member States to offer support and
cooperation to the Tribunal by arresting and
transferring the suspects to the seat of the Tribunal. We
specifically commend the joint efforts between the
Tribunal and the Governments of the Netherlands and
South Africa in arresting and transferring Ephreim
Setako and Ephreim Kanyarukiga, respectively.

However, we still note that there is a significant
number of suspects whom the Tribunal has indicted,
such as Felicien Kabuga, Ngirabatware and others, who
remain, not only at large but in the territories of some
Member States. We wish to note with dismay that some
States have proved to be reluctant to cooperate with the
Tribunal in arresting and handing over such fugitives to
the Tribunal. We urge the Tribunal to exhibit greater
transparency when reporting and discussing this matter.
We particularly request the Tribunal always to inform,
report and involve us in discussions on the level of
cooperation received from Member States in dealing
with this challenge. Though the majority of fugitives
are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are
others who are in States other than the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we have suggested that the
Prosecutor, as a way of enhancing transparency in this
matter, also name those other States that are harbouring
fugitives.

My Government appreciates the support of the
international community, which enabled it to construct
a detention facility in Rwanda that meets international
standards. We expect that convicts will now serve
sentences in Rwanda, which will contribute to the
process of reconciliation and healing, and eradicating
the culture of impunity, as the people will now be able
to make a direct link between crimes committed and
punishments rendered, which has been missing for all
this time.

We would also like to note that Rwanda will
require support in training its investigators, lawyers
and judges, as well as upgrading its court facilities and
infrastructure, in order to handle these trials with the
highest level of professionalism and efficiency. We
shall require support from the international community
in our bid to make our efforts a success. We welcome
subsequent monitoring, but this will have to be
preceded by initial capacity-building, and I wish to
reiterate that Rwanda needs assistance in this area in
the same way as the States in the Balkans need such
assistance, and they are being assisted.

My delegation would like to bring to the attention
of the Security Council the plight of many of the
survivors of the 1994 genocide. They live in conditions
of enormous hardship. To date, most genocide
survivors, particularly the orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence, are suffering from abject poverty,
HIV and limited access to education and medical care,
to mention only a few problems. We urge the
international community to recognize the seriousness
of the problem and support the General Assembly draft
resolution which is being tabled in the plenary of the
General Assembly in this session.

Security of witnesses who testify before the
Tribunal is another major concern of the Government
of Rwanda. At least one prosecution witness was
recently killed. Several others are reported to be living
under threats. My Government continues
investigations, arrest and prosecution of all those
suspected of taking part in these heinous crimes. We
have also invited the Tribunal, particularly the
Registrar, to a cooperation review meeting. The
meeting is expected to draw up a document on the
policy and framework for cooperation in key areas,
including witness protection. We have proposed to the
Registrar that this meeting take place in the first week
of December, and we expect a positive response from
the Registrar.

Finally, Rwanda is very much committed to
cooperation with, and support to, the Tribunal, and we
are happy that the President and the Prosecutor of the
Tribunal are acknowledging the level of cooperation
that we are extending to the Tribunal, and we pledge to
continue extending cooperation to the extent we can.
We also recognize the attention and support of the
international community given to Rwanda in its bid to
uphold justice and rebuild the country on the basis of
unity, rule of law and reconciliation.

Through you, my delegation wishes to thank all
members of the Security Council for their support to
the Tribunal and to Rwanda.

