Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We, too,
would like to thank Mr. Holmes for the up-to-date
information that he provided, informing us about the
situation in that part of the African region. We share his
concerns regarding the deteriorating security situation
there, which has further impeded humanitarian
assistance programmes.

We regret the fact that, in spite of the good
intentions of the international community, including
the Security Council, the civilian population, in
particular displaced persons and refugees from the
three countries to which he referred, continue to lack
protection and that the situation continues to be one of
total impunity. Given the difficult situation on the
ground, in which, we have heard, women and girls are
being raped and subjected to other acts of abuse and
children are being recruited by militias and groups
involved in conflict, we are bogged down in seemingly
technical discussions about the United Nations
presence, the presence of the African Union in the case
of Darfur and the multinational presence in the case of
Chad. We see the consequences of these delays in
terms of human lives lost.

Like others, we are of the view that the resolution
of the Darfur crisis is the key to restoring stability to
the Sudan and to the region as a whole, in particular
Chad and the Central African Republic. In this regard,
we support all the efforts that are being made,
including the work undertaken by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and by the
African Union mediator, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, to
consult with the various parties to conflict with a view
to moving the peace process forward.

We also welcome the progress that has been made
in the context of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
in the south, with regard to which OCHA will continue
its efforts. In that connection, it is important that the
Government take steps to implement a social
development plan in the area.

We also consider the agreement signed by the
Sudanese Government and the United Nations to be a
positive tool with a view to facilitating the distribution
of humanitarian assistance. In this regard, we would
like to ask Mr. Holmes what he believes the Security
Council could do to monitor the full implementation of
the agreement, which we believe is very important for
protecting the civilian population by facilitating
humanitarian assistance.

We would also like to ask whether OCHA has
taken measures in preparation for the forthcoming
rainy season so as to ensure that access to humanitarian
assistance is not further impeded in that area.

