Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation fully
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Namibia, who spoke also in his
capacity as coordinator of the non-aligned caucus.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution, of which we are a sponsor, because we
strongly believe that the Council must act to stop the
killing of Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories. It is more than two months since the current
situation began, and to date more than 300 Palestinian
civilians have been killed and many thousands
wounded at the hands of Israeli security forces, who,

despite Council resolution 1322 (2000) of 7 October
2000, continue to use excessive and disproportionate
force. The match is clearly an uneven one: stones and
catapults against automatic rifles, artillery, tanks and
helicopter gunships. The Council cannot continue to
watch from the sidelines and do practically nothing.

The Security Council, which is quick to intervene
in other conflict situations and to protect civilians
caught in other armed conflicts, must now do the same
to defuse the situation and to provide a modicum of
protection for the Palestinian civilians. For the Council
not to do so after more than two months would be a
dereliction of its responsibilities with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The negotiations on the text of the draft
resolution before us have been protracted, covering
several weeks. The sponsors of the draft resolution
have demonstrated their flexibility and their spirit of
accommodation. Deadline after deadline has been
given, and the sponsors have indicated their
preparedness to consider concrete proposals on the
text. Unfortunately, to date, no concrete
counterproposals on language or amendments have
been made, which only shows that there is a lack of
seriousness on the part of some members of the
Council with respect to considering the text.

Those opposed to the Council taking action on
the draft resolution have argued for more time to allow
for the two parties, that is Israel and Palestine, to arrive
at an agreement between themselves over larger issues,
which might include the establishment of such a
monitoring force. But that is subjecting the
establishment of a United Nations force to the vagaries
of a tortuous and uncertain peace process. In the
process, the killing of Palestinian civilians will continue
unchecked, and the toll in terms of deaths and injuries
will mount over the coming days and weeks. That is
clearly unacceptable to my delegation and to the other
sponsors of the draft resolution.

The proposed monitoring force is intended to
calm the situation on the ground so that further deaths
and injuries can be avoided. Indeed, such a monitoring
force would be an important confidence-building
measure, which would in fact contribute constructively
to the peace process. It was for that purpose that my
Minister for Foreign Affairs travelled to New York,
along with several of his colleagues from the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), under

S/PV.4248

 

the leadership of the Foreign Minister of Qatar,
representing the chairmanship of the OIC summit. My
minister and his colleagues addressed the Council and
made a strong plea for the establishment of a United
Nations protection force. They were honoured to have
been able to address the Council, and had hoped that
their pleas would have convinced members of the
Council to take action to create such a force.

The idea of a United Nations protection force was
also directly addressed by President Yasser Arafat
when he came to the Council on 10 November to make
his case. It is therefore a matter of deep regret and
profound dismay that, in spite of modifications made to
the original proposal and the flexibility shown by the
sponsors of the draft resolution, there was no concrete
engagement by those that are opposed to the proposal,
other than their saying that the time is not opportune.
But when is the opportune time? We believe that such
an opportune time will not come in the foreseeable
future, if at all, as long as Israel, the occupying Power,
cannot accept such a monitoring force. From what we
have just heard, such a force is clearly unacceptable to
Israel, except, perhaps - and it is a big perhaps - in
the context of a comprehensive bilateral peace
agreement with the Palestinians, whenever that may be
arrived at.

We do not believe that the fate of such an
important - indeed, indispensable - United Nations
monitoring force should be subject to the uncertainties
of the peace process. We believe that if the Council is
serious about establishing such a monitoring force,
now - not some uncertain date in the future - is the
time to do it.

May I conclude by expressing my delegation's
deep and sincere appreciation for the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by the European Union, specifically by
Foreign Minister Vedrine of France. We thank him for
the efforts made, but regret that, given the ongoing
violence and the slaying of civilians in the occupied
territories, which continue unabated, my delegation
and the other sponsors of the draft resolution do not
have the luxury or the patience to wait out what is
likely to be a long, protracted process.

We also support the efforts of the Secretary-
General, but we believe that such efforts can be
pursued in parallel with the efforts of the Council. We
do not believe that these efforts contradict each other.

