Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first convey my
delegation's appreciation to you, Madam President, for
having convened this important meeting. I also wish to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
for his briefing and to acknowledge the presence of the
Foreign Ministers of Australia, Luxembourg, Malaysia
and the Netherlands.

Almost two months ago, in this very Chamber, all
of us were mourning and paying tribute to the innocent
victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 (see S/PV.7221). We grieved with the families and friends
who had lost loved ones, and supported them in their
pain.

Today, the sorrow remains and the bereaved are
anxious to seek solace. The international community
owes them justice, and we need to reassure the victims'
families that we still stand with them. The Security
Council in particular needs to continue its support
for and strong commitment to the implementation of
resolution 2166 (2014), working together with all the
relevant actors.

Indonesia welcomes the preliminary report on the
tragedy of Flight MH-17 conducted by the Dutch Safety
Board, together with other investigation teams. We
support the objective ofthe investigation to examine the
cause of the accident and to prevent similar incidents.
We also take note of the findings that, at the time of
the incident, Flight MH-17 was flying in unrestricted
airspace above the restricted area mentioned by the
aviation authority and that the aircraft was in an
airworthy condition at departure, with no technical
malfunctions.

While there has been little progress in the
coordinated access to the wreckage site by the
international team of air safety investigators, we support
the intention of the Dutch Safety Board to conduct a
further investigation of the site should the possibility
arise. Indonesia stands ready to continue to render
our assistance through our National Transportation
Safety Committee for the ongoing investigation. In
that context, we wish to underscore the importance
of a thorough and comprehensive investigation with a
strong emphasis on transparency and impartiality.

We are cognizant of the fact that the report is
preliminary. However, it is based on the initial findings
that "the aircraft was penetrated by a large number of
high-energy objects from outside". Evidently, more work
needs to be undertaken. It is important to emphasize
that the investigation must include unrestricted access
to the immediate site and ensure the safety and security
of the investigation team. Therefore, we request that
a detailed and thorough investigation of the crash of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 continue. At the same
time, we also reiterate our strong demand that those
responsible for the incident be held accountable.

