Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the activities of the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague.

My Offices continue to be firmly focused on the
same priorities, which are expeditiously completing
trials and appeals, locating and arresting the remaining
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and assisting national
jurisdictions in investigating and prosecuting war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

In The Hague, in just a few months, the ICTY
will complete its mandate and close its doors.
Judgements in the two final cases, already mentioned
by the President - Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladie and
Prosecutor v. Prlic' et al. - continue to be expected
by the end of November. The successful completion
of those important cases will be a fitting tribute to the
long fight forjustice that the Council began in 1993.
During the reporting period, my Office made further
significant strides in prosecuting the cases transferred
from the ICTY to the Mechanism. We successfully
prepared and submitted our written arguments in the
Karadeic' and Seselj appeals. We also continued our
pre-trial preparations in the Prosecutor v. Mieo Stanis'ic'
and Stojan Zupljanin case. As the President reported
earlier, that trial is expected to commence next week. I
can assure the Council that my Office will expedite the
presentation of its evidence in that case consistent with
our duty to prove the charges beyond reasonable doubt.

At the Arusha branch, no trials or appeals are
currently ongoing. However, my Office continued to
investigate and litigate proceedings arising out of the
ICTR's cases that were concluded. During the reporting
period, we also commenced a thorough review of the
case files against the three fugitives expected to be tried
by the Mechanism so as to be prepared to commence
those trials as soon as possible following an arrest.

That brings me to our ongoing efforts to locate
and arrest the eight fugitives indicted by the ICTR
who remain at large. I would like to underscore our
commitment to arresting and bringing those fugitives to
justice. The victims of the Rwandan genocide deserve
nothing less. There are three major developments on
which I would like to report today.

First, during the reporting period, we established
two task forces, focused on Africa and Europe
respectively, to support our fugitive tracking efforts.
Those task forces bring our Office together with a
number of key partners, particularly INTERPOL and
national law enforcement agencies, in an operational
structure that will be flexible and responsive. We would
like to express our deep appreciation to the Government
of Rwanda and the Secretary General of INTERPOL
for their strong support to the establishment of those
task forces.

Secondly, as a result of our ongoing review, my
Office is transitioning to a structure that is more
appropriate to our operational requirements. We will
take a more proactive approach to our work, which
means pursuing new lines of investigations, including
financial and telecommunications. That in turn requires
the right investigative and analytical capacity.
Finally, my Office is aware that the window of
opportunity to locate and arrest fugitives will not
remain open forever. At the same time, we recognize the
budgetary constraints facing the United Nations, and
the Council's expectations in that regard. Quite simply,
we recognize that our efforts to locate the remaining
fugitives cannot continue forever. Accordingly, in our
2018-2019 budget, my Office is proposing to temporarily
increase our resources with the clear understanding
that they are time bound. If we do not demonstrate a
track record of success over the coming few years, we
will have to consider alternatives, which would include
the option of fully transferring responsibility for the
fugitives to national authorities. We would be grateful
for Security Council support for that proposal.

During the reporting period, my Offices continued
to assist national judiciaries prosecuting war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia. We are providing access to our
evidence collection, assisting colleagues with advice on
concrete cases, engaging with counterparts to identify
challenges and solutions and monitoring developments
at both the country and regional levels.

In terms of our efforts, I would like to report
briefly on a few examples. We are committed to
deepening our cooperation with tRwandan authorities
and strengthening the exchange of information and
evidence. Accordingly, during the reporting period,
we began planning for improvements in our electronic
databases to increase the amount of evidence made
available to Rwandan authorities and the ease with
which they can access that evidence. We are also now
discussing with the Prosecutor General of Rwanda the
practical steps we can take to ensure better coordination
and communication between our offices.

Just a few weeks ago, and together with the
Prosecutor General of Rwanda, we conducted a
five-day, intensive skills-based training for prosecutors
from Rwanda and other East African countries on
the investigation and prosecution of war crimes.
Through that kind of peer-to-peer capacity-building
and knowledge transfer, we hope to better assist our
national colleagues in improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of their work.

Finally, later this month, my Office will launch
the translation of our publication on the prosecution
of conflict-related sexual violence at the ICTY into
the Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian language. We further
plan to prepare a comprehensive training programme
for judiciaries in the former Yugoslavia. We hope that
national prosecutors and judges can benefit from our
work and achieve greater justice for the victims of
sexual violence crimes.

I have previously reported that regional judicial
cooperation in war crimes justice in the former
Yugoslavia is heading in the wrong direction, and,
unfortunately, that is still the case today. My written
reports (see S/2017/434 and S/2017/436) provide further
details on this and other matters in the area of national
war crimes justice.

We hope that the relevant national authorities
will give our reports full consideration and undertake
concrete steps to resolve the significant issues that we
have identified. However, today, I am compelled to
report on an issue that must be deeply concerning to this
Council and the international community - namely,
the ongoing, widespread denial of crimes and refusal to
accept facts established by the ICTY and ICTR.

The horrors of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda are recorded in the Council's deliberations
and resolutions. All of us remember the images and
reports in the media. In order to establish the facts
and hold individuals accountable for their crimes, the
Council created the ICTY and ICTR. Over two decades
of work, independent and impartial international judges,
who ensured fair trials and heard immense bodies of
evidence, determined the truth of what happened. After
what took place in Rwanda 50 years after the Holocaust,
a new generation came to understand the meaning of
genocide. As the ICTR established, it is a universally
known fact that between 6 April 1994 and 17 July 1994,
there was a genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi ethnic
group. The conflicts in the former Yugoslavia taught
the world a new vocabulary for the horrors inflicted on
innocent civilians: ethnic cleansing. In case after case,
the ICTY found that throughout the former Yugoslavia,
senior political and military officials implemented
criminal campaigns of ethnic cleansing.

After the Council first saw the compelling evidence
of mass graves around Srebrenica, my Office proved
beyond reasonable doubt that genocide was committed
in Srebrenica in 1995 through the execution of more
than 7,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys, while up
to 30,000 women, children and elderly were forcibly
expelled. Yet today, genocide is denied. Ethnic cleansing
is denied. The individual guilt of senior political and
military leaders is denied.

A few days ago, the Minister of Education of the
Republika Srpska declared that he would ban textbooks
that teach students about the recent past, including
about the Srebrenica genocide and the siege of Sarajevo.
Those facts are taught in classrooms around the world
but not in the country where the crimes were committed.
Tomorrow night, a ultranationalist singer who has been
banned in several countries is expected to perform at
a benefit concert in Mostar for the six accused in the
case of the Prosecutor v. Prlic' et al. Such unacceptable
provocations, which are but the latest in a very long list,
are an insult to the victims, to this Council and to all
who believe in justice.

The message of denial and revisionism is loud
and clear. They recognize their victims but not the
other side's. The other side's war criminals are their
heroes. When irresponsible officials use division,
discrimination and hate to secure power, conflict
and atrocities can gain a logic of their own. That was
true two decades ago when the genocide and ethnic
cleansing began and it remains true today.

With the closure of the ICTR and the upcoming
closure of the ICTY, it is now more important than
ever to address that challenge. In order to secure a
peaceful future, there must be a shared agreement on
the recent past.

In conclusion, the ICTY will complete its mandate
before the end of the year. That will close an important
chapter that the Council began 24 years ago. Yet, the
work of justice for the victims of war crimes in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda will continue. My
Office will expeditiously litigate the small number of
remaining trials and appeals before the Mechanism.
We will intensify our efforts to locate and arrest the
remaining eight ICTR fugitives so that the victims of
their crimes can finally see them brought to justice.
And, crucially, prosecutions of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide must continue in
national courts in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
which my Office will support. We are grateful for the
continued support of the Security Council.

