Mr. Egeland: It is very good to be back one last
time in this capacity. Over the past three years, I have
been encouraged to see that concern for the protection
of civilians has steadily gained prominence in the
Security Council's deliberations and has been reflected
in United Nations humanitarian and peace operations.
When fighting takes place predominantly amidst the
civilian population, or is waged directly against them,
and when the main consequential losses are sustained
by civilians, then it is imperative that the safety,
security and well-being of civilians be at the heart of
our approach to international security and crisis
management. The real measure of our United Nations
success will be judged by the extent to which our
actions have made a difference in securing the
protection, the rights and the freedoms of the civilian
population.

Last year, as Members of the United Nations,
Council members solemnly pledged to accept the
responsibility to protect civilian populations. We are,
sadly, still far away from seeing that responsibility
translate into predictable and adequate action to
provide protection for all beleaguered and threatened
communities irrespective of time, place and
circumstance. That responsibility to protect must be
depoliticized, become a truly shared interest and
translate into joint action by all members of the
Council and by our global Organization. Thereby,
members will live up to the expectations of tens of
millions of vulnerable men, women and children for a
United Nations that is united.

I have seen during my tenure as Emergency
Relief Coordinator that we have succeeded in
providing security when in the end there was united
action taken by all members. We are seeing vast
progress in Liberia, in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in South Sudan thanks to
that. We have not had the same unity of purpose or
action in Darfur or in Gaza. Our readiness to act, to
06-63968
sanction and to fund must be the same in Uganda, in
Chad or Cote d'Ivoire as it is in Afghanistan, Kosovo
or Iraq. Our responsibility to protect must transcend
singular interests and become a core principle of
humanity across all civilizations. That is why this
regular thematic debate on the protection of civilians
matters so much. When the lives and safety of civilians
are at stake, regardless of where, neither strategic nor
economic or other political interests should deter
members from acting swiftly upon their united
responsibility to protect.

Since my briefing to the Council in December
2003 (see S/PV.4877) - my first such briefing - we
have witnessed a steady decline in the number of
conflicts. Recent analysis indicates that the number of
conflicts has indeed declined by 40 per cent since
1989, yet we have been far less successful in affecting
the conduct of hostilities and in altering the impact of
conflict. Parties to conflict have increasingly
demonstrated a wilful disregard for the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law. In fact, civilians have
become the primary object of violence more frequently
than in the past. Evidence indicates that violent attacks
against non-combatants increased by 55 per cent
between 1989 and 2005, with the most significant
increase occurring in the last five years.

The reasons for that are many. The proliferation
of non-State and informal armed groups and their
supply of ever more sophisticated weaponry and
equipment is one reason. Another one is the
intentional, reckless and often disproportionate use of
military weaponry and tactics with little or no regard
for their impact on the civilian population.

For example, the Iraqi population wakes up every
morning to a staggering number of civilians who have
been executed, maimed and tortured by sectarian
militias cleansing entire neighbourhoods and areas of
men, women and children belonging to the "wrong"
religious or ethnic group. More than 100 civilians a
day, an estimated 30,000 since May 2006 alone, have
been killed. Nowhere in the world do more civilians
die right now from violence directed against them than
in Iraq.

In Gaza, since September, Israel has launched
some 15,000 artillery shells, mostly into densely
populated areas, killing civilians and children and
destroying essential infrastructure. Palestinian militants
have launched some 1,700 devices into Israel with no
06-63968

attempt to distinguish between combatants and Israeli
civilians. Suicide bombings aimed at causing
maximum casualties and terror among civilians have
become a regular feature of violence in too many
conflicts.

And then there is the use of indiscriminate
weapons. In August, I voiced my outrage at the
unacceptably large number of cluster bomb strikes in
southern Lebanon. The use of cluster munitions, by
anyone, anywhere in the world, is, in my view,
immoral. Just like landmines, they continue to kill and
maim even after the conflict has ended. The victims are
children at play or adults trying to rebuild their
communities out of the rubble. In southern Lebanon
alone, we have more than a million unexploded
bomblets that lie hidden in fields, olive groves, and
gardens, causing one of the biggest impediments to a
speedy return of the displaced and to the rapid
reconstruction of homes and livelihoods. Pending their
eventual prohibition, I urge Council members to
support a moratorium on the use of cluster munitions, a
weapon which belongs in the garbage cans of history
along with landmines.

In reviewing my seven briefings on the protection
of civilians to the Council, you will find that the key
concerns are still the same as those listed in my
original ten-point action plan. They have been the
recurrent themes of all my country-specific briefings to
the Security Council over the past three and a half
years.

The first pillar of my 2003 commitments was to
work with the Council to improve humanitarian access
to those most in need of protection and assistance. At
that time, we at the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) estimated that access
was constrained or obstructed for more than 10 million
people in some 20 conflict-affected countries. There
have since been definite improvements, most notably
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
northern Uganda and southern Sudan. We have seen
that concerted efforts by States, peacekeepers and
humanitarian organizations can deliver positive change
and sustained access.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the country with the largest war-affected
population, humanitarian organizations and
peacekeepers have established a common access and
protection strategy based on their distinct and
3
complementary roles. Access and protection have
improved, as peacekeepers prioritize those locations
where security has most constrained humanitarian
operations. However, such actions have clear resource
implications for peacekeeping operations and require
the Security Council to consider force composition as
well as resource requirements, if peacekeeping
missions are to fulfil this important element of their
mandate.

Despite such improvements, however, serious
obstacles to access persist in many countries. Arbitrary
arrest and detention, verbal and physical abuse, and
bureaucratic impediments continue to be used by
authorities around the world to restrict our access to
populations in need.

The most brutal means of denying access is the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian workers. The
murder of 17 Action Contre La Faim (ACF) workers in
Sri Lanka on 5 August was a vicious reminder of this
fact. The targeted abduction and murder of aid workers
in Sudan, Afghanistan and Iraq have effectively cut off
many of the neediest civilians from our assistance.

Individual incidents such as these are shocking,
and the overall trends are even more alarming. In 1997,
39 humanitarian workers were killed. By 2005, this
number had risen to an annual toll of 61. The number
of violent incidents involving humanitarian workers
more than doubled in the same period, with the most
attacks occurring in the Sudan and Somalia. It is the
national staff of humanitarian organizations that face
the greatest risks. Members of the media, acting as the
world's witnesses to atrocities and humanitarian needs,
alerting all of us to our responsibilities, have also been
increasingly subject to attack. In Iraq alone, 26
journalists have been killed this year.

Attacks on humanitarian personnel have a terrible
impact on our ability to sustain humanitarian
operations. I urge the Security Council to address more
systematically the deliberate targeting of our
humanitarian and associated staff. These acts must be
unanimously condemned by the Council and the
perpetrators held to account.

My second long-term concern is protection and
assistance for internally displaced persons. Large-scale
internal displacement continues to be one of the
principal characteristics of conflict. While the global
refugee population has dropped by 20 per cent over the
past three years, the number of internally displaced
persons declined only by a modest six percent in 2005,
despite resolution of long-standing conflicts and
significant return movements. And we have seen the
numbers increase again over the past several months,
with waves of new displacement in many countries.

Since 2004, I have repeatedly briefed the Security
Council on my missions to Darfur, where direct
targeting of civilians has led to repeated cycles of
displacement. People have now been displaced
multiple times as the victims of shifting conflict and
restrictions on humanitarian access. Just last October,
fighting in Sri Lanka led to 1,000 families being
displaced for the fourth time from the northern part of
the Batticalca district when humanitarian access was
suspended.

States bear the direct responsibility for the
protection of all civilians, including internally
displaced persons, and must be held to their
obligations. In at least 12 countries, six million
internally displaced people receive no assistance or
protection from their Governments. The humanitarian
community has squarely taken on the long-standing
challenge of internal displacement through our
humanitarian reform agenda.

We now have more predictable operational
leadership for the protection and assistance of
internally displaced persons, established through the
so-called cluster process or through humanitarian
partnerships of United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations with Red Cross and Red
Crescent partners. The establishment of the Central
Emergency Response Fund is also a significant
advance and makes headway towards ensuring a
predictable and effective response to acute protection
needs. While those developments will go some way
towards improving protection and assistance on the
ground, they cannot replace the responsibility of States.

The third concern is sexual violence. Rape and
sexual violence are not simply an unfortunate
consequence of conflict; increasingly, they are a
deliberate and devastating weapon against individuals
as well as targeted communities. Despite recent
ground-breaking International Criminal Court
indictments for the use of rape as a war crime, sexual
violence continues unchecked and unchallenged.

I am outraged at our almost complete inability to
address this scourge. And I am deeply disturbed that
we have not taken more decisive action to prevent it, as
06-63968
well as respond to it, through our political and
humanitarian means. In Darfur, the International
Committee of the Red Cross reported an explosive
increase in sexual assaults this summer. Over a five-
week period, more than 200 women were attacked
around Kalma camp alone. Senior Government
officials in the Sudan continue to deny that such acts
occur, and they have yet to take any serious action.
While this persists, those who rape will continue to
enjoy more freedom of movement than those living in
the camps.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 25,000
cases of rape were reported last year, with thousands
more occurring this year and countless others
unknown. Targeted violence on that scale requires
much more effective and concerted action by the
Security Council. Resolution 1325 (2000) gave us clear
standards for the specific protection of women in
conflict, but we must now require stronger reporting,
full compliance and legal recourse.

In Goma, there have been 10 prosecutions for
sexual violence. That has already had some effect.
Women victims, no longer branded as deviants, are
now seen as survivors of an atrocious crime. With the
stigma broken, more women are seeking assistance.
When I met presidential candidate Kabila earlier this
year, I asked that military, political and administrative
leaders be tried and held accountable for rape
committed on their watch. Mr. Kabila then agreed to do
so if elected. We now need him and other leaders of
conflict-ridden countries to live up to their
responsibilities.

I ask the Council to consider the pervasive nature
of sexual violence when reviewing peacekeeping
mandates as well, to ensure that force composition
includes dedicated female policing units and that
adequate support is provided for response and
prosecution where required.

Over the past three years, we have seen, at long
last, modest progress being made on the issue of
children associated with fighting forces. The numbers
have declined some 20 per cent, with an estimated
250,000 children still being exploited as soldiers,
cooks and spies and for sexual purposes. Progress has
been due mainly to the large-scale demobilization of
children in West Africa, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda, even though we continue to see
active recruitment in many countries. Long-term
06-63968
support for reintegration is critical in order to protect
children from recruitment or re-recruitment.

After my most recent mission to Uganda, I
remain very concerned about the conditions of children
held by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). I welcome
the recent presidential statement from the Council
(S/PRST/2006/45) calling upon the LRA to
immediately release all children, women and non-
combatants. The situation in Sri Lanka is also
particularly disturbing, with repeated reports of
continuing recruitment. I hope that the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam will honour its commitment to
release all children from its ranks by 1 January.

I would now like to turn to a number of trends
and reflect on how we can improve the protection of
civilians under three distinct categories: countries
emerging from conflict, those where conflict is deeply
entrenched and those where the effect of conflict and
violence against civilians must be addressed before it
takes root.

In countries emerging from conflict, such as
Angola, Burundi, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Southern
Sudan, protection concerns remain, even though
emergency relief may no longer be our most pressing
priority. In such situations, the Council must recognize
that protection needs relate more specifically to issues
of reconciliation, transitional justice and land or
property rights. The inequalities and perceived
injustices that stem from violations of human rights, if
left to fester, will challenge sustainable peace and
security.

Missions need to be properly resourced in their
final phases, and protection-of-civilians indicators need
to be used to better define those resources. Otherwise,
where mandates are short-sighted and the foundations
of stable recovery are deeply flawed, we will find
ourselves repeatedly returning to unfinished work, as
we have now done for the fifth time in Haiti.

My second category includes those many
countries that face widespread and chronic protection
crises resulting from repeated cycles of violence. We
must now recognize that the conflict related to the
Middle East crisis has become so deeply entrenched
that it has created one of the world's most serious
protection crises. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimates that there
are at least 1.2 million refugees from Iraq living in
neighbouring countries, with unconfirmed figures
indicating that 40,000 to 60,000 people a month are
crossing into Syria seeking refuge, with totally
inadequate support. The worst aspects of the protection
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territories are
reflected in the deaths of more than 110 children under
the age of 17 this year - more than twice the number
of deaths in 2005.

The complex nature of those conflicts and the use
of terror seriously challenge our capability to ensure
the protection of civilians. But that should not deter
members from challenging the disproportionate use of
force, attacks against protected civilian installations
and restrictions on humanitarian access and operations,
whenever they occur.

During my tenure as Emergency Relief
Coordinator, I have repeatedly come before the Council
to highlight the neglected protection concerns in
Somalia. More than 400,000 Somalis live in deplorable
conditions after having endured multiple
displacements, years of drought and, now, massive
flooding. The rising tension between the Islamic Courts
and neighbouring forces may lead to even more
catastrophic conflict. With improvements in security in
some parts of the country, I am concerned that the
United Nations policy of non-engagement with the
Islamic Courts will bind the hands and feet of the
humanitarian agencies, preventing us from meeting our
humanitarian mandate to provide assistance to those
most in need, wherever they are.

In Darfur, I deeply regret that, despite one of the
largest humanitarian operations in the world and
massive, sustained advocacy, civilians continue to be
subjected to rape, murder and repeated forced
displacement. The number of displaced persons has
doubled since 2004, and an unprecedented two thirds
of the population is now in need of emergency
assistance.

In Uganda, systematic advocacy and the
concerted attention of the Council have begun to bear
fruit, as the current fragile dialogue with the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army have led to the first prolonged cessation of
hostilities this decade.

Thirdly, let me just mention the countries that
must concern us because they are the ones where we
see the re-emergence of concern for the protection of
civilians. I have already expressed my concerns about
the serious threat to civilian protection in Sri Lanka.

Myanmar now has a displaced population of over half a
million people to whom humanitarian access is
severely restricted, and the situation remains of serious
concern. I would like to stress the importance of the
continued dialogue with the authorities of Myanmar
under the Secretary-General's good-offices mandate. I
hope that those discussions will yield tangible results
in the near future.

In conclusion, the opportunities to strengthen the
protection of civilians lie in the hands of the Council. I
urge members to firmly exploit the opportunities and
use the tools at their disposal. I will leave the Council
with five issues as future priorities.

First, I urge the Council to remain committed to
regular thematic briefings and debriefings following
the field missions of my successors, briefings by my
colleagues, and consultations with non-governmental
organizations under the Arria formula. That will equip
the Council with the best information available to
facilitate its decisions. My Office remains committed
to establishing effective monitoring systems to assist
the Council. We will be able to provide a systematic
analysis of protection trends, and we are establishing a
comprehensive information management system for the
protection of civilians.

Secondly, the Security Council must make more
effective use of the mechanisms at its disposal to
prevent violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law. Targeted sanctions can
be used more effectively to support the creation of a
more secure environment for the civilian population by
sending a clear message to the perpetrators that such
violations are unacceptable.

Thirdly, conflict mediation and the timely and
effective use of good offices constitute a critical tool at
our disposal, which we must engage at the earliest
opportunity. International protection, whether by
peacekeepers or humanitarians, can be only an interim
response. Civilians will continue to suffer until
protection is complemented by conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and political solutions. It is
important to ensure that humanitarian negotiation and
mediation skills continue to be actively deployed even
in the seemingly most intransigent environments. I
welcome the efforts that have been taken to strengthen
the capacity of the Department of Political Affairs, as
well as the introduction of the Peacemaker Initiative.
Our close cooperation with that Initiative will be key to
ensuring that protection concerns are adequately
reflected in peace processes and mediation initiatives.

Fourthly, there is a need for comprehensive,
predictable funding. The establishment of the Central
Emergency Response Fund is a significant advance,
and will help us to make headway towards ensuring a
predictable humanitarian response to acute protection
crises. However, the impact of more predictable
humanitarian funding will be limited if there is
insufficient funding for peace mediation, peacebuilding
or peacekeeping operations to address their mandated
protection responsibilities. I urge the Council to ensure
that appropriate and adequate resources are available to
peacekeeping missions that enable missions to
discharge their responsibilities for the protection of
civilians in all phases of a mission's mandate.

My final concern is to ensure that sufficient
guidance and support are provided for peacekeeping
operations. My Office is working with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to develop preliminary
guidance, and efforts are also under way to work with
regional organizations to better define their role in the
protection of civilians. It is important to expand our
notions of the protection role that peacekeeping
operations can play, not only through the provision of
physical protection, but through supporting civil order,
the restoration of judicial systems and the
strengthening of the rule of law. We must also ensure,
along with our colleagues in peacekeeping and political
affairs, that we are able to develop and draw on the
skills of regional organizations.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
members of the Council for their attention to these
issues of grave and mutual concern today and
throughout the duration of my tenure as Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs. In times
of difficulty for humanitarian access overall, my access
to the Council has always been impeccable. Together,
we can make a continued positive difference. We
cannot afford to fail.

