Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui; Ambassador Alotaibi and Ms. Bihamba for
their briefings.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo occupies
an important geographical location, and its peace,
stability and political process also attract the broad
attention of the international community, in particular
the countries of the region. Currently, the country is
facing security and political challenges. The Security
Council should therefore assess the impact of various
factors on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and help the Congolese Government to
strengthen its security capacity-building and provide
constructive assistance, with an emphasis on seeking
African solutions to African problems.

China maintains that a political solution is the only
way to resolve the issues of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, and countries
of the region, are most familiar with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the surrounding
areas. The Security Council should continue to support
them in playing a leading role in mediation and
encourage organizations and countries of the region
to enhance communication and engagement with
Congolese parties through their respective channels. In
particular, we should focus on listening to the views
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and respecting its ownership of the political
process, as well as encouraging all the parties to take
concrete action in order to get back on a path to a
political settlement through dialogue and consultation,
with a view to effectively implementing the political
agreement of 31 December 2016. The international
community should work to address the root causes of the
conflict and help the country to deal with its social and
economic development issues, focusing on increased
investment in the areas of education, agriculture and
infrastructure construction.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
plays an important role in maintaining peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
China commends the courage and dedication of the
peacekeepers, who are risking their lives as they
work to deliver on their mandate. The international
community should improve its peacekeeping capacity-
building through bilateral and multilateral cooperation
in order to ensure peacekeepers' safety and security.

