Allow me to begin by acknowledging the work undertaken by Governments and international organizations to mitigate the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on the nutrition of the most vulnerable populations. I welcome Mr. Qu, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); Mr. Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP); and Mr. Egeland, Secretary-General of the Norwegian Refugee Council. We deeply appreciate their acceptance of our invitation to share their assessments of the impact of conflicts on food security. The COVID-19 pandemic has once again placed before us the unbearable evidence that in the twenty-first century, despite increasingly efficient production capacities, the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) of zero hunger is not guaranteed. FAO, which recognized the Dominican Republic as being among the countries that achieved the Millennium Development Goal of reducing hunger and malnutrition, indicates that my country is on track to attain that SDG. However, the current crisis threatens the possibility that many developing countries can eradicate hunger. The joint report produced by FAO, WFP, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health Organization and UNICEF, entitled The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2019, reveals that 821.6 million people are in a state of food insecurity. That is approximately 1 million more than the previous year, which suggests that the state of hunger has at least remained stagnant or has slightly worsened. The prospects of the social and economic crisis that will engulf the globe in the second half of 2020 portend negative developments. Economic inequality, extreme poverty, climate change and natural catastrophes, as well as conflicts, are undeniable factors that contribute to food insecurity. The rise of internal conflicts since 2010 is responsible for more than half of those suffering from chronic food insecurity. The unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) represented a milestone. The acknowledgement of a clear relationship between armed conflict and food insecurity provided the international community with guidelines to prevent such conflicts from becoming food crises for civilian populations. In that context, it is timely to apply the Framework for Action for Food Security and Nutrition in Protracted Crises of the Committee on World Food Security. I would also like to refer to the link between food insecurity and political stability. The evidence is irrefutable - food insecurity is a breeding ground for conflict, even more so if paired with inequality and institutional weakness. Hunger, an increase in social tensions and the displacement of populations can result in increased social and economic pressure for host countries, often affected with diverse vulnerabilities. Hunger affects more than 40 million people in Latin America and the Caribbean. Undernourishment quadrupled in Venezuela between 2014 and 2018. That occurred simultaneously with a severe economic recession and a mass exodus of people. The situation in Haiti, on the other hand, requires urgent attention and calls for the solidarity of the international community. According to the report published in January 2020 by WFP and FAO, 3.7 million Haitians are in a state of severe food insecurity. The lessons learned from Colombia serve as a reminder of the vicious circle of conflict, displacement of people and hunger. Timely actions are needed to improve food security and nutrition, and they must be understood as initiatives that contribute to peacekeeping. Early actions can mitigate the effects of conflict on livelihoods and access to food. This concern must remain on the agenda of the Security Council by means of humanitarian diplomacy and peacekeeping missions. There is no one-size-fits-all approach to multidimensional situations. Many countries affected by conflict also suffer the adverse effects of climate change, an interaction that, in already vulnerable contexts, implies a serious threat to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As often happens, women, children and the elderly, as well as refugees and internally displaced people, are among the most affected. It is imperative to combine efforts to strengthen the pillars of peace, security, development, the environment and humanitarian assistance of the United Nations. The Secretary-General, States, specialized agencies of the system, humanitarian and development actors and the affected communities themselves must have the information, analysis and early-warning tools and ensure concerted efforts to address conflict-induced food insecurity exacerbated by climate change, economic crises and, now, the COVID-19 pandemic. As I previously mentioned, the United Nations recognizes that the Dominican Republic has undertaken food security as a key component of its Government policies. We declared 2020 as the Year of the Consolidation of Food Security, based on a national plan to ensure that all Dominicans have access to proper nutrition and are protected against hunger. The priority given to food security requires greater commitment at the international level. We know that the world will not achieve its shared goals of development without satisfying its food and nutrition needs. We are pleased to have had the opportunity to reopen this debate during this critical moment in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, which currently constitutes a real global threat, in order to reflect on how to adapt our response during this complex situation.
