Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/696)
on the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and it is good to
have Foreign Minister Rabbani with us this afternoon.

It has been 16 years since the United States and the
international community took action in Afghanistan.
Despite all our efforts, the human cost of the conflict
remains staggering. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan documented over 5,200 civilian
casualties in just the first half of this year. Over 1,600
of these were fatalities, and tragically, 30 per cent of
these deaths were children.

After so many years and so much American blood
and treasure spent, it is useful to recite these statistics.
But however war-weary we are, it is the Afghan people,
of course, who pay the highest price for the conflict
there. Anti-Government forces are responsible for the
large majority of civilian casualties. Their actions are
too often indiscriminate and disproportionate. They
keep old grievances fresh and create new ones with
each passing day.

We are and we should be impatient with this war.
In his speech outlining a new strategy for the United
States in South Asia, President Trump said that his
first instinct was to pull out of Afghanistan, but after
studying the issue he concluded that the men and women
who have sacrificed so much in that conflict deserve to
have their sacrifice honoured with victory. Turning our
backs on Afghanistan would dishonour their memory
by leaving the world in an even more dangerous place
than when the conflict began.

That is why we welcome the results of the strategic
review of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. This is a timely moment for the United
Nations to take a step back and to ensure that its
Mission in Afghanistan is able to continue its role in
promoting peace and prosperity. United Nations support
for electoral reforms, peace and reconciliation, human
rights and women's issues will continue to be critical in
the years ahead. We look forward to continuing to work
with Special Representative Yamamoto and his team in
support of these shared goals.

The United States new South Asia strategy is
also well timed and makes clear that, ultimately, the
United States and the United Nations share the same
overarching goal in Afghanistan - a durable political
settlement that leads to lasting peace. The United States
will continue to support the Afghan Government and
security forces in their fight against the Taliban and in
their efforts to combat Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and other extremist groups. We do
not seek a permanent military presence in Afghanistan,
but we are prepared to assist Afghan forces for as long
as it takes to ensure that terrorists are never again able
to exploit Afghanistan's territory as a safe haven.

Our message to the Taliban and their supporters
is clear 4 they cannot win on the battlefield. The
only path to peace is through negotiations. They must
abandon violence, cut ties with international terrorism
and accept the Afghan constitution. We will continue to
support and encourage the immediate launch of peace
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban,
with no preconditions. We will provide support, but
the Unites States is committed to an Afghan-owned
political process to settle the conflict in Afghanistan.
The path towards a negotiated settlement is available.
The Taliban must choose to take that path.

Afghanistan's neighbours can also help. A central
tenet of our new South Asia strategy is the recognition
that Afghanistan's security and stability are tied to
the security and stability of the entire region. We call
on all regional Governments to support the Afghan
Government and to do what they can to bring the
Taliban to the negotiating table. Critically, we also call
upon Afghanistan's neighbours and all countries of the
region to unconditionally cease their support for armed
and violent extremist groups.

Finally, we support Council representatives
travelling to Afghanistan in the coming months to assess
the political and security environment there. Given
the continuing toll of the conflict and Afghanistan's
importance to peace and security in Central Asia, it
is critical that we see this conflict through the eyes of
those living it every day. We are all impatient to end
the conflict in Afghanistan, but our impatience can be
an asset if it is informed by the suffering of the Afghan
people and tempered by the need to never again allow
terrorists a safe haven in Afghanistan.

