Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express the gratitude of my delegation for the
convening of this important open debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding to discuss the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), prepared in
response to the Security Council presidential statement
of 20 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/l6), and I would like to
extend my thanks and gratitude to the Secretary-
General for presenting his report.

As I am sure that the Council presidency and
members are aware, the first part of my intervention will
be on behalf of both Egypt and Ireland, the co-chairs of
the meeting entitled "Post-Conflict Peacebuilding:
Contemporary Challenges and the Way Forward",
convened by the Governments of Egypt and Ireland in
Cairo on 18 and 19 May 2009. The meeting touched on
many of the issues contained in the report of the
Secretary-General under consideration today.

Egypt and Ireland took the initiative to convene
the Cairo meeting to engage senior officials from all
regional groups in a discussion on the contemporary
challenges and opportunities in peacebuilding and on
possible solutions to those challenges. The Cairo
meeting took place against the backdrop of emerging
lessons and experiences in peacebuilding from the four
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission: Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea Bissau
and the Central African Republic, as well as other
countries emerging from conflict. Another important
factor for the meeting was the forthcoming review of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Peacebuilding Fund in 2010, in
accordance with the founding resolutions of the
Commission.
The meeting emphasized the importance of
addressing the underlying social and economic causes
of crises, enhancing coordination and cooperation
among regional organizations and institutions and
donor countries, and assuring the significance of
national ownership and the need to build confidence at
the subnational level. The importance of capacity-
building - which should be country-specific and
tailored to the needs of the country in question - was
underscored, as was the need to build institutional
capacity, particularly outside of the capitals, and the
need for international actors to reduce the
administrative burden on local actors.

It was also highlighted that there should be an
effective and coherent international response to
peacebuilding, coordinated by the United Nations, and
that the United Nations must not be a substitute for the
Government in exercising its functions and
responsibilities, but should support and strengthen the
Government's capacity to effectively address the
challenges it faces.

Participants stressed the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the important role of the World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
partnerships with the United Nations. They addressed
the lack of consistent international support and funding
in critical areas, the need for more simplified donor
procedures that would enable quick gains and more
flexible funding, would reduce time frames for
disbursement of funds and would encourage diaspora
remittances.

The meeting also highlighted the important role
of regional organizations in supporting peacebuilding
efforts, both in terms of political support and in
developing regional peacebuilding capacities. It
emphasized that the United Nations should continue to
strengthen partnerships and create greater synergies
with regional organizations to better support countries
emerging from conflict. It was recognized that some
regional organizations lacked the appropriate capacity
to play their potential role, and donor organizations
were therefore encouraged to support them.

In that regard, I would like to inform the Council
of Egypt's initiative to strengthen the peace and
security structure of the African Union within the
framework of the European Union-African strategic
partnership. The aim of this initiative is to
operationalize and develop the post-conflict
09-41816
reconstruction and development framework of the
African Union through the establishment of a regional
centre in close institutional collaboration among the
African Union, the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations.

In general, the Cairo meeting provided a valuable
opportunity for Member States to discuss and exchange
views on matters of crucial concern, and we - Egypt
and Ireland - are glad to see that many of those
elements were taken into consideration in the
preparation of the report of the Secretary-General.

Commenting in my national capacity on the
report of the Secretary-General, I would like to
commend the Secretary-General and his team for
preparing the comprehensive report and to express
Egypt's support for the ideas and conclusions reflected
therein, in particular the emphasis on strengthening
national capacity and ensuring that it is part of an entry
strategy and not merely the basis for an exit strategy,
the necessity of respecting the principle of national
ownership, and that peacebuilding efforts must be
anchored at the country level, with support and
guidance from the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations system
at large and Member States. It is national leaders who
can ensure that vision, strategy and decision-making
respond effectively to the realities on the ground.
Therefore, the United Nations is expected to play a
leading role in the field, by facilitating engagement
between national and international actors and among
international actors, without prejudicing the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

While we agree with the agenda set by the
Secretary-General in the report to strengthen the
United Nations contribution to a more rapid and
effective response in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, there is still a need for clarification
concerning some of the issues reflected.

First, the report gives the impression that the
Security Council is the major player when it comes to
peacebuilding efforts in the immediate aftermath of
conflict - for example, paragraph 14. At that time the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should play an equal role. Secondly, all
aspects of the matters of the pool of civilian experts
and the standing capacities should be further discussed
in detail. I propose in that regard that the Secretary-
09-41816

General present a comprehensive report, which could
be used as basis for discussions among Member States.
Thirdly, enhancing the United Nations leadership team
on the ground and the steps undertaken by the
Secretary-General, as enshrined in the report, to
strengthen the accountability of the Special
Representatives are matters that need further
discussion and elaboration.

Fourthly, the section of the report relating to the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission did not include
specific proposals aimed at strengthening the role of
the Commission through making it more flexible and
efficient in the immediate aftermath of conflict, rather
than recommending that the Security Council consider
how the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission could
contribute to its work during the early phase of the
Council's consideration of a situation. That
recommendation, though it could lead to increasing the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, could, on the
other hand, also lead to increasing the domination of
the Council over the work of the Commission vis-a-vis
the role of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. Thus, there is a need to further
discuss that proposal to ensure that it will not affect the
institutional balance between the principle organs of
the Organization.

Fifthly, there should be a clear understanding of
the interrelationship between peace consolidation
activities in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
particularly the relationship between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, from all aspects, including the financing
of those activities.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and to the Secretary-General
for presenting his valuable report, with the wish that
the United Nations would benefit from it through
strengthening its response in the immediate aftermath
of a conflict.

