Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are greatly honoured
today by your presence and heartened by your
Government's deep concern for the situation of
children in armed conflict. On the occasion of this
open debate, the Philippines joins the international
community in searching for durable approaches and
strategies to prevent and eliminate the exploitation and
abuse of children.

We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing, and to the
representatives of the United Nations Children's Fund
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their important and informative
statements.

We appreciate the submission of the Secretary-
General's fifth report, which has provided us with
information on the humanitarian conditions in conflict
areas as they impact the protection of children. We
condemn those serious violations and stress our
readiness to contribute to solutions that will
appropriately and effectively address that problem.

However, the report could have given a more
comprehensive account of all conflict situations.
Paragraph 76 of the report, which claimed that the lists
submitted encompassed all violating parties, does not
seem to be as complete and accurate as it should be. A
thorough and non-selective coverage of conflict
situations in future reporting is necessary in order not
to leave unprotected those children whose situation
may never be addressed.

We endorse the Secretary-General's proposal for
a monitoring and reporting mechanism. As the minister
of France has stressed, it is important that there be
objective, accurate and reliable information gathering
and monitoring of violations against children in
situations of armed conflict. We agree, in particular,
with the Secretary-General's idea of a strong local
component in the gathering of information and the
monitoring of developments on the ground. Local
protection networks are right at the front in conflicts
and are in closest contact with the affected children and
communities. We need to strengthen those networks
and give them the necessary support to develop their
capacities for monitoring, reporting and humanitarian
intervention. Investments in building local capacity are
of great value because they help deliver long-term
solutions for the protection and rehabilitation of
children affected by conflict.

We are, however, concerned about the report's
suggestion that the practice of initiating direct contact
by United Nations actors with non-State actors be
generally applied as part of the mechanism at the
country level. That practice may be effective in some
areas, but in other situations it may be a precarious
procedure to use. The minister of Tanzania has clearly
stressed the different dynamics of the conflict situation
there. There are countries, including the Philippines,
that have established channels of communication
between the Government and non-State parties to
conflict, which constitute the basis of the vital peace
process. That peace process involves many essential
elements, including a joint human rights monitoring
component. Any engagement involving United Nations
actors must fall within the context of that established
peace process in order not to undermine or impair the
existing delicate peace process.

The disclaimer that United Nations engagement
with non-State actors would not confer any political or
legal status to those groups does not address the
different dynamics of each conflict situation.

The "era of application" can be realistic if the
implementation regime is based on cooperation among
Governments, the United Nations system, international
humanitarian agencies and local civil society actors.
The "era of application" should address the root causes
of child soldiering and counter the incentives for
recruitment of children by armed groups. This new
regime should also require the strengthening of social
structures, such as the family, community and the
school system, in order to lessen the vulnerability of
children to recruitment and to provide more sustainable
rehabilitation for former combatants. Efforts to protect
children in armed conflict should be carried out as part
of the general strategy to rebuild peace and order and
promote reconciliation in conflict areas.

We are appalled by incidents of sexual abuse and
exploitation by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. Those horrific acts negate the very purpose
of peacekeeping and betray the very people they were
supposed to protect. It is necessary to put in place
accountability mechanisms for offenders. We seek the
support of troop-contributing countries for setting up
more stringent regulations, as well as in enhancing
education for peacekeepers. We also urge the inclusion
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping missions
in order to provide the necessary in-field training.

We welcome the report's elaboration on best
practices in disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration (DDRR). Those
measures should urgently be incorporated into
peacekeeping missions and peacebuilding efforts. We
also appreciate the report's recommendations on
measures to control illicit cross-border activities that
negatively impact children. The recommendations cut
across many important dimensions and should be
considered by the broad membership of the United
Nations in cooperation with relevant international
bodies.

Conflicts and wars place the lives and well being
of civilians and innocent people at extreme risk.
Children are particularly vulnerable and that problem
demands urgent action through coordinated strategies.
The Security Council can contribute towards this end if
there is accurate, comprehensive and inclusive
monitoring of violations on the ground and if it
monitors the implementation of its past resolutions on
that issue.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm my delegation's
commitment to the protection of children.

