Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too should like
to associate myself with the comments which will be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union. I should
like to thank Ambassadors Verbeke, Arias and Burian
for their briefings to the Security Council this morning.
I thank them and their staffs also for their time and for
their commitment to these important matters. We rely
on the energy and leadership of the Chairs of our
subsidiary bodies to enable the Council to make
substantive forward progress.

First, I should like to talk about resolution 1267
(1999). I should like to start by welcoming
Ambassador Verbeke to his new role as Chair of the
1267 Committee. The United Kingdom was a sponsor
of resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006), adopted in
December last year. The establishment of a focal point
within the Secretariat for receiving delisting requests
was a real achievement, and we want to see it come
into its own in the Council. We are also pleased to hear
that the Committee intends to work on improving the
quality of the consolidated list, and we commend the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team for
its efforts in this area. We should like to encourage
Member States to share information with the
Committee that would improve the information on the
list. We look forward with interest to the Committee
improving its guidelines on exemption requests for
basic expenses for individuals on the consolidated list.
Delays in dealing swiftly and effectively with
exemption requests for basic expenses, many of which
are humanitarian in nature, raise serious human rights
concerns; we are at risk of delaying essential payments
for food, for rent and for legal fees. In our view, it is
imperative that the Committee address this.

I should like to turn, secondly, to resolution 1540
(2004). This year, 2007, is an important one for the
implementation of that resolution, and we support
Ambassador Burian in his ongoing work. The United
Kingdom attaches great importance to the outreach
activities of the 1540 Committee. We welcome the
proactive approach on outreach that the Committee's
Chair and experts have taken. We believe we should
focus on work that leads to measurable improvements
in the implementation of the resolution. In furtherance
of that, we support the production of implementation
action plans. We support the proposed work being
taken forward in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in support of resolution 1540
(2004), and we look to that organization to provide a
model for regional implementation of the resolution.
The United Kingdom believes that facilitating
technical assistance remains a key challenge for the
Committee. We look forward to an early agreement on
concrete practical proposals which will enable the
Committee and its experts to adopt a proactive and
effective role in assistance.

Lastly, with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, I would like to welcome Ambassador Arias
to his new role as Chairman. 1 would also like to thank
Ambassador Javier Ruperez for his work as Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). We wish him every
success in the future. The United Kingdom would like
to commend the work that the CTED has been
undertaking on analysis of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We look forward to discussing
the CTED's analysis of the global levels of
implementation of the resolution, including themes and
regional issues that might arise and need further
consideration by the Council.

At this time last year, the United Kingdom
welcomed the development and use of new analytical
tools for assessing individual States' implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We look forward to learning
the results of that process; the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments. We believe that they
should be shared with Member States as soon as
possible. We have every confidence that the Committee
will deal swiftly with the assessments it has yet to
consider and that Committee discussions on internal
processes can be concluded expeditiously.

In the United Kingdom's view, the Committee
should, through the use of these assessments, be able to
move away from the seemingly never-ending reporting
cycles of States and shift instead to a focused dialogue
that is tailored to meet the specific needs of individual
States. We expect that, for some States, a key part of that
dialogue will be about technical assistance. Technical
assistance has long been under discussion in the
Committee, and we look forward to seeing substantial
measurable results, in terms of both the facilitation of
assistance and the resulting improvements in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In particular,
we hope that the Committee will quickly adopt the
technical assistance implementation plan for 2007.

Implementation of resolution 1624 (2005)
remains a priority for the United Kingdom. We look
forward to continued Committee work in that area,
including in the areas of analysis and technical
assistance.

I would like to conclude with a word about the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(General Assembly resolution 60/288). One of the
strengths of the Strategy, we believe, is its focus on
improving coordination within the United Nations
system. We welcome the involvement of the subsidiary
bodies of the Council in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force as part of its core
coordination role.

