Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ombudsperson Kimberly Frost and International
Criminal Court Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for their
briefings. We also thank the Argentinian presidency for
organizing today's debate.

In recent years, several concerns over the
Council's working methods have been addressed. Some
notable improvements include greater transparency
of subsidiary bodies, a more productive working
relationship with regional organizations and enhanced
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries. Nevertheless, we recognize that there is
always room for more transparency, openness and
efficiency in the Council's work.

In the case of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime,
the Office of the Ombudsperson has significantly
improved its fairness by allowing independent reviews
of listing cases for the past five years. We appreciate
her active contribution in that regard and reiterate our
commitment to the joint endeavour to achieve a fairer,
more transparent process. We support further discussion
to improve the independence of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which is essential to her important role
in affecting the decisions of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities on
delisting and listing. More effective functioning of that
Office in the context of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
should be pursued as a first step towards ensuring the
due process of sanctions regimes.

On the issue of broadening its application, due
process and other values, including the effectiveness of
sanctions and the unique character of various sanctions
regimes need to be taken into account. We welcome
ongoing efforts to improve United Nations sanctions
mechanisms and look forward to the outcome of such
exercises and other creative ideas in that regard.

I would now like to discuss the follow-up of the
Security Council's referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Bringing an end to impunity
is one of our shared goals for building peaceful and
inclusive societies. The international criminal justice
system plays a growing role in fulfilling this goal by
rendering justice to the victims of heinous crimes
and preventing further atrocities. The International
Criminal Court, along with other ad hoc criminal
tribunals, has developed into a core establishment of
the system, yet the international courts and tribunals,
including the ICC, lack enforcement mechanisms. We
believe that is why the Rome Statute stipulates a close
working relationship between the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court. The Council is
expected to work hand-in-hand with the Court and to
close the enforcement gap by mobilizing the political
will of the international community.

The ICC, for its part, has an increasing role to play in
fulfilling the Council's responsibility to maintain peace
and security. Given the importance of the role played
by the ICC in facilitating the work of the Council, we
believe that the Council's decisions to refer situations
to the ICC deserve a more practical and responsible
follow-up. Through such follow-up, I believe that the
Council will be able to deal with the various challenges
achieved - on which Prosecutor Bensouda has briefed
the Council many times before - in a more productive
and effective way. In that regard, my delegation is ready
to work with other Council members on the modalities
of following up the ICC referrals, including but not
limited to establishing a separate subsidiary body or
making use of the existing Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is indeed a crucial component of bolstering
the effectiveness and legitimacy of the Council's
work. While serving as the President of the Council in
February 2013 and May 2014, the Republic of Korea
made the utmost effort to promote transparency of the
Council's work and interaction with the wider United
Nations membership. As Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we also
conducted a number of outreach activities to reinforce
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We
will continue our efforts towards a more transparent,
accountable and effective Security Council.

