Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane, Special Envoy Haysom and
His Excellency Mr. Mogae for their comprehensive
and insightful briefings. I also commend them for
their commitment to bring peace to South Sudan under
difficult circumstances. My delegation would like to
make the following observations and recommendations.

We welcome the arrival of the vanguard units of
the Regional Protection Force (RPF), especially the
engineering, technical and high-readiness company
of the Bangladeshi and Nepalese contingents. We
look forward to having the deployment of Rwandan,
Ethiopian and Kenyan personnel completed so as to
make the RPF fully operational. More efforts, such
as the Pakistan level-2 hospital and the deployment
of unarmed aerial systems, should be supported and
encouraged. The Government should speedily allocate
personnel and coordinate the proposed one-stop
shop to resolve impediments to the operations of the
patrols of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) so that they can have greater freedom of
movement. Every proactive measure should be taken to
ensure that UNMISS staff do not face arbitrary arrest
or detention. We hope that thejoint meeting of chiefs of
defence forces of the troop contributing-countries, the
transitional Government and the United Nations will
help resolve all remaining issues.

We are gravely concerned that the continuing Sudan
People's Liberation Army military operations in the
Equatorias and Greater Upper Nile have led to a sharp
escalation in the number of humanitarian incidents and
violence against UNMISS and humanitarian personnel.
That violence has also led to an increase in the number
of internally displaced persons (IDP), most of whom are
women and children. Those hostile actions undermine
the efforts of the Transitional Government and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to facilitate
the peace process, and lead to further deterioration in
the humanitarian and security conditions. We therefore
urge all parties to restore a permanent ceasefire and
to stop attacks on humanitarian workers so that access
to famine-affected locations is not adversely affected.
We also encourage the Special Envoy to have more
frequent and intensive dialogue with the parties on the
protection of women and children, which constitute
about 85 per cent of IDPs, and to ensure that vital
lifesaving feeding programmes, including for schools,
are not stopped.

We commend the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to organize the
Revitalization Forum and include all sides, for the
effective implementation of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, and to prepare for the forthcoming democratic
elections. We hope that the outcome of the Forum will
lay the foundation necessary for the building of stable
State institutions. Simultaneously, we need to ensure
that the national dialogue launched in May is truly
inclusive and transparent, for which the assistance
of UNMISS and the Special Envoy will be needed.
That will have to be reinforced by closer cooperation
between the Transitional Government and IGAD.
At the same time, a truly inclusive national dialogue
has to be proceeded by a political process that creates
the necessary security and political environment for
such inclusion.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan fully supports the
concerted efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and IGAD, and will work with the Council and
key actors to find a lasting solution to the conflict in
South Sudan, which should remain high on our list
of priorities.

