Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank Ambassador Takasu for his report. We are
grateful for his leadership in ensuring the full
implementation of the vital measures needed to counter
the threat of proliferation. We particularly appreciate
the efforts of Ambassador Takasu and the Committee to
address the issues raised by the transfer of materiel on
MN Manchegorsk, which constituted a violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). We appreciate the cooperation
of a Member State in providing further information
about the cargo. But, as the report notes, the response
received from the States in violation was not adequate.
We note that the matter remains under the Committee's
consideration and hope the Committee can draw some
useful lessons to ensure full implementation and
compliance.

The most recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Iran makes clear yet
again the seriousness of the threat of Iran's nuclear
proliferation activities. Iran has still not suspended its
enrichment-related activities nor its work on heavy-
water related projects. This is in clear defiance of
several Security Council resolutions. Moreover, it is
continuing its non-cooperation with the IAEA.

Iran now has over 7,000 centrifuges installed, of
which about 5,000 are enriching UF6. Iran has now
produced 1,339 kilograms of low-enriched uranium.
Iran has denied the IAEA access to the heavy-water
reactor at Arak for nearly a year. A reactor of this design
could potentially be used to produce plutonium for
nuclear weapons. The IAEA has said that this has made
3
it difficult for it to report further on the construction of
the reactor, as requested by the Security Council.

The report also emphasizes that Iran is the only
State with significant nuclear activities that has a
comprehensive safeguards agreement in force but that
is not implementing the provisions of the revised Code
3.1 on the early provision of design information.
Moreover, the report states that the IAEA has still not
received preliminary design information, as requested
in December 2007, for the nuclear power plant at
Darkhovin.

The report also shows no change in the lack of
cooperation by Iran in responding to questions about
the possible military dimensions of Iran's nuclear
programme. Without this, it is impossible to be
confident of Iran's professed peaceful intentions.

We do not wish to deny Iran its right to civil
nuclear power. The generous E3+3 offer contains
everything Iran needs to pursue a modern civil nuclear
power programme, which it claims is its aim. It is
difficult to see how Iran's current actions are in pursuit
of this goal. Iran's continued stalling simply
undermines confidence in their intentions. Instead, it is
continuing to expand its enrichment programme with
no apparent civilian purpose. Iran must suspend its
enrichment-related activities, as required by five
Security Council resolutions and act to reassure the
international community that its intentions are
exclusively peaceful.

Our message to Iran is clear and simple. It is now
time to get down to serious business. The international
community has made clear its desire for a mature
partnership with Iran. We hope that we will see a
genuine response from the Iranian Government in the
weeks and months ahead, but this opportunity is not a
blank check. We need to make real and urgent
progress. It is now essential that Iran makes the choice
to move the process forward. The E3+3 has made clear
that it wants to engage with Iran. We hope that Iran
will quickly decide to do so and move quickly to take
forward the offers of engagement by both the United
States and the international community. It is essential
that we make progress on this front. The offer will not
be there forever.

