Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2385 (2017), which renews the Eritrea and Somalia
sanctions regimes for a further 12 months. This is a
Vital regime for the region - one that keeps guns and
funds out of the hands of Al-Shabaab and helps to
promote peace and stability across the Horn of Africa.

We also recognize, however, that the Eritrea regime
commands differing views among Council members,
so as penholder we have worked hard to balance these
views. The resolution adopted today is a measured
text that acknowledges and attempts to bridge those
differences. We are disappointed that some Council
members could not support the resolution today, but I
do thank all Council members for their cooperation and
engagement in its drafting.

In spite of those differences, the sanctions regime
will continue its important work. In Somalia, it will
continue to prevent the flow of illicit arms and funding
to terrorist groups; it will help to preserve Somalia's
resources for Somalia's economic development; and it
will help to strengthen the Somali National Security
Forces by giving them access to the necessary
equipment and support to build a stronger weapons
and ammunition management system. Through the
resolution, we have also agreed additional steps to
support Somalia. The text requests that the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea recommend further
action that we can take against those who continue to
put money into the hands ofAl-Shabaab by violating the
charcoal ban, as well as on additional steps to prevent
chemical precursors from reaching Al-Shabaab.
Through these new and existing measures,
the regime will continue to support the significant
progress that Somalia has made this year, including at
the London Conference in May, and we look forward to
the December meetings in Mogadishu that will provide
further important milestones towards achieving
Somalia's stability and prosperity. These are efforts
that we should all back. We will not allow terrorist
groups like Al-Shabaab to undermine this progress
through their indiscriminate attacks on civilians.

Turning to Eritrea, the resolution recognizes the
positive developments that have occurred this year.
There have been no provocative actions on the Djibouti
border following the withdrawal of Qatari forces, and
we welcome the fact that the Monitoring Group has
once again found no conclusive evidence of Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab. We also welcome Qatar's
efforts in the mediation process so far. As a Council, I
am sure that we all stand ready to engage with Eritrea
constructively, but this effort must be reciprocated.
With that in mind, we have made clear in the resolution
the route that Eritrea needs to take to fully abide
by the arms embargo and to engage fully with the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, as well as the
Monitoring Group, so that we can be satisfied of that.

As penholder, we stand ready to support Kazakhstan
as Chair of the sanctions committee to kick-start this
engagement, and I hope that all Council members will
join me in strongly encouraging Eritrea to come in
from the cold.

