Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
express our gratitude to you, Sir, for your able
stewardship of the Council this month and to commend
you for convening this debate.

Israel was a strong supporter of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). The
resolution is, in our opinion, a significant step towards
the consolidation and implementation of international
standards against the threats of international terrorism.
It is also, of course, an important step in support of the
international effort against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

The possibility that weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery could fall into the hands of
terrorists and the threat of unmonitored transfer of
sensitive items have become, in recent years, one of the
worst nightmares of the international community.
Resolution 1540 (2004) and its full implementation
represent important progress in our joint struggle to
prevent the realization of that terrifying scenario. The
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism is yet another significant step
forward in that context.

The commitment of Member States to prevent
any cooperation with terrorists and terrorist
organizations attempting to acquire or develop
weapons of mass destruction, and the commitment to
set clear and strong standards for monitoring dual-use
types of items, are vital tools in our efforts.

Moreover, we are of the view that some
components of that important resolution can also be
relevant to the prevention of transfer of conventional
arms to terrorists. It is particularly relevant when the
presence of sophisticated weaponry in the hands of
terrorists has proven to have strategic implications. In
that context, it should be noted that rockets of various
ranges can serve as a means to launch chemical and
biological weapons. The transfer of such rockets to
07-24825

non-State actors - in particular to terrorists - is
therefore already a violation of paragraphs 1 and 2 of
resolution 1540 (2004). That violation has clearly been
demonstrated by the uranium supplied to the Hizbollah
terrorist organization, as witnessed recently in
Lebanon.

For its part, Israel has made significant progress
in aligning itself with the highest international
standards in the field of exports control on sensitive
items, including dual-use items, by adopting into
Israeli law the various lists of the supplier regimes,
namely, those of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Australia Group and the Wassenaar Arrangement.
Furthermore, Israel maintains a continuous dialogue
with the various regimes and with relevant States, with
the aim of improving control over facilities and items
at the highest level.

We hope that all States will act in accordance
with resolution 1540 (2004). True implementation of
the resolution could contribute to a safer world. For its
part, Israel is fully committed to it.

