I thank the Deputy Special Envoy and the Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings. The Al-Assad regime and its allies, including permanent members of the Security Council, would greatly prefer that the world ignore their briefings, pretend that resolution 2254 (2015) is obsolete and believe somehow that the political and humanitarian conditions in Syria are stabilizing and that the conflict is over. Sadly, the realities cannot be obscured and must not be ignored. Lasting peace will come about only when the Al-Assad regime and its backers, including Russia, China and Iran, accept a United Nations-brokered political settlement to the conflict in line with resolution 2254 (2015) - when the Al-Assad regime shelling and Russian warplanes no longer destroy Syrian communities, families and futures; when Iranian support for terrorist forces in Syria ceases; and when Chinese and Russian obstruction on the Security Council finally comes to an end and humanitarian assistance can reach every last one of the 11 million Syrian women, children and men in need. The preposterous refugee conference hosted earlier this month in Damascus is a prime example of how Russia and the Al-Assad regime continue their attempts to perpetuate a false narrative about the situation in Syria. Russia and the regime have repeatedly and spectacularly failed to convince the international community, including those countries generous enough to take in high numbers of Syrian refugees, that Syria is ready for large refugee returns and that the regime genuinely wants them to return. Rather than end their depraved military campaign, enact political reforms and further a political process to create an environment conducive to voluntary, safe, dignified and informed returns, Russia and the regime are using refugees as a public relations tool. To add insult to injury, Russia has the audacity to ask the international community to provide the Al-Assad regime with reconstruction funding after the brutal leader plunged the country into a civil war and continues to kill his own people. The United States does not oppose the idea, in principle, of a conference centred on Syrian refugees to take stock of the actions needed to ensure that Syria's 6.6 million refugees can return safely, for those who choose to do so. However, a legitimate conference on refugee returns can be successful only if it is coordinated with the United Nations, the United States and other relevant countries, hosted by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and held in a neutral location, not Damascus. Such a conference certainly would affirm that Syrians should not be pressed to return to their country until it is safe to do so, and that those living outside Syria should be able to participate in free and fair elections. As long as the Al-Assad regime effectively ignores or undermines every aspect of resolution 2254 (2015), Syrians will not be able to return safely. The United States welcomes the Special Envoy's plans for the fourth round of the Constitutional Committee talks later this month. That latest round is long overdue, and we urge the Committee members, in particular the regime and Syrian opposition co-Chairs, to make immediate and substantive progress. Furthermore, we encourage Special Envoy Pedersen to take any measures that he thinks appropriate to facilitate the parties' efforts, consistent with United Nations parameters and principles, and identify to the Council any participants who continue to obstruct progress. Beyond the work of the Constitutional Committee, we ask the United Nations to facilitate, and the parties to undertake, confidence-building measures. These measures should include the unilateral release of arbitrarily held detainees, as called for in resolution 2254 (2015), and the provision of information on the whereabouts of more than 100,000 Syrians who remain missing, including women and children. Turning to the humanitarian situation, it is abhorrent that humanitarian workers continue to face threats as they endeavour to deliver life-saving aid to the Syrian people. We offer our condolences to the families of the two aid workers killed in north-western Syria earlier this month as they were on their way to work in a child-friendly space run by UNICEF. United Nations humanitarian operations, including cross-border operations, remain essential for the more than 11 million Syrians. The loss of three cross-border operation access points in the past 10 months has only worsened the suffering and the vulnerability of the Syrian people, and there are increasing reports of shortages at hospitals and medical facilities and delays in food delivery. We call the Security Council's attention to the draft resolution on the situation of human rights in Syria that was adopted overwhelmingly in the Third Committee last week (A/C.3/75/L.33). The draft resolution, which was co-sponsored by the United States, highlights the regime's egregious denial of humanitarian aid and urges the Council to reauthorize the opening of previous crossing points or open new ones to ensure that aid gets into Syria through the most direct routes. We are closely monitoring the recent spike in violence in Syria's north-west. The Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran must ensure that the nationwide ceasefire for which the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy have called throughout this year is implemented, and no military offensive should resume anywhere in Syria. Winter is approaching, and we urge all Council members and States Members of the United Nations to support efforts to quickly scale up assistance efforts to meet the growing needs of the 4.2 million Syrians in Idlib. Last year, the world was rightly horrified by reports of children freezing to death. We must not allow that to happen again. In addition to such needs, the Syrian people also face another long winter, compounded by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We are increasingly alarmed by reports of hospital intensive-treatment-unit beds for COVID-19 patients already filled to capacity in north-western Syria, straining the region's already fragile health system. According to the official numbers, cases have risen by 250 per cent since September. Sadly, we know that the official numbers are only the tip of the iceberg of Syria's COVID-19 crisis. The actual rates of infection are much higher than those reported. Yet the limited ability to test and trace makes it impossible to know the full extent of the spread of the virus. The Syrian people face the same risk from COVID-19 as all the rest of us. Yet the shortages of medical supplies and the lack of testing raise concerns that the virus can spread unchecked and inflict damage on already vulnerable populations. Every month the Security Council meets on the crisis in Syria, and every month the briefings reveal worsening human suffering. The United States once again calls on the Al-Assad regime's supporters and abettors to alter the course and join us in pushing for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That is the only path that will lead to peace and security in Syria and a more hopeful future for the Syrian people.
