Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): The Security
Council has before it the report (8/2017/94) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I should like to begin by giving
the Council a brief overview of the main developments
since the publication of the report.

The security situation in Bangui as a whole has
gradually stabilized over the past few months. On
7 February, Central African internal security forces
supported by MINUSCA launched an operation
in Bangui to apprehend Youssouf Malinga, self-
proclaimed leader of a self-defence group that on
several occasions threatened civilians and fuelled
inter-community tensions. Malinga's bodyguards
opened fire indiscriminately in the course of the
operation, killing two civilians and wounding a child.
Malinga and two of his men were fatally struck during
the exchange of fire that followed, while three Central
African gendarmes were wounded. As a result of the
operation, MINUSCA and the internal security forces
continued to conduct robust patrols and outreach
to communities.

In contrast to the relative calm in Bangui, violence
associated with the seasonal migration continued in the
north-west of the country. However, it should be noted
that in general the movement of shepherds with their
millions of head of livestock takes place peacefully.
There is also the problem of ongoing clashes between
rival ex-Seleka factions - such as the Front populaire
pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and the
Union pour la paix en Centrafrique - which clearly
continues to undermine the central region, along with
a worrying ethnic connotation. The continuing clashes
are fuelled by power struggles and disputes regarding
control over resources and access to transport
routes - all of which threatens the peace process in
the country. But that also constitutes an intolerable
burden for the population, as well as aggravating an
already alarming humanitarian situation.

It is in that context, and against the backdrop
MINUSCA's efforts to protect civilians, that on
11 February MINUSCA attack helicopters engaged a
column of approximately 300 elements of the coalition
led by the FPRC moving with pick-up trucks heavily
armed with machine guns. The goal of the operation for
us was to deter the group from crossing a demarcation
line. We had told them and other warring parties
about it in advance, as we wished to prevent a major
conflict from occurring in the strategically important
town of Bambari, on the Ouaka river. One of the only
bridges over the river is located there, so this was
very important.

As part of its intervention, MINUSCA destroyed
at least four pickups, all this following very strong
warnings from the Mission to both parties to the effect
that MINUSCA was determined to use force to protect
civilians, in line with its mandate and with the appeals
made by the subregion, the African Union (AU) and the
Government of the Central African Republic, which
have continued to call for robust action on our part.

Despite our intervention and our advocacy efforts
with the armed groups, certain coalition elements were
nevertheless able to enter the town of Ippy, which is
further west. Since then we have strengthened our
temporary operational bases in the zone and established
a checkpoint north-east of Bambari to prevent any new
movements by the coalition towards Bambari, which,
again, is very strategically important. We deployed two
sections of the Portuguese rapid-intervention force that
has just been deployed to the Central African Republic,
alongside two special-forces detachments around the
town. I would note here that the Government issued a
declaration on 13 February expressing firm support for
MINUSCA's actions and urging the warring parties to
immediately cease hostilities. The Secretary-General
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the AU representative in Bangui both
issued declarations expressing strong concern at the
continued fighting between armed groups.

This leads me to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) policy. As the Council is
aware, an agreement on a strategy in that respect
was reached with 12 of the armed groups within the
framework of the Consultative Follow-up Committee,
headed by President Touadera. However, the situation
is constrained by the fact that the two principal armed
groups that I have already mentioned, Noureddine
Adam's FPRC and Maxime Mokom's anti-balaka
group, remain outside of the framework of the DDR
agreement. Along with the Government, we are
continuing to engage with both groups to try to get
them on board, since it is clear that if there is a DDR
process to which not all armed groups have signed
on, in the absence of a broader agreement aimed at
addressing the legitimate grievances of those groups,
the inclusiveness of the process cannot be guaranteed.

We know from our experience in other contexts that
a DDR process that does not include all warring parties
is likely to encounter major difficulties and be doomed
to failure. We know also that for a DDR process to
have greater credibility, the overall environment must
be secure. In that respect, the two recent events that
took place in Bangui and in the Bambari region remain
causes for concern.

That is why, while continuing to aim for a broad
agreement encompassing all parties, we are continuing
to undertake a series of actions aimed at reducing
the level of intercommunal violence and prolonging
the pre-DDR initiative, which has already mobilized
some 4,000 former combatants. In particular, we are
exploring the possibility of implementing, jointly with
the Government and the World Bank, a pilot DDR
integration project that would ensure the disarmament
and demobilization of 480 former combatants, half
of whom would be integrated into the gendarmerie,
following proper vetting procedures, and the other half
involved in social reintegration activities.

All of this, in particular the recalcitrant attitude
of these groups, must be addressed. In that context, I
should like to highlight the initiative just undertaken
by the African Union, ECCAS and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, accompanied
by Angola, Chad and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to promote an African initiative for peace and
reconciliation between the Government and all the
armed groups in the Central African Republic.

The United Nations welcomes and supports
this African initiative, as clearly this is a matter of
collectively paving the way for a resolution of the
conflict and the lasting peace that the Central African
Republic has so long desired.

I believe that the efforts personally undertaken by
President Touadera vis-a-vis the armed groups should
continue, and all of these initiatives and elements must
be brought together. We must also safeguard the gains
made by the Bangui Forum and continue to work as
proactively as possible towards achieving the goals of
justice and reconciliation. However, the armed groups,
and this is a very clear message that I am addressing
to them, must not forget that the vast majority of the
population of the Central African Republic aspires to
the restoration of peace.

Let us not overlook the fact that we have made
progress, in the framework ofa formal dialogue, on all
these initiatives. We deem particularly interesting the
fact that on 30 January the national authorities launched
a national campaign to recruit 500 police officers and
gendarmes. We would note, moreover, that the first
infantry company of the Central African Republic
armed forces, which was trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission, will soon be deployable. In
addition, the appointment of the Special Prosecutor of
the Special Criminal Court, whose selection we were
eagerly awaiting, was announced this very day by the
President; this is a very significant step forward in this
process of ensuring justice for all.

MINUSCA is continuing to adapt to this evolving
situation. We have significantly rearranged our
deployment scheme and have endeavoured to enhance
mobility. In particular, we have reduced the number of
bases so as to ensure greater flexibility. We now have
the Portuguese quick-reaction force. An intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance company has been
deployed. The air fleet has been reviewed, with
particular focus on our night medical evacuation
capability. We are also about to deploy a surveillance
drone company provided by the French armed forces; I
believe this will have a strong deterrent effect on those
who continue to create problems on the ground.

In that context, we would have hoped to begin to
see some peace dividends. Sadly, they remain elusive,
as the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate;
violence in the provinces is contributing to this state of
affairs. Indeed, 2.2 million people, that is, more than
half of the population, are affected to various degrees
by food insecurity - the highest percentage in the
world. Recent events have also led to the displacement
of another 100,000 persons, which is a problem of
course. It is also an issue for humanitarian actors,
as the environment in the Central African Republic
remains dangerous for them. It should be noted that
31 per cent - practically one third - of security
incidents around the world in 2016 affecting the staff
of non-governmental organizations took place, sadly,
in the Central African Republic.

Last November during the conference held by the
European Union, the Central African Republic received
pledges of €2.2 billion, which is significant. Given the
current situation, I believe it is now more important
than ever that the countries and organizations that
pledged funds fulfil their promises and disburse those
funds. On the occasion of that conference, we signed
the Mutual Engagement Framework, also known as the
compact, a significant instrument that the Ambassador
of the Central African Republic recently shared
with the Council. It is a mechanism of extraordinary
importance intended to strengthen the partnership
between the country and the international community.
I am absolutely convinced that it will help us in the
coming period to address the deep-rooted causes of
the conflict. In that regard, we will continue to do our
utmost to support the authorities and to ensure that this
receives the relevant follow up.

MINUSCA is the Organization's youngest
peacekeeping operation. Soon three years will have
passed since its inception. It will have been one year
since President Touadera took office. Let us examine
how far we have come. Three years ago the Central
African Republic was on the brink of the abyss.
Genocide was more than possible - it even seemed
probable. And that posed a grave threat to the subregion.
There was the security risk, a variety of destabilizing
elements and extremism in the country and region.
That is why the Council at the time recognized how
urgent it was to act by authorizing the deployment of
MINUSCA, building on the work that had already been
accomplished by the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic.

Although that had its difficulties, Ibelieve it can be
said that the combined efforts of the Mission, the forces
of Operation Sangaris and, at the time, the European
Union-led peacekeeping force made it possible to avoid
additional mass atrocities. Above all, those efforts
also made it possible to avoid the complete collapse
of the Central African State. Constitutional order
has been restored. The Central African Republic is
moving forward under its President and Government.
It has a functional Parliament. The authority of the
State is being strengthened in the provinces. All of
that should be taken into account without, however,
deluding ourselves.

Of course there are problems, but indicators are
pointing generally in the right direction. I will give a
small example. We all know how important agriculture
is to the country. Last year agricultural production
rose 26.3 per cent. That would suggest that farmers
are returning. Moreover, we are seeing displaced
persons returning to some of the regions, beginning
to cultivate their lands once again. The economy has
been stimulated.

We must not stop there. We must learn from past
experience. There is one lesson in particular. Too often
in the past the international community has reacted
only at the height of a crisis. Then, as soon as the
main symptoms have disappeared, the international
community turns its attention away from the country
and the crisis. In such cases, there is the danger of the
resurgence of the crisis, and that must be avoided. We
need to consolidate using all available means. We need
to consolidate the economy and human rights. That is
the purpose of the agencies and international financial
institutions. Clearly for MINUSCA, stability, the
establishment oflasting peace, the progress of national
reconciliation and combating impunity and transitional
justice are crucial. Disarming armed groups and
security sector reform are also essential. Focus should
be placed on the most affected regions.

More than ever, MINUSCA and the United Nations
system as a whole must continue to support the people
of the Central African Republic, thereby building a
foundation for sustainable peace and development,
such as established by the mutually agreed priorities
in the compact. The Mission cannot be seen as the only
answer to all the challenges being faced. However,
provided that the established partnerships endure and
grow stronger, and provided that the population itself
is determined, then the establishment of lasting peace
in the Central African Republic is within reach.

