Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this thematic
debate, and congratulate you on having carried out your
presidency so successfully with so little lead time to
prepare yourself. We also thank you for your eloquent
statement this morning, and Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
very lucid briefing.

We appreciate the interesting concept paper
(S/20l4/30, annex) and the very concrete proposal
that it contains. It is the basis of my own statement.
My reference point is that the invitation that has been
extended to us to think about preventing war and
maintaining peace constitutes the Security Council's
raison d'etre - that is, what it does on a daily basis. In
that context, what we have before us is a discussion on
how effectively the Council is doing its job.

My delegation has just spent two years as a member
of this forum and has given considerable thought to how
the Council can and should go about the business of
maintaining international peace. It is hardly a topic that
can be adequately covered in four minutes. However, I
will make the following very brief points.

First, in spite of its serious flaws, the Council has
been relatively successful over the past two decades
in maintaining peace, and, when that has not been the
case, it has been relatively successful in containing
and managing conflicts. Syria heads the list of the few
exceptions to that observation.

Secondly, part ofthat success is due to a cumulative
learning process on the part of Member States, the
Secretariat, the community of non-governmental
organizations and civil society. When we compare
the practice of peacekeeping and peacebuilding today
with the practice as it was 10 years ago, we note major
innovations tending towards greater effectiveness and
a much greater effort to address the root causes of
conflict. We are all familiar with the gradual expansion
of the Council's thematic agenda, and there is no need
to belabour the point, except to stress your point,
Mr. President, that it is one thing to achieve peace and
another thing to achieve a firm and lasting peace.

Thirdly, having gone through a protracted internal
conflict ourselves, we share the concept note's
emphasis on a culture of tolerance and reconciliation.
However, we must be realistic and recognize that we
live in an imperfect world. We should always stress the
prevention of conflicts, but, in cases where, despite our
best efforts, we fail, we must move quickly to contain
them and use all of the increasing means available to
us to bring them to a speedy end, at the lowest cost in
humanitarian terms.

Fourthly, there are no blue books on how to
maintain peace. Circumstances and even personalities,
which play a pivotal role, differ in every case. The
Security Council must continue to tailor its mandates
to each unique situation.

Fifthly, the Security Council can greatly influence
events on the ground, but, ultimately, peace can be
maintained - or restored - only between the parties
in conflict, be it between States or within States. In
matters of war and peace, the international community
can play critical roles, but it is domestic actors that are
the final masters of their destiny. It is also important to
acknowledge and to address the increasing number of
sectarian and tribal conflicts, especially within States,
which obligates us to assess adapting the instruments
at the Council's disposal and the means to implement
them.

Finally, circumstances change, and trends are not
linear. We can never accept that worsening situations,
such as those we face today in various African and
Middle Eastern States, will inevitably lead to major
disasters. Both circumstances and trends can be acted
upon by both individuals and institutions. A judicious
mix of policies on the part of the Council can prevent
conflicts and reverse trends. In fact, Mr. President,
that is the whole point of having a proactive Security
Council, which has proved its value over and over again
during the past 67 years in achieving, in various cases,
the lasting peace on a solid basis that is mentioned in
your concept note.

