Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We too
have warmly welcomed the appointment of Ms. Carla Del
Ponte to this task and congratulate her on it, if that is the
right phrase for such a daunting responsibility. We are
very grateful to her for her briefing this morning.

I am glad to hear that she was impressed by the
quality of her staff when she first got to know them, and
I think it is right that the Council should pay tribute to
the staff of the Prosecutor's Office for what they have
done over the past few years. They have broken new
ground and have shown us that it is possible to end the
culture of impunity. I would like her to take back the
message from the Council that we warmly appreciate
what the whole staff of the Prosecutor's Office, and the
Court as a whole, has done.

We are grateful too for her updating us on the
details of what is happening on the Balkan scene and in
Kosovo in particular. There have been, I think, some
misstatements about the volume and the intensity of the
abuses that occurred during the conflict earlier this year,
and we are glad that she is paying immediate attention to
that.

The United Kingdom remains strongly committed to
the Tribunals and fully supports the Office of the
Prosecutor and her investigation of atrocities in bringing
the perpetrators of crimes against humanity to justice. I
think the United Kingdom has done as much as any
individual nation actually to take steps to help bring
indictees before the court, and it will continue to do so,
particularly in the Balkan sphere. We have heard her
appeal also for the need for forensic work now in
Kosovo; we are helping, and will continue to help, in that.

As others have said, it is the duty of States to hand
over the Tribunal's custody all those indictees residing in
their territory, in accordance with their obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. It is important
that they comply with Tribunal orders without undue
delay. We remain particularly concerned that indictees

 

remain at large in Republika Srpska and in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

The Serbian performance in this respect has been the
least satisfactory of all. Croatia also has been at times
dilatory, though at times also responsive about compliance
with the court, and the court wants us to remain - and we
should remain - in direct communication with Croatia to
make sure that it responds. We are particularly insistent that
Croatia should extradite the indictee Mladen Naletilie to
The Hague as soon as possible, and that the Croatian
Government should make progress on handing over
documents on Operation Storm and Operation Flash without
delay, to the satisfaction of the Court.

In this respect, I think we have to take rather sharper
notice among ourselves that the Security Council has a
responsibility to ensure that States live up to their
obligations. Just as the court is breaking new ground in this
area, so is the Security Council. In the expectation that we
shall soon have an International Criminal Court coming into
being and being operationally active, we have to discuss
further the obligation on the Security Council to make sure
that the Statutes are implemented.
The United Kingdom is concerned also at the recent
announcement by the Government of Rwanda to suspend
cooperation with the Tribunal for Rwanda. We hope that
both the Tribunal and the Government of Rwanda will
continue to work together and to maintain dialogue. We
note that before the Rwandan Government took this
decision, the Government and the Tribunal were beginning
to work more effectively together. We hope that the visit by
the Prosecutor and the return of her deputy to Kigali will
help improve relations to that end.

Again, we thank Ms. Del Ponte for her briefing this
morning. We hope that these briefings will be a regular
feature, and we look forward to seeing her return to the
Council.

