Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): West Africa is one of the most unstable
regions in the world; hence, the heightened attention
given to its problems by the Security Council. The
Council's mission to the region in June 2003 sent a
serious message to the parties to conflicts on the need
to comply with their obligations to cease hostilities, to
achieve political settlements, strictly to observe human
rights and the norms of humanitarian law and to
implement the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. It is important that the Security Council
monitor the reception of those signals by the parties
and the extent to which the requirements of the
international community are being fulfilled by the
participants in conflicts.

We have carefully considered the Secretary-
General's progress report on the recommendations of
the Security Council mission to West Africa and we
generally agree with its conclusions and assessments.
In the context of the settlement of specific crisis
situations in the subregion, we believe it important to
stress the following points.

The military coup d'etat in Guinea-Bissau on 14
September last year reaffirmed the misgivings of the
participants in the mission. Following the visit to
Guinea-Bissau and an assessment of the situation on
the ground, we felt this to be extremely realistic in the
light of the irresponsible policies of the previous
leadership of the country. Our recommendations with
regard to Guinea-Bissau and the new circumstances
retain their relevance. The key task of convening
elections following an unconstitutional transfer of
power is more important than ever. We welcome the
desire of the new authorities in Guinea-Bissau to
restore the constitutional order as soon as possible
through the holding of parliamentary and presidential
elections in accordance with democratic standards. In
the context of that task and of addressing the most
difficult social and economic situation in Guinea-Bissau,
there is an increasingly urgent need to provide that
country with the necessary assistance of the international
community, as the Security Council has regularly urged.

The recent positive changes in the settlement of
the situation in C6te d'Ivoire have breathed new life
into the peace process in that country and give us
reason to hope that the stated objectives of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement may be achieved. We welcome
the compliance with a number of the mission's
important recommendations, including the appointment
of ministers of defence and national security, the
guarantee by the forces of the Economic Community of
West African States for the safety of Ivorian political
figures and the adoption of an amnesty law. We feel,
however, that progress has not been very significant in
carrying out the recommendations with regard to such
key tasks as the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the
disbanding of paramilitary formations and the
extension of State authority throughout the national
territory. In order to strengthen and further develop the
peace process in C6te d'Ivoire, we need to intensify
international cooperation. We believe that the Security
Council in the near future will agree on and adopt a
resolution approving the establishment of a
comprehensive United Nations peacekeeping operation
in C6te d'Ivoire.

The long-standing instability in Liberia can
rightly be considered to be the most negative factor for
peace and security throughout West Africa. The key to
bringing peace to the subregion is a comprehensive and
lasting settlement to the Liberian conflict. We welcome
the progress achieved in the peace process in that
country, the catalyst for which was the peacekeeping
operation undertaken by the United Nations. We note
that the basic recommendations of the Security Council
mission with regard to Liberia either have already been
carried out or are in the process of being implemented.
However, our conscience is still burdened by the
ongoing impunity for criminal activity, including the
involvement of children in hostilities. In order to
strengthen the positive dynamic in the Liberian
settlement process, it is very important to complete, as
early as possible, the full deployment of the
peacekeeping mission in that country, in accordance
with the terms set out by the Security Council.

On the whole, we are satisfied with the
development of the peace process in Sierra Leone and
the state of the implementation of the Security Council
mission's recommendation there. Nevertheless, the
Sierra Leonean authorities still have a great deal to do
in the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in that country. The most important tasks for
the leadership of Sierra Leone are the resolution of
existing internal security problems, the enhancement of
controls over natural resources, including diamonds,
and the strengthening of the civil administration over
the entire territory of the country.

The broad scope of the missions'
recommendations deal with problems of a general
nature for the States of West Africa - problems that
have a direct effect on the course of conflicts and on
the situation of the people of those countries: the use of
mercenaries, the large number of armed groups, the
cross-border spillover of conflict, the illicit trade in
weapons, the recruitment of child soldiers and massive
violations of human rights and the norms of
humanitarian law. These problems should be discussed
in detail at a separate Security Council meeting, after
the issuance of the Secretary-General's report on cross-
border problems in West Africa and his
recommendations with regard to the practical steps to
take in order to resolve them.

