The Deputy Secretary-General: Before I begin
my address I would like to inform all present that we
are trying to lower the temperature in this house. I
think it is going to make our meetings much less
pleasant if we do not manage to solve that problem. So
we are working on it.

We meet today to address an issue of central
importance to our efforts to reform and revitalize
United Nations peacekeeping for a new era. This
meeting reflects a recognition that without strong,
close, and constructive cooperation among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the countries which supply
the troops for our missions, we cannot expect to find
success in this vital endeavour.

Over the past year the international community
has shown renewed political will to act to prevent
conflict through the instrument of peacekeeping. At the
same time, our operations are being asked to discharge
increasingly complex tasks, often in hostile
environments. In this context, it is more important than
ever that there be the closest possible cooperation
among the key elements in the peacekeeping
machinery.

In the General Assembly, in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and in the
Security Council, the international community has
repeatedly acknowledged the importance of a vibrant
and vigorous partnership, grounded in an ongoing
dialogue. Most recently, the need for partnership and
close communication was stressed in the report of the
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations. I hope that
today's discussion can help us to identify ways to
pursue this goal.

Much of the focus of today's discussion concerns
the framework for consultation between the Security
Council and troop-contributors. We all stand to gain
from a clear understanding between those who prepare
the mandates and those who execute them. Troop-
contributors need to know clearly what Security
Council members envision, and the Security Council
members need to understand what troop-contributors
are prepared to do. While the process of consultation
may be time-consuming and complex, it pays
invaluable dividends- not only for the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and the Council, but also
for those vulnerable populations we are seeking to
help.

A central aspect of this effort is to improve
cooperation between TCCs, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. This will help us address such problems
as commitment gaps in the contributions of troops;
failures or shortcomings in the operations; and
problems concerning safety and security, as you,
Mr. President, have mentioned. We in the Secretariat
are committed to providing accurate and timely
information to political decision-makers in the Security
Council, proposing options for action, and assessing
accurately the risks and costs of each of these options.
At the same time, we must provide troop contributors
with the information they need to decide whether they
wish to participate in a particular operation, including
the requirements and risks that are involved. With both
groups of interlocutors, our contacts allow us to listen
to and take account of their concerns, expectations and
insights.

In this context, the Secretariat attaches the
highest importance to providing frequent and
comprehensive briefings to Member States. We hold
consultations with Member States during the
formulation and revision of concepts of operations and
at times of crisis. With the recent increase in resources,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will be
able to make its senior staff available - including its
military and civilian police experts - to provide even
more frequent briefings. We look forward to exploring
with Member States how these sessions can be
improved so as to respond to their requirements as
fully as possible.

In addition to its regular meetings with groups of
troop contributors, the Secretariat stands ready to meet
with the representatives of individual Member States at
any time, upon request, to discuss any concerns
relating to the field. Furthermore, the Secretariat has
not hesitated to introduce innovations where this would
be useful; one example was the meeting the Secretariat
convened in August 2000 with chiefs of defence staff
of those countries contributing to the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).

In addition to the imperative to improve
consultations, the Panel on Peace Operations contains a
number of practical recommendations that can help
improve our cooperation with troop contributors. For
example, the establishment of a stand-by list of
military and civilian police specialists would accelerate
the recruitment of mission staff, which could then help
make use of the expertise of troop contributors early in
the planning phase.

Strengthened stand-by arrangements could lead to
further opportunities for training of all potential
peacekeepers, resulting in turn in a more coherent and
consistent approach. It could also allow many
administrative issues to be resolved in advance, such as
negotiations related to contingent-owned equipment.
This would reduce the risk of misunderstandings,
delays and frictions.

The strength and promise of peacekeeping lies in
its collaborative nature. By consulting closely, by
coordinating our responses and our actions and
establishing a relationship of trust and confidence, we
can fully exploit the potential of peacekeeping.

We welcome today's debate, which we hope will
lay the groundwork for still-closer ties among the
Security Council, troop contributors and the
Secretariat.

