Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Government of Spain and in particular, if
I may, my colleague and friend the Foreign Minister of
Spain, Miguel Moratinos, for having organized today's
debate.

Military peacekeeping and political peace
agreements bring an end - or they should - to the hot
war of conflict. But we can ensure lasting peace in
countries recovering from such conflicts only if we
help to build civilian institutions and structures,
capable government, a strong economy, a functioning
civil society. So resolving today's conflicts, which
often occur within States rather than between them, is
more complex than in the past. It may involve
stabilizing a fragile peace, restoring public order,
reintegrating combatants, acting on women's issues,
ending impunity, and rebuilding local institutions for
security, governance, justice, democracy, economic
growth and for social welfare.

Acting across all these areas presents us with big
challenges, made all the more acute by the need to act
quickly in the brief period following the end of the hot
conflict. Acting quickly is vital, as we know, for
success. But as well as being quick, we have to be
coherent, across a range of issues and a range of actors.

I think that, over the last decade, we all have been
on a very steep learning curve. We are agreeing more
comprehensive mandates, for example for the
operations that we have determined in Liberia, in Cote
d'Ivoire, in Haiti and in Burundi. We are learning the
importance of supporting programmes which originate
locally and which reflect local cultures, such as the
Loya Jirga in Afghanistan.

I think we are getting better at burden-sharing.
Last year, for example, the European Union police
mission in Bosnia took over from the United Nations-
led International Police Task Force there. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a European Union-
led force helped to prepare the way for United Nations
troops.

Alongside that, we are working more closely
across institutions, such as the United Nations and the
World Bank are doing in Iraq, the Sudan and Liberia,
and together with the Inter-American Bank and the
European Commission in Haiti.

All those improvements show the direction in
which we need to go in future. Let me suggest briefly
five areas on which we need to focus: earlier action,
better financing, stronger partnerships, local priorities
and long-term engagement.

First, on earlier action, we have got to plan and
implement civilian processes early so we are able
quickly to lay the foundations for stability. To take the
example of Iraq, Prime Minister Alawi has made clear
that it cannot simply be a case of security first and
elections later. Elections are themselves vital to
building security. We need to help the Secretariat
deploy civilian staff more quickly and improve our
own capacities - as the United Kingdom is doing
through a new interdepartmental, post-conflict
reconstruction unit between the British Foreign Office,
the British Department for International Development
and the British Ministry of Defence - so that we are
better able to give civilian support to United Kingdom
and international operations abroad.

Secondly, we need better financing for the
civilian parts of peace-support operations. I am not
necessarily arguing for an increase in the scope of
assessed contributions, but we have to find ways to
generate more funding for civilian peace-building
activities, especially in the vital first year after the end
of a conflict.

Thirdly, we have to build stronger partnerships.
Regional organizations can often mobilize resources
more quickly and have special, local legitimacy, which
is why I greatly welcome the contribution made earlier
this morning by the representative of the African
Union. It is the African Union that is playing a crucial
and leading role in the resolution of the conflict in
Darfur.

The European Union's capacities and
partnerships with the United Nations are growing, too,
and our partnership also needs to be with civil society
and non-governmental organizations. I welcome the
recommendations of the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations - the Cardoso
panel - on this.

Linked to all of this is a need to better coordinate
our actions. In post-conflict environments, competing,
conflicting or inappropriate programmes can often do
more harm than good. We have all seen examples of
that, where well-meaning individuals and Governments
take programmes down off the shelf, do not adapt them
to local circumstances and end up creating more, not
fewer, difficulties. There is much to be learned from
the trust fund models that we have seen in Afghanistan,
in Iraq, in Liberia and elsewhere.
My fourth point concerns local priorities, and it
relates to the point I have just made. We can no longer
impose structures that will collapse as soon as the
international community leaves. Instead, we have to
work to priorities agreed in and by the country
concerned and develop the local capacity to implement
them. The Afghan Transitional Administration is a
commendable example of that necessary local
leadership.

Fifthly, and finally, there is the question of long-
term engagement. We have to address the fact that
international political attention for the financing of
post-conflict countries tends to wane, or drop off, after
three or four years, although studies show that that is
precisely when countries are most vulnerable to
relapsing into conflict. We therefore need to find better
ways to mobilize long-term support for post-conflict
countries in transition. I hope that the High-level Panel
will propose some options for doing so.

It is also not just a matter for us; it is a matter for
the world media, because as their attention drops off,
so inevitably - in all the countries that we
represent - does the attention of our voters and then
the attention of our Governments. We have to try and
turn that around.

Let me end by commending the report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies
(S/2004/616). I look forward to discussing how we can
follow-up on its excellent analysis and
recommendations in the open debate on the report
under the United Kingdom's Security Council
presidency next month. These discussions are vitally
important, and we need to keep working on building
our capacities and partnerships, sharing expertise and
continually reviewing our operations to ensure that we
really do learn the lessons for the future and put them
into practice.

