Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Argentina for having convened
this open debate under your presidency, partly to mark
World Humanitarian Day and also to commemorate
the events that took place exactly 10 years in Baghdad,
when 22 members of the Secretariat made the ultimate
sacrifice while pursuing the noble humanitarian
mission of the United Nations.

We would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for the concept note (S/2013/447) circulated by your
delegation, which contains valuable guidance for
today's debate. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as to Navi Pillay,
Valerie Amos and Philip Spoerri for their respective
presentations.

This is the third time this year that we have
addressed the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We expressed our Views during the
debates held on 12 February and 17 July (see S/PV.6917 and S/PV.7003). We do not wish to reiterate the points
made in those statements, and there have been no major
changes in the situation on the ground to date, with the
exception of the signing of the Arms Trade Treaty. We
will therefore limit ourselves on this occasion to make
some observations concerning the questions raised in
the concept note.

The starting point of the note focuses on
shortcomings in the protection of civilians since the
Security Council adopted its pioneering resolution
1265 (1999). That point is reflected in the key phrase
contained in the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/20l2/376) and quoted in the concept note,
which describes the situation of the protection of
civilians as "abysmal". We would do well, then, to ask
ourselves collectively, "Why?"

One first, obvious answer lies in the serious
shortcomings of the Governments of the countries in
conflict, which frequently do not have the political
will or the institutional or organizational capacity to
fulfil their primary responsibility to ensure security
and the right to life for their own civilian populations.
Clearly, United Nations contingents cannot replace the
State in the fulfilment of such a basic commitment,
although they can sometimes contribute to mitigating
the situation.

In addition, we have specific cases on the agenda of
the Council where States, far from helping humanitarian
aid reach the victims, prevent it from doing so. By the
same token, those States, instead of respecting the
norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights law, are deliberately violating them. It is for
that reason that, together with the palliative work of
the peacekeeping operations, a greater complementary
effort in capacity-building is needed, both for State and
non-State institutions. In that regard, there is a crucial
role for the United Nations Development Programme
and the multilateral financial institutions. Furthermore,
we believe that the norms of international humanitarian
law must continually be analysed in the light of new
circumstances or difficulties that arise in the field.

A second serious failure can be attributed to
militias and rebel groups revolting against national
Governments, which is a subject of extraordinary
complexity. We know relatively little about how to
encourage such diverse groups - the majority of which
are anarchical in nature - to comply with international
norms regarding the protection of civilians, especially
the most vulnerable civilians. We have cases on our
agenda in which not only did the States fail to fulfil
their most basic responsibility, but the armed rebel
groups have also committed mass atrocities against
civilian populations.

Although we usually include in our statements and
resolutions language demanding that the perpetrators of
such acts be held accountable before justice, that rarely
occurs. For our part, we have firmly supported not only
the rigorous observance of international humanitarian
law and human rights, but have also insisted on the
particular usefulness of the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court in holding individuals and
collective groups accountable in certain cases. In the
same sense, we value the mechanism of the independent
international commissions of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council.

The third failure in enhancing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict situations can be found
within the Security Council. Ajoint investigation by the
Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations criticized
the Council for not having offered clearer and more
detailed guidance that would have enhanced the United
Nations capacity to offer effective protection to civilian
populations and develop local capacities to make its
own role transitory. Furthermore, when we have not
achieved consensus on a clear path of action, as is the
case with the Syrian Arab Republic, the humanitarian
consequences have been catastrophic. We believe that
we ourselves carry the burden of responsibility for that
flagrant failure to protect innocent civilians, including
women and children.

Finally, I would like to say that the use of modern
technology, such as drones and remotely operated
weapons, complicates efforts to implement the
fundamental norms of international humanitarian law
concerning the distinction between combatants and
non-combatants or civilians. It also complicates the
issue of proportionality in asymmetric conflicts, in
which forces that are very unequal in terms of military
or technological capacity are deployed. And it hampers
the precautions that must be taken, in choosing the
means and methods of attack, so as to ensure that all
feasible measures are employed to avoid or at least
reduce the number of dead and wounded among the
civilian population.

In conclusion, almost 15 years have passed since
our peacekeeping operations were first charged with
the protection of civilians. Missions have increasingly
been charged with such tasks in situations of armed
conflict that, more often than not, pit Governments
against non-State armed groups from their own
civilian populations, or in States that are experiencing
inter-ethnic or inter-communal conflicts. Apparently,
the rich trove of lessons learned from that diverse
collection of experiences has not been translated into
corresponding improvements in our performance in
the field. In addition, we have doubts as to whether the
most recent innovations aimed at focusing missions
on the imposition of peace will improve or worsen
the situation. In any case, we have a robust arsenal of
instruments and policies at our disposal that, at very
least, has the potential of improving our performance
in the matter of protection of civilians.

