Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Allow me to start by
reiterating our profound sorrow and heartfelt
condolences for the loss of a great number of lives
following the natural disasters in the People's Republic
of China and Myanmar. We wish the injured a speedy
and full recovery. I would also like to join previous
speakers in commending the United Kingdom's
presidency for organizing today's meeting on
post-conflict peacebuilding.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by Slovenia on behalf of the European Union. I
would like, however, to make a few remarks about
Turkey's approach to the subject.

Turkey has always been a staunch supporter of
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. In that regard,
we welcomed the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which we believe effectively fills an
institutional gap within the United Nations system in
terms of post-conflict management. The achievements
of the Peacebuilding Commission so far in Burundi,
Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau are encouraging. We
think that the long-term role and capacity of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be fostered to
enable it to include more post-conflict cases on its
agenda.

But that does not in any way absolve the States
concerned from their responsibilities to work to build
peace in their own countries. The ownership of
peacebuilding belongs first and foremost to the country
concerned itself.

Experience has shown that it is much easier to
win a war than to win the peace. There is a fine and
delicate line between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and between peacebuilding and possible relapse.
Failure is inevitable if peace is not supported from day
one. Relapsing into conflict poses an even greater
threat. Tangible results can only be achieved if security
considerations and needs are addressed at a very early
stage in post-conflict situations. Failure to build
national security institutions can lead to the failure in
the peacebuilding process. We have seen that happen in
a number of countries in the post-conflict era.

Of course, peacebuilding is not only confined to
the security dimension. Simultaneous progress in all
the dimensions of peacebuilding is absolutely
necessary. Good governance, human rights and
capacity-building in all sectors are all part and parcel
of the process. One must therefore consider them all
together. It is crucial that the vast network of actors
operate effectively and coherently. Every country could
try to contribute to the process according to its own
resources and expertise. That is how we approach the
issue.

Cognizant of that wide framework, Turkey is
currently focusing on the security dimension of the
peacebuilding process and attaches particular
importance to the civilian police component of United
Nations missions. That is mainly because the demand
for United Nations civilian police in post-conflict
situations has grown tremendously. At present, Turkey
is the eleventh largest police contributor, with hundreds
of police officers serving in 10 different United
Nations missions. We intend to further increase that
contribution. With the ongoing growth in size and
complexity of United Nations operations, we believe
that we may consider undertaking a comprehensive
review of the capabilities and needs of the police
component at United Nations Headquarters. In that
respect, we equally welcome the establishment of the
Standing Police Capacity.

As for the issue of rapid and flexible funding, I
believe the Peacebuilding Fund sets a good example.
Contributions have exceeded the envisaged target of
$250 million. That shows the international
community's trust and faith in the success of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Turkey has already made a
contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund without any
caveat. Turkey will continue to support the
enhancement of the peacebuilding efforts of the United
Nations in every possible way.

