Mr. Arias (Spain)(sp0ke in Spanish): I would like
to begin by saying how much I regret the fact that
Ambassador Wang is leaving us. I am convinced that
the entire Council, both permanent and non-permanent
members, will miss him, because of the common sense,
moderation and expertise that he has always shown. At
the same time, I want to welcome our Chilean
colleague, and I wish him every success in his stay
here on the Security Council and in the United Nations.

We are grateful to Mr. Guehenno for his briefing
and to Mr. Costa for his very complete presentation.
Spain supports the statement that will be made by
Greece on behalf of the European Union.

As has been amply stated, the entire process in
Afghanistan is threatened by the deterioration of
security. The increase in crime, daily acts of
intimidation, battling among factions, the major
activity of elements linked to the Taliban and drug
trafficking are all endangering the reconstruction
effort. Unfortunately, for many, drugs have become a
way of life in Afghanistan, and the challenge is
precisely to change this way of life. It is necessary to
act against the flow of money caused by the trafficking
and to avoid having the money give increasing power
to the warlords.

We want to see the completion of the 10-year
strategy for national drug control, prepared by the
Afghan Government with the assistance of the United
Kingdom, and we support the emphasis that has been
placed on the rule of law, on the reduction of demand
and on promotion of an alternative sustainable
development.

Links between the illicit traffic in drugs,
organized crime and financing of terrorist activities
have been reiterated in different United Nations
forums. Mr. Costa has enlightened us today by
highlighting the fact that the international fight against
drugs means carrying out development programmes
and strengthening activities with respect to reduction in
supply, but also of demand. It is necessary to focus on
a global approach and to address all three areas:
production, trafficking and consumption.

Together with shared responsibility between
consumer and producer countries, another principal
area is the need to consider the drug question as an
integral part of policy development and human rights.
All of our countries, together with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), need to increase
cooperation in order to strengthen border controls, to
identify and dismantle groups involved in drug
trafficking, to carry out programmes to reduce demand
and to offer assistance in the area of information.

The Paris Conference on drug routes from Central
Asia to Europe emphasized the need for a global, well
balanced and coordinated approach at the international
and regional levels to tackle the drug threat. It is our
hope that the so-called Paris Covenant will be fulfilled
by everyone.

Lastly, in the sphere of international action, we
invite the parties to the 1988 Convention Against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
to contribute towards the seizure of goods in cases of
drug trafficking, including money-laundering, to the
specialized international organizations that are
involved in the fight against drug trafficking. This is an
essential aspect of international action that has already
been carried out by Spain through its contribution to
UNODC.

