Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank you, Sir, for having taken the felicitous
initiative of organizing this public debate and for
ensuring the high level of representation here by
presiding over it yourself. We also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico and the Vice-
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile.

I should also like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General and to express our gratitude to him
for having shed light on our deliberations today, which
will be considerably enriched by the contributions of
the high-level leaders of the regional organizations
invited and present here.

Today's debate is being held at a critical stage in
the development of international relations. It provides
us with a timely opportunity jointly to consider a
common strategy to strengthen synergy between the
United Nations and the regional organizations in order
to meet the challenges facing the international
community today.

Given its universal mission, the United Nations,
since its founding, has endeavoured to fulfil the role
entrusted to it: that of the primary guarantor of
international peace and security. Indeed, the Charter
authorizes it to use regional organizations for support.
The United Nations has therefore been able to establish
partnership relations with a number of such
organizations that have a mandate in this area.

On the other hand, the work of the Security
Council has become more complex and more
multidimensional, to the extent that, in the context of
its initiatives to maintain peace and security, it has had
further to rely on regional organizations through the
establishment of networks for the exchange of
information and mechanisms for capacity development.

In Africa, the proliferation of internal armed
conflicts has forced regional and subregional African
organizations to shoulder increased responsibility in
the area of conflict management in that region of the
world. The Security Council has consistently endorsed
such initiatives, thus reinforcing their legitimacy under
the Charter, which, in Article 53, states that

"no enforcement action shall be taken under
regional arrangements or by regional agencies
without the authorization of the Security
Council."

From the point of view of subsidiarity, it would
seem, therefore, that the member States of a given
region should, through regional agreements, build up a
rapid-reaction capacity in order to be in a position to
deal with situations that pose serious threats or that
could lead to a breach of the peace, and that the
launching of United Nations peacekeeping operations
would take place only in the face of an increased threat
that cannot be dealt with through regional mobilization
alone.

It is also important that a genuine
complementarity be developed between the actions of
the Security Council and regional contributions to
peace and security. Depending on the seriousness of the
situation and the speed of the action required, regional
organizations may offer a comparative advantage in
terms of their capacity to intervene rapidly to prevent a
situation from spiralling out of control. It is therefore
important that a strategic partnership be established
between the United Nations and regional organizations
for more effective interaction.

But that division of labour is not a given. It can
be credible only if it is based on a proactive strategy
that involves the creation and strengthening of regional
capacity, so that that responsibility can be fully
shouldered at the appropriate time. From that point of
view, we welcome the decision taken by the Group of
Eight to assist regional organizations in acquiring their
own capacity for the maintenance of peace, particularly
in Africa, in the context of support for the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD).

We deem it important that there be increased
coordination with regional mechanisms for the
prevention and management of regional conflicts and
crises, such as the African Union's Peace and Security
Council and the Mediation and Security Council of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Interaction between the United Nations
and regional organizations should therefore be based
not only on consultations but also on the rational use of
the possibilities and resources that are available, with
pride of place given to the leadership role of the
international world Organization, on the basis of a
rational division of tasks.

From another point of view, NEPAD and
ECOWAS are clear examples of the awareness of the
genuine link that must be established between peace
and economic and social development, which regional
integration organizations must promote. The fact that
most of the regional organizations that are United
Nations partners have economic objectives, particularly
in Africa, gives them genuine potential for contributing
to the elimination of the root causes of armed conflicts
within States through the advancement of rational
economic policies. They also should benefit from
increased attention from the United Nations to that end.
Indeed, genuine regional integration can also serve as
an effective remedy to counter rebellions and
irredentism. The example of the European Community
would seem to be the best illustration in that respect.
Clearly integration is not something to be found only in
texts; it must be effective and, indeed, truly
experienced by the peoples of the region or subregion
involved.

Cooperation with regional organizations can
promote the implementation of the regional approach
that is now being tried out in West Africa within the
framework of the stabilization process for post-conflict
countries or countries that are working to overcome a
serious political crisis. In my delegation's view, that is
an unprecedented, and most welcome, development in
the search for a coherent solution to several conflicts.
Conflicts in West Africa, for the most part, are
spawned by the same underlying causes, even though
their manifestations differ from one country to another.

In that context, we welcome the cooperation
between the United Nations Office for West Africa,
ECOWAS and other actors working for peace in the
subregion, as well as the emerging possibility for the
countries of the region to pool their efforts to resolve,
in close cooperation with the United Nations, trans-
border and transnational problems. It is important that
that approach receive ever-greater support from the
States Members of the United Nations.

