Mr. Liviu Bota: the standing mechanism of working
meetings between the Georgian and Abkhaz sides. This,
in tandem with work on the political documents, allows
for progress to be made on mutual confidence-building
measures and for the intensification of economic and
cultural cooperation between the parties. It is important
that the agreements reached by the parties in these areas
be implemented.

We welcome the meetings held in Athens and
Istanbul between the Georgian and Abkhaz sides under
the chairmanship of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Georgia. We take note of the value
of these meetings from the point of view of maintaining
the positive dynamism in the dialogue between the parties
and of building confidence between them.

We are pleased to note the continuing close
interaction between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in resolving
the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia. This cooperation is
taking place strictly on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter, and the activities of the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States are
backed by the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, which repeatedly have welcomed the important
contribution of the CIS peacekeeping force in helping to
stabilize the situation in the conflict zone.

A little more than a month ago, 21 June, marked the
fifth anniversary of the deployment, at the request of the

 

parties, of the CIS peacekeeping force in Abkhazia,
Georgia. During that period, through the peacemaking
efforts of the CIS, 23,000 explosive devices have been
rendered harmless and more than 250 hectares of arable
land demined. This force, through its very presence, has
also enhanced the security of the refugees who have been
spontaneously returning to the Gali region.

The Russian delegation supports the further six-month
extension of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia. We share the view of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations regarding the substantive and important role
of the Mission in stabilizing the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, and in seeking to find a peaceful settlement to the
conflict.

While we attach great importance to the question of
security in the area of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict, we
deem it only fair to point out that recently the situation in
this region has considerably improved, although it does
remain rather fragile. We have also taken steps to enhance
the effectiveness of the CIS peacekeeping force in order to
ensure the security of the international personnel of the
United Nations.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned at the
persistent terrorist activities of the so-called uncontrolled
armed groups in the Gali region, which increasingly are
targeting civilians. We agree with the Secretary-General
that it is precisely these terrorist groups that are the main
cause of instability and tension in the area of conflict, and
we demand that the sides take decisive action to put an end
to their criminal and destructive activities.

Russia is prepared to continue to do its utmost to
ensure that the parties reach mutually acceptable
agreements and that progress in made towards an overall
political settlement.

