The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
Uruguay.

I would like to thank the ambassadors of Egypt,
Kazakhstan and Bolivia, the Chairs of the three
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, and to resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004), and their detailed briefings on the Committees'
work combating terrorism. I would also like to thank
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team ofthe Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and as the
Office of the Ombudsperson for the work they do in
accordance with their mandates. Uruguay encourages
cooperation and coordination between the Committees
and we hope that it will continue in the areas discussed
and that other possible areas of cooperation can be
found, particularly with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

In our View, the Committees' reports provide
us with very useful information that allows us to
understand the dimension of the terrorist phenomenon
and how it is developing.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
we particularly appreciate the country visits by the
Committee's Executive Directorate, which make
it possible to identify strengths and weaknesses in
normative matters, as well as in institutional, technical
and operational capacity. This, in addition to the
identification and exchange of good practices and to the
role that the Committee meets in providing technical
assistance, are an example of what international
cooperation can offer to those countries that need it.

In that connection, we appreciate in particular
the recent visit to Uruguay by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, as well as its
recommendations and assessments, and we express our
desire to continue to work together with it in a spirit of
frank cooperation. This is important to us, not only to
prepare us from a national perspective, but also as part
of our commitment to the United Nations system and
as an expression of our responsibility to and solidarity
with members of the international community. We also
consider very useful the thematic reports and meetings
organized by the Committee to address different
aspects of the terrorist phenomenon.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (201 l) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL)/Da'esh, Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, we believe to be
of vital importance the Committee's monitoring of
ISIL, Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and its important work to
neutralize the capacity for action of all who are included
on the Committee's sanctions list through the freezing
of assets, travel bans and arms embargoes. However,
we note that a large part of the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime depends on the cooperation and the
commitment of States to keep the list up to date. The
creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson, pursuant
to resolution 1904 (2009), represents an important step
forward in favour of procedural guarantees that help to
provide the regime with impartiality and transparency.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), we are concerned by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
growing risk that these could fall into the hands of
non- State actors, including terrorist groups. That is why
consider important the preventive role played by the
1540 Committee and the work of the Committee in its
areas of work: implementation, assistance, cooperation,
transparency and dissemination.

While the mandates of the three Committees differ,
there are important areas of complementarity and
cooperation among the Committees and the experts
is important to promote the effective implementation
by States of their obligations pursuant to Security
Council resolutions.

In conclusion, for Uruguay, it is crucial that we
continue all antiterrorist activities in the framework
of the rule of law and that we respect and protect
fundamental freedoms.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
