Ms. Rasi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union

 

- Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia - and the associated
countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free
Trade Association countries members of the European
Economic Area - Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway -
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is deeply appreciative of the
intensive work that you, Sir, and other delegations carried
out during the last days - work that resulted in the
adoption of this resolution.

The European Union has on many occasions warmly
welcomed the result of the popular consultation of the East
Timorese people on 30 August 1999. The European Union
considers imperative Indonesia's commitment to the full
implementation of the 5 May 1999 Agreement between
Portugal and Indonesia. We are committed to seeing the
people of East Timor enjoy the independence that they have
freely chosen.

The European Union condemns in the strongest terms
the atrocious acts of terror in East Timor that have followed
the announcement of the result of the popular consultation
and that have been perpetrated with the complicity of the
Indonesian armed forces and police. We would like to
reiterate our position that the Government of Indonesia
remains responsible for law and order in the territory.

The European Union takes note of President Habibie's
announcement that Indonesia would be ready to accept an
international force to help create peace in East Timor,
protect the population of the territory and implement the
outcome of the popular consultation. We look forward to
the immediate deployment of the international force. Order,
security and the rule of law must be restored immediately.
The European Union welcomes the early decision by the
Security Council to enable the rapid deployment of an
international presence. Our attitude towards Indonesia will
depend on its full cooperation with the international force.

In this context, I would like to inform the Council that
the European Union Foreign Ministers, at their meeting of
13 September, agreed, for a period of four months, on an
embargo on the export of arms, munitions and military
equipment, a ban on the supply of equipment which might
be used for internal repression or terrorism, and a
suspension of bilateral military cooperation. The European
Union will decide, in the light of the situation after that
period, on a possible further suspension for a period to be
determined.

The European Union stresses that an urgent priority
is to remedy the grave humanitarian situation. We would
like to express our deepest indignation at the attacks
which have been mounted on humanitarian personnel,
church members and human rights defenders. We urge the
Indonesian Government to take no action which would
further endanger the lives of internally displaced persons
within East Timor. We also call on the Indonesian
Government to allow the safe return of international
humanitarian organizations and agencies to East Timor
without delay and to grant full and immediate access for
international humanitarian agencies in West Timor and
elsewhere in Indonesia. They must have secure access to
displaced persons to allow them safe return to their
homes.

The European Union will urgently pursue the
implementation of humanitarian aid and the provision, in
coordination with international organizations, notably the
United Nations Development Programme, of further
humanitarian assistance to those in need. The European
Union also supports the call of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for the convening of a
special session of the Commission on Human Rights. We
call for an investigative mission by that Commission to
gather the facts and ascertain responsibility for the
campaign of terror which followed the holding of the
referendum.

The European Union pays tribute to the United
Nations for the organization of the popular consultation,
and to the courage and extraordinary work of the
personnel of the United Nations Mission in East Timor in
the most challenging of circumstances.

After the resounding vote in the popular
consultation, East Timor's independence must proceed
without delay, as provided for in the Agreement of 5 May
1999. The States members of the European Union look
forward to recognizing East Timor once the process
towards independence is complete.

We would also like to emphasize our desire to see
a strong, democratic and united Indonesia.

