Mr. Scott (United States of America): We are
obliged to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate, as we are to Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his detailed presentation this
morning. That presentation, and that of the Secretary-
General's report of last year, paint a disturbing picture,
but we are encouraged that this meeting helps to
reaffirm the international community's commitment to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The world continues to be plagued by violent
conflicts, with civilians now comprising the major
category of casualties of war worldwide. We commend
the work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, together with its humanitarian
partners on the ground, for their valuable work in
providing life-saving assistance and advocacy for the
protection of civilians, particularly children, women,
the elderly and other vulnerable groups.

We would like to stress, however, that the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians lies with
States and their Governments, and that international
efforts can only complement government efforts.
Improving the protection of civilians from the
devastating effects of armed conflict depends largely
not on what we say or do here, but on what
Governments do to protect their own people and on
how they allow others to assist.

Let me now turn to specific cases of concern. We
continue to be gravely concerned about the ongoing
crisis in Darfur, and especially about the impact of that
conflict on civilians in that region. While in some areas
the scale of the violence has decreased, civilians
continue to be directly targeted, and more than 2
million remain displaced from their homes. In addition,
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers have been
increasingly targeted. That continuing insecurity has a
direct detrimental impact on the international
community's ability to deliver assistance and provide
basic services for the victims of the conflict. The
situation in Darfur illustrates the urgent role that States
must play to safeguard civilians, including those who
are internally displaced. It is also important to reiterate
that internally displaced civilians living in camps can
continue to face serious human rights violations.

Several other countries, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, are marked by delicate
situations of transition, in which many protection
challenges have increased. The United Nations
peacekeeping and assistance missions, together with
support from non-governmental organizations, help to
ensure that civilians in those regions are not denied the
dividends of peace.

We are encouraged that that Security Council has
been addressing the regional dimension of civilian
protection more consistently. Furthermore, Security
Council resolutions and peacekeeping mandates
regularly identify key protection issues, including the
deliberate targeting of civilians, forced displacement,
the use of sexual and other forms of gender-based
violence, the recruitment and use of child soldiers - in
violation of international law - the need for
unhindered humanitarian access at reasonable times
and places and the safety of United Nations and
associated humanitarian personnel.

As we once again reaffirm the commitment to
reinforce and strengthen the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and in the resulting situations of
humanitarian crisis, let us ensure that our words and
intentions become action.

