Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me also thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special
Envoy of the Secretary-Genera, Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, for their informative briefings.

Poland welcomes the recent efforts by the leadership
of the Sudan and South Sudan to enhance bilateral
relations between the two countries. We encourage the
Sudanese and South Sudanese authorities to continue
building on the rapprochement that we have witnessed
over the past months and work together to achieve a
lasting solution to the status of the Abyei Area.

Despite those encouraging developments, we note
with regret that very little progress has been made on the
issues of border demarcation and the process leading to
the final status of Abyei, especially with regard to the
establishment ofjoint institutions in the Abyei Area.

We are concerned that the lack of genuine
cooperation between the Sudan and South Sudan will
perpetuate the administrative vacuum that exists in
Abyei. The security situation in the Area remains fragile,
with criminality on the rise. The absence of effective
formal authorities in Abyei is resulting in limited law
enforcement and the lack of good governance and the
rule of law. Widespread poverty and unemployment,
as well as the lack of basic social services, are only
contributing to the volatility of the situation.

In that context, I would like to praise the role of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). My country continues to believe that the
relatively stable security situation in Abyei can be
attributed to a large extent to the mission's efforts
and the sacrifices made daily by its personnel on the
ground. We believe, however, that the presence of
UNISFA cannot be a substitute for the role of the State.

We remain convinced that every peacekeeping
mission needs to adapt to the changing realities on
the ground. That also applies to UNISFA, which has
to be able to adjust its tasks to the current situation in
Abyei. We voted in favour of UNISFA's new mandate
last year, which reinforced the police component within
the Mission and enhanced its civilian capacities. Today
we note with regret that the increase in police personnel
has yet to be implemented and that the civilian Deputy
Head of Mission has yet to be appointed. We call
on the Sudan authorities to facilitate the mission's
reconfiguration. We support the renewal of UNISFA's
mandate for another six months and remain in favour of
strengthening the political posture of the mission and
enhancing its capacity to support the political process
in Abyei Area.

I stress that the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the 2011 Agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of South
Sudan on Border Security and the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism and the 2012 Agreements on
Cooperation and Security Arrangements lies with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan. Poland
believes that the Security Council should remain
unified in its message and encourage both Governments
to swiftly establish the joint mechanisms with full
capabilities, normalize border agreements and, in
terms of the long-term perspective, elaborate a political
solution that will lead to lasting peace in Abyei. There
is no way for the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve
the question of Abyei other than through dialogue,
including intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation,
and a genuine and inclusive political process, involving
women and youth.

Finally, let me draw the Council's attention to my
colleague, Poland's Political Coordinator, sitting behind
me. As everyone knows, to a large extent, the Council's
work rests on the Coordinator's shoulders. It is Kamil
Krzysztof Mielus' last day at the Mission in New
York - at least for the time being. I hope that Council
members share my belief that Kamil has contributed
greatly the work of the Council. I therefore shout out
and offer my kudos to Kamil for his work and daily
commitment. I thank him.

