Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, Madam President, I would like to welcome
you to New York and to thank you for personally
presiding over today's public debate. The selection of
the topic of the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, in the maintenance of international
peace and security, is a vivid indication of South
Africa's great interest in this important issue.

In recent years, South Africa has made
unremitting efforts and important contributions in
promoting the development of the African Union and
maintaining peace and security on the African
continent. We would like to express our admiration and
appreciation for this. Allow me also to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo, the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union and the Secretary-General of the Department of
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia for their presence at
today's meeting.

I would like to make the following comments on
the subject of today's open debate. First, China firmly
supports full cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. How to further
strengthen coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in the
maintenance of peace and security is a new issue
facing United Nations Member States.
The United Nations is like one big family
comprising the international community. Matters that
come before this big family should be managed by all.
As the old Chinese saying goes, joint efforts to collect
firewood will build a blazing fire. And another tells us
that close neighbours are dearer than distant kin.

Peace and harmony in this big family of the
international community rest on cooperation and
mutual assistance among its members. This is even
more the case among neighbouring countries. In recent
years, China and neighbouring Asian countries have
been exploring various ways to maintain peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacific region and have achieved
some positive results. The 10 + 3 cooperation accord
among the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), China, Japan and the Republic of Korea has
played a prominent role in promoting peace, stability
and development in the region. The Shanghai
Cooperation Organization has also provided an
effective platform for carrying out a multilateral
dialogue on security in the region and is widely
acknowledged by the international community.

On the basis of those ideas and practices, China
fully understands and respects the wish of the African
countries to play a greater role in resolving their
regional issues through intensified cooperation with the
international community. This, in itself, is a great
contribution to international peace and security.

Secondly, strengthening cooperation with
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the area of peace and security, can contribute to the
Council's efforts to carry out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Under Chapter VIII of the Charter, the Security
Council should encourage the development of pacific
settlement of regional disputes through regional
arrangements. Regional organizations, owing to the
comparative advantage they enjoy because of their
geographical location, can also play a unique role in
settling regional issues and maintaining peace and
stability in the region. By strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
we can not only react more rapidly and effectively to
conflict situations, but also ease the ever-increasing
United Nations peacekeeping operations burden.

Over the past 10 years, the United Nations and
regional organizations have engaged in a variety of
cooperation and coordination efforts in the areas of
conflict prevention, peaceful settlement of disputes and
peacebuilding, thus contributing effectively to
strengthening the United Nations role and to the
maintenance of international and regional peace and
security. It has been shown through many years of
practice, on the basis of respect for the United Nations
Charter, that regional organizations can fully develop
and play an active role in maintaining regional and
international peace and security and can fully tap their
own potential for taking actions.

Thirdly, sufficient and explicit policy statements
exist on strengthening mutually reinforcing
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union. What is needed now
even more is concrete action. Over many years, the
General Assembly and the Security Council have
adopted a number of resolutions and presidential
statements. The 2005 World Summit reaffirmed the
importance of strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union.

As regards promoting cooperation and interaction
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of the maintenance of peace and security in the
region, what is more important is to take more tangible
action and help the African Union resolve certain
specific issues. The African Union has now deployed
peacekeeping missions in various parts of Africa and
has played an important role in easing tensions and
resolving disputes there. At the same time, African
Union peacekeeping operations are faced with a
multitude of challenges in terms of personnel and
financing, which have constrained the Union's ability
to play its unique role in this area.

The United Nations and the international
community should continue to provide the African
Union with increased assistance in the form of training
and logistical support. It should help the African Union
to improve its early warning and integrated
peacekeeping capacities, so that the Union can bring
fully into play its unique role in settling issues specific
to Africa.

China hopes that the Secretary-General will be
able to provide us with concrete and practical
recommendations relating to the division of
responsibility between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping and to the
promotion of dialogue and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union.

China welcomes and supports the draft
presidential statement provided by South Africa. We
support its adoption at the end of the meeting.

