Dr. Amathila (Namibia): I will certainly be very
brief. I only have three points to make here.

I do not want any impression to be created that the
African Governments are sleeping on the problem. We have
proven that the Governments have made serious, serious
efforts in fighting the scourge of HIV/AIDS.

Of course, as we said, we cannot afford the medicines,
but we are working very hard on prevention. Our
communities are fully informed, and we are not sitting and
waiting for other people to come and do the work for us.

This is a question of partnership. HIV is not only an
African problem; we, as partners, can really work together
in order to fight AIDS as a nation, just as we would any
infections that come our way, such as plague - just as we
are fighting polio and as we fought smallpox. I think this
is what we are requesting other Governments to do; but
they should not think that African Governments are
irresponsible and are not doing anything. That is not the
issue. We are all working very hard on this question.

Secondly, I would like to reiterate the need for
vaccines. I would like to request the researchers, when they
research the vaccines, to also include sub-group C, the
group in our area in southern Africa. I think the vaccines
that they are busy testing include only sub-groups A and B,
if the information that we got in Lusaka in the last three
months is correct. I want the vaccines; we are asking for
these vaccines to be affordable to everybody, particularly to
us in Africa. They should not be made so expensive, like
the anti-viral drugs that we cannot afford. I think that we
have to work very hard so that these vaccines will be
affordable for our people.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate that while we are
trying to treat those who are infected - and we treat the
opportunistic diseases and also the other sexually
transmitted diseases - it is important that we continue
with our education programmes. We are also targeting
schools in order to stop the new infections, because we
cannot do much about those who are already infected. I
think the programmes must be strengthened in schools.
We have asked our Ministries of Education to include
HIV/AIDS as part of their school curricula.

On behalf of my delegation and others, I thank you
once again, Mr. President, for making it possible for this
issue of HIV/AIDS finally to come to this Council, and
it should not be the last time. I think we should continue
to fight together. I am very happy with the input from
everybody who spoke.

