Ms. Bensouda: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding over the
Council for the month of November, and to take this
opportunity to also thank you, Sir, for your continued
support of the work of my Office and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) more broadly, both as Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations here in
New York, as well as Vice-President of the Assembly
of States Parties.

I welcome this opportunity to update the Council
on my Office's activities in Libya since I last reported
in May (see S/PV.7934).

I observe with regret that the security situation in
Libya remains a matter of great concern. Indeed, as
the Council has stated repeatedly, the volatile situation
in Libya remains a threat to international peace and
security. Libya continues to confront many challenges:
the proliferation of armed groups; the continued, albeit
lessened, activity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL); the humanitarian crisis created by Libya
being the key transit point for hundreds of thousands of
migrants; and the ongoing struggle for political power
in many parts of the country.

At the same time, and notwithstanding those
challenges, it is important to recognize the efforts of
numerous actors - first and foremost, the Libyans
themselves, as well as Libya's neighbours, international
partners and regional organizations, who are all
working to achieve peace and stability in Libya through
an inclusive dialogue.

As underlined recently by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, the re-establishment of the
rule of law, the protection of human rights and the need
to combat impunity must form part of the process that
will lead to a sustainable political settlement in Libya.

Justice is an important component of sustainable
peace. Courts with competent jurisdiction over crimes
committed in Libya, including the International
Criminal Court, have a crucial role to play.
Accountability for serious crimes and full respect for
the rule of law are key factors that must be encouraged
and supported if Libya is to achieve peace, security and
stability. We are striving to do our part. Since my last
report before the Council six months ago, my Office
has made substantial progress in the investigations of
alleged crimes committed in Libya. In that regard, let
me now turn to the most recent warrant of arrest issued
by the Court in the Libya situation.

Members will recall that in my May statement and
report to the Council, I highlighted reports of serious
crimes allegedly being committed in the context of the
conflict between forces of the Libyan National Army
(LNA) and the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council
in and around Benghazi. Specifically, I noted reports
of serious crimes, including summary executions
allegedly committed following the LNA's takeover of
the Ganfouda neighbourhood of Benghazi on or around
18 March. I called on all parties to the conflict to
refrain from carrying out serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. I reminded
all parties to the conflict of the provisions of the Rome
Statute relating to the responsibility of commanders
and superiors to prevent or repress the commission
of crimes by their forces and to submit any such
crimes for investigation and prosecution. I also noted
that my Office was closely monitoring that situation.
In the following months, my Office continued to
receive credible information of grave crimes allegedly
perpetrated in Libya, including in Benghazi.

Based on the evidence of these alleged crimes
committed in and around Benghazi, on 1 August, I
applied for a warrant of arrest for Major Mahmoud
Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli. On 15 August, Pre-Trial
Chamber I of the Court granted the application and issued
a warrant for his arrest. The suspect, Mr. Al-Werfalli,
is a commander in the Al-Saiqa Brigade, a Benghazi-
based Special Forces unit that has been active in the
LNA's Operation Dignity since May 2014. Based on
the evidence collected, we allege that Mr. Al-Werfalli
is responsible for the war crime of murder in relation
to six unlawful executions that allegedly took place in
or around Benghazi between March and July 2017, as
well as another execution that allegedly took place on
or before June 2016. These executions were filmed and
posted to social media sites. Mr. Al-Werfalli is alleged
to have ordered or personally committed the seven
executions that resulted in the murder of 33 people in
cold blood.

My Office follows the evidence and applies the
law, independently and impartially, as set by the
Rome Statute, irrespective of the affiliation of the
perpetrators or the victims. Since the issuance of the
warrant, there have been public reports of a possible
arrest and an internal investigation by the LNA into
Mr. Al-Werfalli's actions. The LNA has officially stated
that it is investigating. However, my Office has also
received reports indicating that Mr. Al-Werfalli is at
large, remains a commander with the Al-Saiqa Brigade,
and may have been involved in further killings. I am
investigating these reports.

Let me stress that irrespective of any reported
domestic investigation that may be under way, Libya
remains under a legal obligation arising from resolution
1970 (2011) to immediately arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Werfalli to the ICC. He must be transferred
to the Court to stand trial. I therefore urge General
Khalifa Haftar, commander of the LNA, which has
publicly expressed gratitude for the work of the Court
in relation to Mr. Al-Werfalli's case, to demonstrate,
by concrete actions, respect for international justice by
ensuring Mr. Al-Werfalli's immediate transfer to the
Libyan authorities so that he may be surrendered to the
Court without delay.

The Council will also recall that on 24 April,
the ICC made public a warrant of arrest against
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, former head of the
Libyan Internal Security Agency. Mr. Al-Tuhamy is
alleged to have committed crimes against humanity
and war crimes in relation to the events of 2011. My
Office continues to investigate Mr. Al-Tuhamy and
others associated with the 2011 events. The Office is
also engaged in identifying and, where appropriate,
sharing information relating to both Mr. Al-Tuhamy and
Mr. Saif A1-Islam Al-Qadhafi's current whereabouts.
We continue to devise and implement strategies to
facilitate the execution of the outstanding warrants
of arrest.

In relation to Mr. Al-Qadhafi, I appreciate
the support expressed by members of the Council,
encouraging the Libyan authorities to comply with their
outstanding obligation to surrender him to the Court.
Those who allegedly bear responsibility for crimes
under the Rome Statute must be brought to justice.

My Office continues to request States Parties,
non-States Parties and organizations to assist in
securing the arrest of persons subject to an ICC warrant.
In that context, we have engaged in a spirit of good faith
and demonstrated utmost sensitivity while providing
specific information to enable cooperation. We count
on the support of States we have engaged in that process
to assist the Office with the arrest and surrender of ICC
suspects. In that regard, I wish to recall the wording of
resolution 1970 (2011), and again encourage all States
and regional and international organizations to take
concrete action to support my Office's efforts so that
Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Al-Qadhafi can be surrendered
to the Court and face justice in relation to alleged
crimes committed during the 2011 events.

In relation to Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, my Office
continues to monitor the Libyan proceedings in relation
to his pending appeal before the Libyan Supreme Court.

My Office's assessment since our previous
report to the Council (S/PV.7934) indicates that the
situation remains dire in Libya. The security situation
remains unstable with violent clashes occurring
between various factions across Libya. Reports
indicate widespread violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law being perpetrated by
different parties to the conflict. Often, the victims are
civilians. One major cause for concern is the continued
internal displacement of persons in Libya, such as the
Tawerghan. Despite the approval by the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord in June
of this year of an agreement between the Tawerghan
and Misratan communities, there has reportedly been
no progress towards fulfilling their return home.

I also note with grave concern reports of unlawful
killings, including the execution of detained persons;
kidnappings and forced disappearances; torture;
prolonged detentions without trial or other legal
process; and arbitrary detention, torture, rape, and
other ill-treatment of migrants in official and unofficial
detention centres. As detailed in my latest report,
events of particular concern during the reporting period
include the attack on the LNA-held Brak Al-Shati air
base on 18 May, and recent clashes in the Sabratah
region between the 48th Infantry Brigade - also known
as the Martyr Anas al-Dabashi armed group - and
the Operations Room to Combat the Islamic State.
My Office also notes the continued activity of ISIL,
including its claimed suicide attack on the Misrata
courthouse on 4 October.

My Office has also received information that the
LNA has allegedly intensified restrictions on access to
the city of Derna over recent months, in connection with
fighting during the reporting period between the LNA
and the Derna Mujahideen Shura Council. Restrictions
reportedly include blocking medicine, medical
treatment and petrol from entering the city. The Office
has received reports indicating that hundreds of Derna's
inhabitants have been arrested attempting to leave the
city. I join Mr. Salame, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, in condemning
recent air strikes in a residential neighbourhood in
Derna that appear to have resulted in the tragic deaths
of civilians, including at least 12 children and women.

Finally, reports have also emerged that 36 male
corpses were found in the town of Al-Abyar, 50
kilometres east of Benghazi. This is also of grave
concern. The bodies were reportedly handcuffed,
showed signs of torture, and displayed bullet wounds to
the head. I remind each and every combatant engaged
in fighting in Libya that my Office remains seized
of the situation in Libya, and if their actions amount
to war crimes or crimes against humanity, they can
be prosecuted.

These recent attacks and the reports of the finding
of 36 corpses bearing signs of torture and execution,
compel me once again to bring the provisions of
the Rome Statute relating to the responsibility of
commanders and other superiors to the attention of
senior commanders and officials across Libya. Persons
acting as military commanders or as superiors can
be criminally responsible for crimes under the Rome
Statute committed by forces or subordinates under their
effective command or control, or effective authority
and control. In addition to their responsibility to protect
civilians, commanders have an obligation to prevent
or repress the commission of crimes by their forces,
and to submit any such crimes for investigation and
prosecution. Let me be clear: if serious crimes under
the Rome Statute continue to be committed in Libya, I
will not hesitate to bring new applications for warrants
of arrest. Such crimes must stop. Those taking part in
hostilities must do so within the framework of the law
and with full respect for international humanitarian law.

I wish now to return to the issue of crimes
against migrants, as they represent a serious matter
that continues to preoccupy me and my Office. I
have instructed my Office to continue its inquiries
into the alleged crimes against migrants transiting
through Libya. Depending on the precise facts and
circumstances that might be established in the course
of a full investigation, such crimes may fall Within
the jurisdiction of the Court. However, that issue must
be decided through a case-by-case analysis based on
the relevant facts and an assessment of my Office's
jurisdiction. Such work will be strictly within our
mandate as set by the Rome Statute.

In conformity with goal 9 of my Office's latest
strategic plan, we will also work with Libya and other
States and organizations on that issue, Where appropriate,
and where we think we can be of assistance to address
crimes perpetrated against migrants. Where possible,
our collaborative efforts enhance coordination of
investigative and prosecutorial strategies that are aimed
at closing the impunity gap not only for Rome Statute
crimes, but also for other transnational and organized
criminal activity falling outside of my mandate. Those
other crimes significantly contribute to the continuing
insecurity and violence in Libya today.

I now turn to some of the unfortunately recurring
challenges facing my Office. My Office's investigations
into alleged crimes under the Rome Statute that have
been committed in Libya are hampered by the ongoing
insecurity in the country, which continues to prevent
my teams from operating within Libya. Insufficient
resources also continue to be a major problem. The
Office receives various forms of support for its work
from members of the Council and States parties.
However, our modest financial resources, which
must be spread across all situations currently under
investigation by my Office, must be increased so as
to ensure that we have adequate means to achieve our
mandated mission.

The failure to execute arrest warrants issued by
the Court also remains a major challenge. Members
of the Security Council, as well as other States and
non-State parties, have the responsibility to ensure
the timely arrest and surrender of all Libyan suspects.
Despite those challenges, the announcement of two
arrest warrants in the past eight months - one for
crimes committed during 2011 and the other for crimes
perpetrated more recently - should clearly demonstrate
that my Office continues to be fully engaged in Libya
and is determined to contribute to achieving real
progress towards a culture of accountability for crimes
under the Rome Statute committed in Libya.
The progress that we have made and our
achievements to date are a result of the commitment
and expertise of my staff, as well as the strong and
collaborative relationships that we have developed
with key partners. My Office continues to receive
Vital support from a number of States, including the
Netherlands, Tunisia, Italy and the United Kingdom,
as well as international organizations and other actors,
such as the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and INTERPOL. The exemplary efforts of those States
and organizations deserve recognition. More of the
same is required from others joining to contribute.
In addition, the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office
remains a strong and valued partner in our investigation
activities, and, as always, I remain grateful to the
citizens of Libya and all individuals and organizations
that are committed to the goals of the ICC.

I am acutely aware that peace and stability in Libya
will require action, support and commitment from
various actors. Ensuring justice for victims of serious
crimes perpetrated in Libya and bringing to account
those who have committed or ordered atrocities remain
critical factors for sustainable peace in a country that
has been plagued by conflict for so long. Libya will
remain a priority for my Office in 2018. Along with
my team, I am determined to fulfil the responsibility
entrusted to my Office by the Rome Statute vis-a-vis
Libya, following the Council's referral pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). My Office will continue to do
its part. As we do, we count on the critical support of
the Security Council, States Members of the United
Nations, and States parties to the Rome Statute.

Suspects against whom ICC warrants of arrest have
been issued must be arrested and transferred to the
Court to stand trial. We have a collective responsibility
to cultivate a culture of accountability for Rome Statute
crimes in Libya and to deter the commission of future
crimes. Continued failure to do so is to deny the victims
of the grave crimes committed in Libya the justice that
they so rightly deserve. Inaction will also embolden

those who have already committed crimes and would-
be perpetrators by signalling that impunity will prevail
and that they are beyond the reach of the law. That we
cannot allow.

