Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Nine
months have passed since the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). During that
period the CTC has made much praiseworthy effort
towards the implementation of the recommendations of
resolution 1373 (2001). The Council meetings of
18 January 2002 and 15 April 2002 enabled us to see
the determination of Member States to act decisively to
combat terrorism. The submission of 164 reports to
date - the majority of which have already been
considered by the Committee, as Ambassador
Greenstock mentioned - eloquently illustrates that
determination. The experience acquired by the
Committee through consideration of these reports is
promising for the coordination of future activities.

There is no doubt that the Committee, through its
work, has in many respects highlighted the connection
between terrorism and other forms of organized crime
and the existence of a world structure to combat it. We
are grateful to the Committee, its Chairman and its
support staff for the important milestones they have
reached.

The tragic events of 11 September 2001 shed new
light on the dangers posed by terrorism because of its
many ramifications. We welcome the appointment of
two experts on the provision of assistance to States,
and we encourage them in the accomplishment of their
mission. My delegation views coordination of
assistance as a priority, beginning with identifying the
type of assistance available with a view to better
coordinating it with the needs expressed. In that regard,
the contacts already established with potential
providers of assistance are encouraging. Strengthening
cooperation between the Committee and other
international community actors including regional
organizations is necessary and greatly benefits Member
States. We encourage the ongoing work on the
composition of the panel of experts, and we reiterate
the need for representation of all regions within the
panel. My delegation would also like to emphasize the
importance the Committee should attach to
consideration of the second reports. We are convinced
the outcome will enable Member States to adopt, as
appropriate, additional measures to strengthen our
common fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for the new work programme of the
Committee, submitted for our consideration.

