Mr. Crighton (Australia): I am grateful, Mr.
President, for the opportunity to contribute to the debate.

The maintenance of international peace and security
is, of course, a core function of the United Nations.
Primary responsibility for this function has been entrusted
to the Security Council. It is a solemn responsibility, but
it is not solely the responsibility of the Council. It is one
shared by all Members of the United Nations.

It is in this light - and in View of our strong wish
for greater openness and transparency in the working
methods of the Council - that Australia particularly
appreciates the initiative to convene this formal meeting
to discuss an issue that is of direct concern to all of us.

The maintenance of international peace and security
encompasses many things. Conventionally it is seen as the
range of cooperative activities undertaken by the
international community when a dispute is emerging or a
conflict has erupted. These activities can range from
preventive diplomacy to peacemaking, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peace-building. It can also require peace
enforcement.

We also know that other factors bear upon the
maintenance of international peace and security. Poverty,
ethnic differences, abuses of human rights, breakdowns in
governance and access to fundamental freedoms, among
others, are as much causes of dispute and conflict as more
traditional ones such as territorial claims, ideology or
access to natural resources. Maintaining peace and
security requires that we address them, because failure to
deal with the underlying causes of conflict will only
ensure that peace will not be sustainable.

Social and economic development goals are, to state
the obvious, an equally important and central part of
United Nations activities. But all too often the tendency
has been to see them as something different, activities
apart - as, perhaps, a competing part of the United
Nations agenda rather than as an integral part of its role
in the maintenance of peace and security.

 

The experience of the United Nations over the last 50
years, particularly in intra-State conflicts, demonstrates that
a more integrated, holistic approach is critical to our efforts
to maintain international peace and security. A fragmented
approach - dealing with peacemaking, peacekeeping,
economic development, humanitarian assistance, refugees,
institution-building and so on as though they were
unconnected - will not work. The pieces need to be pulled
together.

In practice, of course, this is no easy task. Creating the
right political circumstances alone is demanding. It requires
a high level of cooperation between the parties concerned.
It requires a shared understanding about national goals and
priorities. It requires a significant commitment of resources.
It requires strong political and practical commitment from
the full membership. And it requires a high level of
cooperation and coordination between the various arms of
the United Nations and other international agencies.

It is also true that the distinction between
peacekeeping and peace-building is blurred, and the
transition from one to the next is not simply like passing
the baton in a relay. In practice there must be a substantial
peace-building element to peacekeeping. Traditional
peacekeepers can now be called on to perform a
multifunctional role, for example assisting in the
organization and conduct of elections or helping to meet
urgent social, economic and institutional development
needs.

In each case the needs will be different, and in each
case the United Nations must be able to respond flexibly
and realistically. We do not see this as redefining or
reinterpreting the role of the Security Council, or giving it
responsibilities that are rightly within the competence of
other parts of the Organization. Rather, we see it as a
challenge to the Organization as a whole and to the
membership. The challenge is to develop what others have
appropriately called a strategic framework, to give
coherence to all the activities of the United Nations.

I stress, however, that the United Nations cannot do it
alone. The United Nations contribution will be only as
effective as the support it gets from the local parties and
populations themselves. Without their full participation and
cooperation, political and practical, the United Nations role
and effectiveness will be heavily circumscribed. There is an
important role here for regional organizations, which have
the most direct interest in seeing tensions relieved,
problems resolved and reconstruction begun. In Australia's
own region, in the Asia-Pacific area, the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville is a very good current
example of a small mission operating in support of a local
and regional peace process.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my Government's
appreciation that this debate is taking place, and we thank
you, Sir, for organizing it. It is a welcome response to the
increasingly strong calls from the wider membership for
greater openness and transparency in the way the Council
works.

We understand and we accept that the Council
cannot always debate issues in this way. We acknowledge
that there are times when the need for speed, decisiveness
and confidentiality are paramount. But it is equally true
that there are many issues on which the Council can
benefit from exposure to the views of the wider
membership. We see more dialogue of this kind as a
valuable and perhaps essential part of the process of
modernization of the institutions of the United Nations,
and as a vital aspect of maintaining the credibility and
effectiveness of the United Nations as a whole.

