Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French):
Ukraine welcomes the Security Council's unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2337 (2017). My delegation
would also like to congratulate Mr. Adama Barrow,
who was inaugurated today as the new President of the
Islamic Republic of The Gambia. We hope he will soon
be able to return to his country in order to complete the
transition of power and begin fulfilling his duties so as
to ensure peace and stability in the Gambia.

Since the announcement of the results of the
presidential elections of 1 December, the international
community has been working hard to convince the
outgoing President to respect his country's Constitution.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and of Nigeria's President Buhari,
as the ECOWAS mediator in The Gambia, Ghana's
former President Manama and other regional leaders
who have worked to resolve this impasse. We would also
like to pay tribute to the role played by Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary

General for West Africa and the Sahel, and to thank
the delegation of Senegal for its proactive efforts on
the issue.

It is regrettable, however, that despite the clearly
expressed will of the Gambian people and intensive
efforts on the part of the international community,
including the Security Council, to achieve a peaceful
transition of power, the situation has deteriorated to
the point that a Council resolution is needed. I want to
emphasize that, in the light of recent developments, we
must step up the diplomatic pressure and the political
initiatives supporting it if we are to resolve the political
crisis. The adoption of today's resolution is an integral
part of those efforts to ensure peace in the Gambia and
implement the election results.

In conclusion, we believe that right now the most
critical immediate task is to convince Gambia's military
and security actors to remain calm and refrain from any
action that could lead to the deterioration of the country's
human rights, security and humanitarian situation.

