Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to perform the pleasant task of expressing to
you, Mr. Foreign Minister, my delegation's satisfaction
at seeing you presiding over today's meeting and to ask
you to convey our thanks to Ambassador Chowdhury
for the excellent manner in which he has been guiding
the work of the Council this month. We are grateful for
the initiative of the Bangladesh delegation to organize
this open meeting of the Security Council on the
prevention of armed conflicts.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
analyses and the relevant and bold recommendations
contained in the excellent report before us. We thank
Ms. Louise Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General,
for her introduction of the report.

In his report on the prevention of armed conflicts,
the Secretary-General reminds us that the core mission
of the United Nations remains "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war". However, after
more than half a century of existence, it is clear that the
United Nations has, basically, sought to ensure
collective security by deploying peacekeeping
operations, rather than by considering concrete
measures to prevent conflicts.

Less than a year ago the Security Council held its
second open debate on this important issue. During that
meeting, many Member States rightfully emphasized
that above all we had to tackle the socio-economic
causes of conflict, and they therefore advocated
increased development assistance as a way of
preventing conflict. Others felt that areas such as
defending human rights, good governance, the rule of
law and democratization were the main pillars of
preventive action.

During the Millennium Summit last September,
the heads of State and Government of our global
Organization reasserted the relevance of these
approaches to conflict prevention. They concluded that
the most promising form of prevention was to elaborate
integrated, long-term strategies combining a broad
range of political, economic, social and other measures
to reduce or suppress the causes of conflict.

On that basis, my delegation would like to
emphasize that success in preventing armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach involving all the
institutions of the United Nations, the Member States,
the regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and business circles. With
this as a premise, I would like to highlight the points
that, in the opinion of my delegation, and in the context
of today's debate, deserve particular attention.
First, following the Secretary-General's lead, I
would like to emphasize that the Security Council,
according to the Charter of the United Nations, has a
key role to play in preventing conflict. This is why my
delegation encourages the Secretary-General in his
intention, inter alia, to periodically provide the
Security Council with regional and subregional reports
on threats to peace and international security, focusing
in particular on cross-border problems that might
threaten peace and international security, such as illicit
trafficking in arms and natural resources, refugees,
mercenaries and irregular forces, and the impact of
such phenomena on security.

We must be equally supportive of the Secretary-
General's recommendation encouraging the Council to
consider innovative mechanisms to discuss on a more
regular basis the issue of prevention.

In the same vein, my delegation fully supports
recommendation 4 of the Secretary-General's report,
which proposes that the Economic and Social Council,
during its annual substantive session, conduct a high-
level debate on the elimination of the root causes of
conflict and the role of development in promoting
long-term conflict prevention.

My second comment bears on the required
cooperation between the United Nations and external
actors, in particular regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations, civil society and business
circles. Here, the Secretary-General's report aptly
reminds us that for some years now some regional
organizations have possessed new institutional
capacities for early warning and conflict prevention.
This is the case with the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), to mention only two. They have set
up their own mechanisms for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts. In 1999, in the
framework of effective conflict prevention, ECOWAS
created a monitoring system for peace and subregional
security. This system is called the early warning system
or, simply, "the system". This system includes a
monitoring and follow-up centre based at the ECOWAS
secretariat headquarters in Abuja, Nigeria. Its mission
is to establish cooperative links between the United
Nations, the OAU, research centres and any other
relevant international, regional and subregional
organization. The system also involves monitoring and
follow-up zones for the subregion. Thus, on the basis
of proximity, ease of communication and effectiveness,
the member States of ECOWAS have set up four
monitoring and follow-up zones under the auspices of
offices opened at Banjul, Ouagadougou, Monrovia and
Cotonou.

But the political will of the authorities of the
continent and of the West African subregion requires
the support and assistance of the international
community. This is why my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation number 26,
which calls on Member States to support the follow-up
processes launched by the Third and Fourth High-level
United Nations-Regional Organizations Meetings to
improve conflict prevention and peace-building, and to
provide increased resources for developing regional
capacities in this field.

On this occasion I would like to reiterate Mali's
support for the Secretary-General's recommendation,
based on the report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on
West Africa, regarding the establishment of a United
Nations office in West Africa that could reinforce the
organization's capacity for early warning, conflict
prevention, peace-building, reporting and policy
development, as well as enhance cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States and other
subregional organizations.

My third and last comment is to draw attention to
the fact that if we wish to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, we must combat the pathetic
spectacle of child soldiers. My delegation therefore
suggests that we draft a more restrictive set of
international provisions in this regard. We invite
Member States to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted in
May 2000. In this context we wish to restate Mali's full
support for the proposals made by the Prime Minister
of Bangladesh at the second Security Council summit,
on 7 September 2000, relating to the creation of areas
free of child soldiers in conflict-prone areas.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
agreement with the Secretary-General's statement that
the time has come to intensify our efforts in order to
progress from a culture of reaction towards a culture of
prevention. The prevention of Violent conflict is surely
less costly than post-conflict remedy. And surely the
international community is already well enough
informed about certain latent crises throughout the
world. What we have to do is act, and act now.

