Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Like others, I
would like to thank Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his very important and comprehensive
briefing. We are also grateful for the excellent reports
received from the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 132 and S/2009/146). We warmly welcome the participation of
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Foreign Minister of
Somalia, and we were happy to listen to Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.

Austria fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Czech Presidency of the
European Union. Our comments are meant to
complement that statement.

Despite a difficult political situation, a precarious
security situation and an alarming humanitarian
situation, Somalis have achieved important progress in
the Djibouti peace process. Austria commends that
development and congratulates President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed on his election. We support the
legitimate Government and the continuation of a
political process, which should be as broad-based as
possible.

The international community must act now and
lend its support to Somali efforts to build security and
rule-of-law institutions, as well as to embark on a
reconciliation process. The Foreign Minister spoke of
all those goals, which we support. For that purpose, we
also need to strengthen the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS). We therefore
wholeheartedly support the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report in that
regard.

A number of resolutions on Somalia have been
adopted by the Security Council within the past three
months. Those resolutions must be implemented in
good faith, including resolution 1844 (2008), which
targets those who threaten the peace, security and
stability of Somalia.

The security environment and the humanitarian
situation also need our utmost attention: 3.2 million
people - 43 per cent of Somalia's population i are in
need of humanitarian assistance and 1.9 million are in
a state of humanitarian emergency. Currently,
according to our data, there are over 1 million
internally displaced persons. Unfortunately, the
progress in the peace process has not yet resulted in an
alleviation of that situation.

The human rights situation in Somalia has been
of great concern as well, as was rightly noted by the
technical assessment mission. Especially worrying is
the situation of women, in particular violence against
women, as well as traditional harmful practices that are
still widespread. In addition, all the reported human
rights violations have been committed - or most of
them - with total impunity. Austria fully supports the
capacity of UNPOS to focus on the incorporation of
justice and accountability mechanisms in Somalia, as
suggested by the Secretary-General in his report.

Civilians, United Nations staff and, recently,
AMISOM. personnel as well as staff of local
non-governmental organizations have been targeted,
abducted and murdered. Austria pays its respect to
humanitarian workers who continue to deliver much-
needed humanitarian aid. We also thank the troop-
contributing countries to AMISOM, Uganda and
Burundi, for their continuous commitment and
engagement in bringing stability and security to
Somalia. We join others in condemning the attacks
against AMISOM. that we have heard and spoken about
today.

Austria fully supports the strengthening of
AMISOM. The United Nations support package is an
important pillar in that respect. We are therefore
looking forward to the Secretary-General's report to be
issued in April, which will inform us on the progress in
the political process and the security situation on the
ground and which will serve as a basis for our future
deliberations.

It is very important for the authority and the
effectiveness of any international presence in Somalia
that obligations under international humanitarian law
be fully respected by all sides. The protection of
civilians, especially women and children, must be a
concern and must be ensured by all parties.

As far as piracy is concerned, it is important not
to see it only as a threat to key international shipping
lanes, but also as a factor further aggravating the
security and humanitarian situation in Somalia. Apart
from putting humanitarian supplies at risk, it certainly
also plays a role in financing the activities of what one
might call spoilers of the stabilization process and
particularly illegal flows of arms in violation of the
embargo. Austria therefore stresses the importance of
focused activities to curb piracy in the region and of
course as a member of the European Union (EU) we
fully support the EU's naval operation, Operation
Atalanta.

We look forward to continuing and intensifying
the close cooperation between the international
community and Somalia in the interest of Somalia and
all ofits people.

