Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the 1267 Committee and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their briefings this morning. I would also
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and to join all States in the
unequivocal condemnation of all terrorist acts,
irrespective of their motivation, wherever and by
whomever committed.

We are very pleased to see that the CTC and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) are making further
progress in refining their approaches to monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We agree
that the CTC should take a more tailor-made approach
in monitoring implementation, and encourage the
Committee to deepen its dialogue with Member States
beyond mere reporting. Liechtenstein has just
submitted our fifth report to the CTC and stands ready
to continue its cooperation with it. We are also grateful
for the continuation of the practice of informal
briefings for Member States on the work of the
Committee.

Once again, we would like to focus our comments
today on the mandate given by the 2005 world summit
to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions. The 1267 Committee has
been dealing with this issue for quite some time now.
In the meantime, several studies have been produced
on this question which underline the need for urgent
action by the Security Council.

Like previous speakers, we commend, in
particular, the study produced by the Watson Institute
for International Studies. The Monitoring Team of the
1267 Committee has also made valuable
recommendations. We call on the Council to give
serious consideration to the many proposals made to
improve the listing and de-listing procedures. There is
no doubt that United Nations organs, when imposing
measures that have a direct and dramatic impact on the
rights of individuals, must respect international
standards of human rights in a similar manner as States
would have to.

Sll'V.5446

 

The work undertaken by the United Nations over
the last six decades to ensure that Governments respect
human rights would suffer a great setback were we to
allow the Organization to treat individuals in a manner
which it would qualify as impermissible by States. We
welcome Security Council action against terrorism,
which is based on a modern interpretation of what the
Charter means by the maintenance of international
peace and security. It must, however, go hand in hand
with an equally modern interpretation of international
human rights law.

Future listing and de-listing procedures must,
therefore, as an absolute minimum, grant targeted
individuals and entities the right to be informed about
the measures imposed and the reasons for their
imposition, as well as the right to present information
that might refute the case for listing. Furthermore, we
urge the Council to consider procedures that could be
considered an effective remedy or those that would at
least entail a similar effect. Any such improvements
would be highly beneficial for both the accuracy and
legitimacy of the sanctions regime and, therefore, for
its effectiveness. Finally, it must be stressed that any
such improvements must also extend, as far as
appropriate, to the so-called humanitarian exemptions.

Liechtenstein welcomes the extension of the 1540
Committee, as mandated by resolution 1673 (2006).
We have submitted our first report in a timely manner
and also provided the Committee with updated
information. In fact, the 1540 Committee and its
experts have been highly effective in their dialogue
with Member States and have established good
practices that can be beneficial for other Committees as
well. In this context, we would like to express our
support for measures aimed at consolidating the work
of various subcommittees dealing with counter-
terrorism. Such measures should make the United
Nations response to terrorism more coherent and more
effective and should focus on building State capacity.
This chain against terrorism, which we have been
building over the last years, will only be as strong as
its weakest link.

