Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of the Niger to hold this open debate and expresses its gratitude to all briefers for their presentations. Defending itself since 2014 from the Russian armed aggression, Ukraine is well aware of how far the environmental impact of armed conflicts could stretch beyond the hot phase or geographical scope of hostilities. The list of the most dangerous environmental threats for the conflict- affected territory of Donbas includes mine flooding, the risk of dysfunction in the region's main water supply channel, pollution of surface and subterranean waters, emission of toxic chlorine substances, chemical and radioactive contamination of the environment, changes in physical and chemical properties and ground subsidence under residential areas and critical infrastructure facilities. More than 80 per cent of the industrial enterprises and critical public infrastructure damaged in Donbas belong to dangerous or very dangerous environmental-risk categories. Due to the power outages, destroyed infrastructure, disabled pumping equipment and other causes, 39 of the region's mines have been flooded. The flooding may have resulted in acidification and mobilization of heavy metals into the local groundwater and riverine environment, with potentially significant impacts for human health and wildlife. Some of the flooded mines were earlier used as waste- storage facilities. It is a matter of particular concern that there is a flood danger to the site of an underground nuclear test, carried out in 1979, in the Yunkom coal mine, near the occupied city of Yenakiyeve. This presents the real risk of radioactive contamination spreading to groundwater, rivers and, ultimately, the Sea of Azov. Forest fires and illegal tree cutting pose another serious threat for both the environment and the local population in the conflict-affected areas. According to an assessment carried out two years ago by the Geneva Science-Policy Platform on Environment and Security, the conflict affected, damaged or destroyed ecosystems cover an area of at least 530,000 hectares, including 18 nature reserves covering an area of 80,000 hectares. Since that time, the situation has further deteriorated, as only in July forest fire in the Luhansk region destroyed 1,500 more hectares. We have also seen signs of severe environmental degradation in occupied Crimea, resulting from environmental mismanagement of both natural and agricultural areas. It must be also emphasized that the principles of international law relevant to the environmental hazards that Ukraine has experienced as a result of unlawful activities in and around occupied Crimea are not limited to international humanitarian law. They also include, for instance, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The illegal construction of a bridge across the Kerch Strait is just one example of such a violation. Apart from the fact that it violates Ukraine's rights as a coastal State and disrupts the freedom of international navigation, the unauthorized construction of the bridge could have long-term consequences for the coastal and marine environment of the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea by interfering with water circulation, increasing erosion and damaging internationally important protected areas. The weakness of the existing legal framework for environmental protection in relation to armed conflicts was one of the motivations behind Ukraine's initiative for a resolution on the "Protection of the environment in areas affected by armed conflict", at the second session of the United Nations Environment Assembly, in 2016. We also co-sponsored Iraq's resolution on "Pollution mitigation and control in areas affected by armed conflict or terrorism" at the Assembly's third session, in 2017. The hazardous environmental situation in the occupied territories of Ukraine is critical and may lead to a real disaster, in particular against the backdrop of the absence of the credible system of environmental monitoring. This affects not only the entire territory of Ukraine but also our neighbours and other nearby countries. In conclusion, we express our confidence that the environmental impact of the Russian armed aggression must be within the focus of the United Nations and its agencies in order to prevent further aggravation and the suffering of the people.
