Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Mr. Gonzalo
Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary General of
the Organization of American States, and Mr. Felix
Maradiaga for their respective briefings. We would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nicaragua, His Excellency Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres.

We have been following the developments in
Nicaragua. Since we are not from the region, we do
not claim to have knowledge and/or expertise of the
unfolding situation, but we have listened very carefully
to the different views that have been expressed.

We maintain that, when it comes to issues related
to our region, and Africa as a whole, the views of the
countries concerned, as well as the region and the
continent, need to be fully considered. Past experiences
have shown that international engagement in any
situation, including by the United Nations, can be
effective and meaningful only ifit is carefully calibrated
and coordinated with regional efforts.

When it comes to the situation in Nicaragua
in particular, we have not seen any indication that
convinces us that it constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. That is the basis for any involvement
by the Security Council, as provided for by the Charter
of the United Nations. We are concerned by the
increasing violence in the country, but at this stage the
situation remains an internal matter of Nicaraguans,
which needs to be addressed through genuine dialogue
and negotiation among the political stakeholders to
find a peaceful solution to the crisis. We appreciate and
support the ongoing efforts in that direction.

We know the history of the region and the sensitivities
surrounding any perceived external involvement
from outside the region. That is why there is a need
for caution in handling the situation in Nicaragua. We
understand that some members think there is a case for
preventive diplomacy. It is indeed very important that
every possible effort be made to prevent the situation
from getting out of hand. We know that is best done
discretely through the deployment of good offices.
Otherwise, there is a possibility that such action may
send the wrong signal to the Nicaraguan stakeholders
and undermine the ongoing dialogue process.

We are aware that the Secretary-General has
already been approached to assist, and we note his
readiness to do so. That, in our opinion, is the best way
forward. We hope that kind of constructive engagement
will continue with a view to de-escalating the political
tension and finding a peaceful solution to the crisis.

