Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the briefers for their
excellent input in today's discussion. I should like to
express our appreciation to the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Poland, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and of Ukraine for being present here
today. We very much welcome this opportunity to
discuss the situation in eastern Ukraine, and we want
to thank the Polish presidency for scheduling this very
important briefing.

The redrawing of borders - backed by military
power - as we have seen not only in Ukraine but also
in Georgia, represents a threat that goes beyond Europe.
When a State decides to challenge the international
legal order and the Charter of the United Nations as
such, it constitutes a threat to us all. Security is not a
zero-sum game, and the rules-based order can function
only when everyone adheres to the rules.

We are deeply concerned over the recent escalation
of violence and the deteriorating humanitarian and
human-rights situation in Donbas. Casualties, heavy
shelling, damaged critical infrastructure and imminent
environmental disasters underline how civilians are

bearing the heaviest burden. Almost 3.5 million people
are now affected by conflict and need humanitarian
assistance. The thousands of Ukrainians living along
the contact line are in particular need. It is crucial that
humanitarian actors be given full, safe and unhindered
access to people in need of humanitarian assistance, as
has been stated by many around the table today.

We call for an immediate and full implementation
of the Minsk agreements, and we support efforts within
the Normandy format to that end. Our full support
for those efforts does not alter the fact that Russia's
continuous aggression against Ukraine is the origin of
the conflict, and that Russia has the influence to end
it Whenever it so chooses. The withdrawal of foreign
armed formations, military equipment and mercenaries
from the territory of Ukraine, as well as the restoration of
Ukrainian control over its State border, remain crucial.

Sweden will welcome, and be ready to contribute to,
a possible United Nations mission in Donbas. However,
such a mission must, from the outset, cover the entire
occupied area of Ukraine, including the Russia-Ukraine
border, and have as its clear aim the restoration of
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

We strongly support the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. It is unacceptable that the Mission's
monitors continue to be intimidated, denied access
and to have their equipment destroyed, primarily in
areas held by Russian-backed armed groups. We call
on Russia to use its influence over the armed groups
it supports to ensure the Special Monitoring Mission's
full, safe and unhindered access throughout Ukraine,
including along the Russia-Ukraine State border and to
the Crimean peninsula.

The recent holding of presidential elections in
illegally annexed Crimea and the inauguration of the
Kerch Bridge, connecting the peninsula to mainland
Russia, constitute clear breaches of international
law. The European Union and Sweden will continue
to remain firm in applying a non-recognition policy
regarding Crimea, including through sanctions.

Human-rights monitors consistently report on the
deteriorating human-rights situation in Crimea, where
torture, kidnapping and house searches have become
commonplace. Full, free and unrestricted access
for international human-rights actors to the whole
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea, continues
to be paramount. We welcome the yearly General
Assembly resolution on the situation of human rights
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sebastopol, Ukraine, and its bold support.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands reminded us today, 298 human lives
were lost in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7. That was a heinous crime that constitutes an
unacceptable violation of international law. On 24 May
the independent and impartial Joint Investigation Team
concluded beyond doubt that the BUK missile system
used to bring down the flight belonged to the armed
forces of the Russian Federation, based in Kursk.
We condemn that tragedy and call upon the Russian
Federation to accept its responsibility to cooperate fully
with the ongoing international criminal investigation
in order to establish accountability and to provide full
reparations for the injury caused by those unlawful acts.
We reiterate our support for resolution 2166 (2014).

