Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, Ambassador
Valdivieso, for introducing the report of the Committee
of Experts and extends its appreciation to the
Committee for its important work.

We have carefully reviewed the report and have
concluded that the ideas and recommendations provide
a basis for effective implementation of the measures
mandated in resolution 1333 (2000). It is our view that,
having adopted resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333
(2000), we must seek to enforce the measures we have
approved. Responsible parties must take appropriate
action to prevent illegal flights and the entry of arms
and ammunition into the territory and ensure the
closing of terrorist training camps in Afghanistan.

The report addresses the steps that need to be
taken to give effect to these measures and we welcome
the opportunity to discuss effective measures to address
this problem. We feel that the report provides
guidelines for action at the national, regional and
international levels that require the commitment of the
concerned States if these provisions are to be
implemented.

At the regional level, neighbouring States must
coordinate their efforts and indicate the level of
assistance needed to effectively monitor their borders.
It is important that transit and supply States comply
with Security Council resolutions. It is commendable
that neighbouring States have expressed their
commitment to this process and it is left to us to
encourage them to put these words into action.
At the international level, it is important that
these levels be supported, in the short term, by the
provision of technical and financial assistance to those
countries. In the long term, the gains made and
decisions taken in other United Nations bodies must be
taken into account. In this regard, we note the
observation of the Committee, contained in paragraph
34 of the report, that

"any measures proposed for Afghanistan must be
seen in the wider context of arms control
measures targeted elsewhere".

It is clear that we need to move quickly to
strengthen monitoring mechanisms in order to support
border arrangements. We look forward to further
discussions on the modalities and financing of these
mechanisms. We are also particularly interested in the
Committee's recommendations regarding the
inspection of shipments under the Afghan Transit
Trade Agreement. It is important that we examine
carefully how this recommendation can assist us in the
implementation process.

In closing, my delegation wishes to reiterate that
the Security Council must continue to seek a
comprehensive solution to the problem in Afghanistan.
The Committee of Experts, in its report, notes the
position of all concerned States in the region. We
concur with its conclusion that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and that only a
political solution by the people of Afghanistan can
bring an end to its suffering. The international
community must continue its efforts to bring this about.
The effective monitoring of sanctions should be
undertaken as a means to this end. While we focus on
this issue, we should also remain conscious of the dire
humanitarian situation that prevails and make a
concerted effort to ensure that our decisions do not add
to this crisis.

