Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank the officials of the two Tribunals for
their briefings and for the reports (S/2006/353 and S/2006/358) submitted to the Security Council, in
accordance with resolution 1534 (2004), on the
implementation of the completion strategy for their
work.

I wish to commend the progress made by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
the past six months. We are sympathetic with regard to
the difficulties faced by Arusha in transferring
intermediate- and lower-rank accused to national
courts. We believe that the Tribunal's work is
particularly important in enhancing the capabilities of
the Rwandan courts. It is our view that the referral of
cases to national jurisdictions is central to the effort to
implement the ICTR completion strategy in a timely
way.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the situation that has
emerged following the death of Mr. Babic and Mr.
Milosevic at the Scheveningen detention centre is of
the greatest concern. As members know, at the 30 April
video conference we questioned Tribunal officials
about the circumstances of what took place. Prior to
the issuance of the reports before us today, we
provided the ICTY with a more detailed list of
questions, but unfortunately we cannot say that the
information we received was adequate or that it
addressed all of our concerns.

It is surprising and strange that, although
Milosevic was repeatedly referred to as the ICTY's
primary indictee, his health problems were not
properly monitored. It is hard to comprehend that
following the detection of a non-prescribed medication
in the defendant's blood the Tribunal did not
immediately conduct an inquiry and that when
Milosevic's health deteriorated the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia made no
attempt to admit him to a clinic in the Netherlands. The
Trial Chamber committed a grave error in not releasing
him for treatment in Moscow, where routine medical
procedures would have been carried out. The
guarantees provided by the Russian Federation, a
permanent member of the Security Council, were
rejected. I cannot fail to note that the Russian public
was shocked by the tactless statement made by the
ICTY Prosecutor following the death of Slobodan
Milosevic.

The upshot here is that medical assistance was
denied to a man who needed it. Does the ICTY not
recall the presumption of innocence? Having proven
nothing, the Tribunal is left without its primary
indictee, whose case had consumed some three years
and vast amounts of money. What lessons has the
Tribunal drawn from all of this? "We did everything
correctly".

But the ICTY was incomprehensibly humane in
another case. It decided on the provisional release of
the former Prime Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Haradinaj.
The shortsightedness of that action is self-evident. The
report of the Prosecutor contains criticism of that
individual's relationship with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The support for Haradinaj expressed by the head of
UNMIK was clearly aimed at undermining the
Tribunal's indictment against him. This casts an overall
taint on UNMIK.

Returning to the report, I wish to state that we do
not accept its negative assessment of cooperation
between Russia and the Tribunal. Russia has made the
necessary efforts to meet the Tribunal's requests for
assistance and to inform it immediately of results in
that regard. The Russian Federation is meeting all of its
obligations with respect to financing the Tribunal. Over
the course of the ICTY's existence, we have
contributed some $16.5 million to its budget, including
$1.7 million for 2006, which was paid in April.

With respect to the individuals referred to in the
report, the investigation by the competent Russian
agencies did not confirm the Tribunal's information
concerning the whereabouts of Vlastimir Djordjevic.
Those agencies continue their search for Mr.
Djordjevic, and the ICTY has been kept informed of
this on a timely basis.

With regard to Dragan Zelenovic, we wish to
refute the information in the report about the alleged
release of that indictee from detention. For reasons
known to the Tribunal, Zelenovic remains in the pre-
detention centre in the city of Khanty-Mansi.

We have noted that in the assessments of the
Tribunal leadership there is, unfortunately, a trend
towards curtailing the process of referring the cases of
intermediate- and lower-ranking accused to national
courts in the region. In our view, the Security Council
must take additional steps to ease the Tribunal's
workload so that it can focus its efforts on ongoing
trials and fully comply with the completion strategy
within the time frame established by the Council. The
Prosecutor must be in a position to take the decisions
and make the choices that are necessary to ensure that
the Tribunal's work is more effective.

There is concern about the costs of the Tribunal,
which are growing for unknown reasons. Its budget has
risen from $223 million in 2002-2003 to $276.5
million in 2006-2007. The number of staff is no less
impressive: there are 1,146 staff members. The Russian
Federation therefore maintains the firm view that the
ICTY must strictly comply with its completion
strategy. Unwarranted delays or costs in its operation
have already had a negative impact on the Tribunal's
image throughout the world. The only proper course is
to complete the activities of the ICTY in a timely
manner and in conformity with the timetable
established by the Security Council. We must not adopt
policies of legal fantasy, such as the Tribunal's cloak-
and-dagger operations to seek the arrest of persons in
the territories of individual States.

