Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for giving us the opportunity to discuss such an
important issue and for underlining its importance by
presiding personally over today's debate. The timing
is particularly relevant, given the tenth anniversary
this year of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the sad fact that the need to expand peace, justice
and accountability is as urgent now as ever before. In
that context, we are grateful to the Secretary-General,
President Song and Mr. Mochochoko for their briefings
and their calls to action.

The rule of law is critical to the preservation of the
rights of individuals and the protection of the interests
of all States. To borrow the words of the great humanist
Erasmus, justice restrains bloodshed, punishes guilt,
defends possessions and keeps people safe from
oppression. That is why the Government of the United
Kingdom is a strong supporter of international justice
in general and of the International Criminal Court in
particular. We have learned from history that there
cannot be lasting peace without justice, accountability
and reconciliation. The Arab Spring has reminded
us again that nations cannot maintain long-term
stability and prosperity without human rights, political
participation and economic freedom for their citizens.

The International Criminal Court has a central role
to play in achieving an end to impunity. It is in that
context that cooperation with the Court is so essential.
We agree with President Song that, in making future
referrals, the Council should underline clearly the need
for Member States to cooperate fully with the Court.

The Security Council and the Court have a
mutually reinforcing relationship. That is evidenced in
the Council's resolutions and statements, which have
regularly recognized the importance of the Court and
the role that it plays in helping to deliver peace and
reconciliation. Most obviously there are the resolutions
referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
Court and the briefings that flow from them. But there
are also other resolutions that recognize the role of the
ICC, and we would highlight resolutions 2053 (2012)
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2062 (2012)
on Cote d'Ivoire, and 2071 (2012) on Mali as examples
from this year, not to mention the various presidential
and press statements that refer to the Court's role and
work.

The Security Council, however, also needs to
be ready to respond to issues that hinder the Court's
activities, such as the failure by a State to implement the
Court's outstanding arrest warrants, notwithstanding
an obligation to do so under either the Rome Statute
or a Chapter VII resolution. Those issues are not
straightforward; they raise real challenges. But as we
work to support the Court we must keep the victims
in mind and recognize that in those instances the
International Criminal Court may be the only path to
justice.

Achieving the universality of the Rome Statute is
the key to deepening and broadening the reach of the
rule of law. We need all States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Rome Statute, and we need
States parties to live up to their responsibilities. Until
then, where impunity is unchecked and accountability
denied, the Security Council must be prepared to live
up to its responsibility and take action. The Council
and the Court must continue to send a strong message
to those leaders who would commit atrocities that they
will be held to account by the International Criminal
Court, if not by their own national courts.

In Syria, the world is calling for a stop to the
State-sponsored killing and torture machine that has
already claimed thousands of victims and for an end to
the vicious cycle of violence. So far, our efforts have not
succeeded, but as our Foreign Secretary has made clear,
we remain committed to ensuring that those responsible
will be held accountable, and we will offer every
support to those seeking to ensure that this happens.
The path to peace and justice can be long and difficult,
but progress is possible as long as we strengthen our
commitment to the international rule of law.

