Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
briefing and for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2000/1196). We are also pleased to welcome
Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and have taken careful note of
his remarks.

My delegation notes that the key achievement of
UNMIK during the reporting period was the holding of
municipal elections on 28 October throughout Kosovo.
With the municipal assemblies fully functioning since
11 November, we wish to acknowledge the efforts of
UNMIK to ensure that all of Kosovo's communities are
represented in these municipal structures. The
appointment of minority representatives to elected
assemblies is a welcome development, as are the
efforts aimed at integrating Kosovo Serb appointees
into these structures. This is a critical task for UNMIK,
as it lays the foundations for a multi-ethnic society on
which the future of Kosovo must be built. We join in
urging local leaders across the political spectrum in
Kosovo to support and participate in the daily business
of government at the municipal level.

We encourage UNMIK to continue its work in
reconfiguring the existing central bodies as part of its
efforts to build local capacity for self-governance and
note the work being undertaken to elaborate an interim
framework that would define substantial autonomy. We
believe, like UNMIK, that the process of defining
substantial autonomy and of developing institutions of
self-government, with the population of Kosovo
sharing more and more responsibility in the
administration of the province must, be actively
pursued.
At this point I wish to focus on a few of the areas
covered in the report of the Secretary-General, namely,
the security situation, minority communities, detained
and missing persons and the humanitarian situation.

My delegation is concerned that the post-election
period has seen an increase in politically motivated
attacks to a level comparable to that of mid-summer
2000. That is unacceptable. We therefore place
emphasis on the work of the Political Violence Task
Force and support its efforts in combating politically
motivated violence. We agree with the assertion in the
Secretary-General's report that words alone do not
reverse this counter-productive behaviour, but only
concrete actions by all communities in Kosovo,
particularly their leaders, through which they must
show that they do not accept such violent acts.

Of particular concern is the recent escalation of
armed confrontation between the Serbian security
forces and the so-called Liberation Army of Presevo,
Medveda and Bujanovac in the ground safety zone, and
the resulting influx of almost 5,000 displaced persons
into Kosovo. We see the need for the presence of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in the area to help ease conditions
and build confidence among the local population.

The conflict situation in the Presevo Valley must
not be allowed to worsen further, as it could serve to
destabilize the region, thereby posing a serious threat
to the local population and to community relations. In
this context, my delegation joins in condemning the
killings that have taken place. We express our
condolences to the bereaved. The presidential
statement to be adopted fully reflects the views of my
delegation.

We are also encouraged by the stated
commitment of the Yugoslav authorities to work
towards a peaceful settlement. At the same time, it is
imperative that there should be increased surveillance
of the border by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to put an
end to extremist activities and to stop any traffic in
illegal weapons. In that regard, we expect KFOR to
report fully on any relevant violations to the committee
established under resolution 1160 (1998).

As my delegation has emphasized in previous
briefings, the future of Kosovo must encompass the
peaceful coexistence of various ethnic groups,
including minority communities. The fact is that
adequate security still remains the key issue for
Kosovo's minority communities. It is of concern to us
that minority groups continue to be the target of
threats, intimidation and violence. We urge UNMIK to
continue to develop measures to improve the
conditions in various minority communities across
Kosovo through the implementation of special security

S/PVAZA')

 

measures, including joint patrols by UNMIK police
and KFOR. We have noted the establishment of a
telephone hotline.

Another area of concern to us is that of violations
of human rights. It is disturbing that in October 2000
alone some 25 cases of trafficking in women were
discovered. It is clear that these are not isolated cases,
but part of a larger problem that has to be dealt with in
collaboration with all the countries in South-Eastern
Europe.

We welcome the establishment on 21 November
of the ombudsperson institution as one mechanism for
ensuring respect for human rights. We note that there
have been workshops and other activities, such as a
public awareness campaign, carried out by UNMIK
with the support of the Council of Europe.

The issue of detained and missing persons
remains a high priority for my delegation. The
Secretary-General's report indicates that over 3,470
cases of missing persons from Kosovo remain
unresolved. The establishment of the Bureau for
Detainees and Missing Persons is a step in the right
direction. We also continue to attach importance to the
work of the Special Envoy on Persons Deprived of
Liberty, and support his work. This is another area in
which cooperation between UNMIK and Yugoslav
authorities will be critical to the reconciliation process.

In closing, I wish to offer by delegation's
commendation to Mr. Bernard Kouchner. The words in
paragraph 114 of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2000/1196) aptly describe my delegation's views:

"His imagination and inspiring leadership were
instrumental in steering this most challenging and
unique mission during its most difficult period."

We wish Mr. Kouchner well in his future endeavours.
We also welcome his successor, Mr. Hans Haekkerup,
and assure him and the men and women of UNMIK of
Jamaica's continued support as they carry out the
challenging task of implementing the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999).

