Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I thank Special Representative Swan and Special Representative Madeira for joining us today and for their comprehensive updates and briefings. I also join you, Mr. President, in welcoming our new Belgian colleague, Ambassador Kridelka. It is really good to see him in person. Although I saw him on the screen yesterday, I want to welcome him officially to the Security Council today. Somalia stands before a moment of profound opportunity. The country faces difficult circumstances and security challenges to get there, however, including in the attack on the hotel in Mogadishu last weekend, which the United States condemns. We express our condolences to the victims and their families. This and other attacks highlight the need for Somalia to keep the upcoming elections on track. Those elections are fundamental to advancing stability and security in the country. Uncertainties and delays in holding elections will have the opposite effect. The challenges Somalia faces require concerted and unified efforts by its leaders. Unfortunately, the withdrawal of confidence in the former Prime Minister and his Government in July by the President and the Lower House of Parliament has only heightened the political tensions. We are concerned that such action has undermined the process of dialogue and negotiation among the Federal Government of Somalia, federal member states and other key stakeholders. We strongly encourage Somalia's Federal Government and member states to hammer out a way forward for the upcoming elections. Elections need to be credible, timely, secure, practical, implementable and built on broad-based consensus in a Somali-owned and _ Somali-led process. We welcome the discussions under way in Dhuusamarreeb and encourage the parties to reach agreement on a model that meets the criteria and can be implemented by early 2021. The United States further encourages Somali authorities to maintain momentum on the reform efforts that brought about the re-establishment of ties with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in March of this year. Reaching the heavily indebted poor country decision point is an important milestone for Somalia, as it lays the foundation for inclusive economic growth. But such reforms must continue as Somalia seeks to build long-term inclusive economic growth and resiliency. The United States is and will continue to be a close partner of Somalia. I meant to say earlier that it is very good to have Ambassador Osman here in the Council with us. With more than $5.3 billion in bilateral foreign assistance over the past 20 years, we are working alongside the Somali people in support of improved food security, health-care services, water, sanitation and hygiene. United States humanitarian assistance is helping Somalis overcome flooding, drought, locust infestation and food insecurity, affecting nearly half the population, with a quarter of the people also displaced by natural calamities and conflict. The United States is also working alongside its Somali partners to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Since the crisis began, we have provided more than $23 million to support Somalia's COVID-19 response, including for masks, hospital beds, testing-centre equipment and communication efforts. Finally, as other colleagues have already highlighted this morning, Al-Shabaab remains a destabilizing force in Somalia that has also repeatedly demonstrated the will and capability to launch attacks against neighbouring States. We are encouraged that the Somali and African Union Mission in Somalia forces have made progress on the battlefield, and that those military gains have been followed up with vital stabilization efforts to hold liberated territory. We remain concerned, however, that the implementation of key elements of the Somalia transition plan are behind schedule. We urge all parties to take the necessary stepsto accelerate the transfer of security responsibilities to the Somali military and civilian authorities. The United States remains steadfast in _ its commitments to promoting peace and stability in Somalia and to working with our international partners in assisting the country to reach its goals for a peaceful and prosperous future.
