The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Morocco.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Amira Haq, Under-Secretary-
General for Field Support, for their comprehensive
briefings.

I would also like to warmly commend the
personnel and the peacekeeping forces for their efforts
on the ground. They accomplish their noble mission in
circumstances that are often very difficult, often at the
cost of their lives.

Despite the current international financial crisis,
it goes without saying that peacekeeping missions
and operations remain an effective and irreplaceable
instrument that needs to be developed and maintained
on an ongoing basis. The complexity and multifaceted
nature of peacekeeping operations require United
Nations action on a number of levels, which in turn
requires a coordination and cooperation strategy among
missions, not to mention the need to develop a rapid-
response military reserve that can intervene in urgent
crisis situations.

Today's debate seeks to canvass the opinions of
Council members regarding inter-mission cooperation
with a view to developing the concept of collective
ownership of these mechanisms and to reaching an
agreement on what concrete measures to take. In the
concept paper distributed to Council members, we
have tried to highlight a number of aspects of potential
cooperation. Through debate in the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, we have also tried to highlight
inter-mission cooperation, particularly with respect to
the protection of civilians through rapid intervention in
emergency and humanitarian crisis situations.

The Council's visit to West Africa in February
highlighted the added value and benefits of such
cooperation, which is why we thought it necessary to
hold this debate today. At its meetings on 23 March and
7 December, the Working Group considered various
forms of cooperation. Member States were briefed
on inter-mission cooperation by representatives of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the Department of Field Support (DFS), who
emphasized that this useful tool offers some short-term
advantages, particularly in emergency situations.

In their briefings to the Security Council, the
Working Group, the Fourth Committee and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
representatives of the Secretariat underscored the
increased use by DPKO and DFS of inter-mission
cooperation as an effective mechanism for designing
and optimizing the use of available resources. That
mechanism has enabled us to temporarily deal with
crises and fill the gaps in various peacekeeping
operations operating in the same regions. Specific
cases, such as in Liberia, C6te d'Ivoire, South Sudan,
Abyei in the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, have proved the relevance of the mechanism.
Those actions would not have been possible without
the cooperation and understanding of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), which made it possible
to rapidly redeploy their personnel, military equipment
and supplies, thereby contributing to protecting and
saving the lives of many civilians.

The cases I mentioned illustrate the usefulness of
inter-mission cooperation and the challenges it faces.
One of the lessons learned in such situations is the
importance of early planning and political consultations
for ensuring the effectiveness of inter-mission
cooperation. Such planning enables early commitments
to be agreed with TCCs, which in turn strengthens the
possibility of using this mechanism when it is needed.

While inter-mission cooperation can provide a rapid
response in boosting capacities that are very under-
equipped, it is still an ad hoc mechanism and temporary
solution for very specific situations. Such cooperation
can be affected by the capacity of missions at both
the receiving and the sending ends, since transferring
equipment and personnel could lead to a vacuum
between the two. Success in such types of cooperation
depends on a number of interdependent factors, such as
the practicality of the peacekeeping mandates created
by the Security Council and the necessary cooperation
between the Security Council and the TCCs, the
Secretariat and the host countries.

We are mindful of the fact that inter-mission
cooperation is a work in progress that is driven by day-
to-day practice and the specific nature of each particular
mission. It is enriched by the mutually beneficial
partnership between the TCCs and the United Nations.
Today's debate is one pillar in that process, which we
hope will be followed up and contribute, going forward,
to strengthening peacekeeping around the world.
Morocco will continue to be a traditional partner with
the United Nations in order to enrich and develop this
debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20pm.
