Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing.

First of all, allow me to recognize, as we do each
month, the permanent, dedicated and brave work of the
thousands of humanitarian workers of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and its
local partners seeking to improve the living conditions
of millions of civilians, who are always the primary
victims in this and other conflicts.

We cannot stress it strongly enough that
humanitarian principles, human rights and international
humanitarian law must be respected. Whenever they
are violated through grave crimes, those responsible
must be held accountable. We must urgently have
immediate, secure and unhindered access to deliver
humanitarian relief to all those in Syria who need it.
Nevertheless, many hotbeds of intense fighting persist
and remain a source of concern. Regrettably, every
month OCHA and the Secretary-General inform us
that humanitarian access in the country continues to
encounter serious problems, despite constant efforts
to coordinate with Syrian authorities to change the
dynamic on the ground.

We call on countries with influence to do what they
can to ensure that humanitarian aid can be delivered
in a fluid, secure and unhampered manner. For that
to occur, Damascus must allow OCHA's bimonthly
plans to be fully implemented by issuing all necessary
permits to that effect. The Government of Syria bears
the primary responsibility for allowing its own people
to access food, water, medicine and supplies to ensure
their survival as long as the conflict has not reached a
definite end. The provisions of resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of the injured, the sick and medical
facilities and personnel, must be fully complied with.
We will continue working to strengthen that resolution.
Attacks on hospitals and health-care personnel violate
the most basic international humanitarian laws and
may constitute war crimes.

The Astana process and other regional initiatives
launched in recent months to achieve the cessation of
local hostilities have enabled a significant reduction in
the fighting in the country this year by implementing
of various violence de-activation zones. Despite this,
there are still several hot spots with intense fighting
and this situation directly impacts the distribution
of supplies.

I want to dwell today on the emergency
humanitarian situation - or I would say, food
catastrophe - in eastern Ghouta, where there are at least
350,000 civilians under siege and which was described
last Friday as "an outrage" by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Zeid
Al Hussein. UNICEF reported on 23 October that
there are over 1,100 cases of child malnutrition, 232 of
which are severe acute malnutrition. Today, Monday,
30 October, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
mentioned, it is reported that supplies for 40,000 people
were authorized for the cities of Kafr Batna and Saqba.
Unfortunately, according to the reports and statistics
regularly provided by OCHA, the percentages of the
civilian population that effectively receive assistance
are very low in comparison with the target population.

Although significant progress has been made in
reducing violence, we must now ensure unimpeded
access for the United Nations and humanitarian
assistance to those areas, as well as the freedom
of movement to voluntarily enter and leave those
territories. This would ensure that the basic principles
of international humanitarian law are being upheld.
The Security Council must be vigilant when it comes
to this humanitarian crisis. Just as in 2014 it adopted
resolution 2165 (2014), which has been successively
renewed, most recently with resolution 2332 (2016),
it must ensure that the most suitable humanitarian
corridors are protected so that supplies reach their
intended destinations. Time is running out and winter
is coming.

We hope that, at the Astana meeting, as the three
guarantors did in a statement last month, emphasis will
be placed on the need to make use of the deactivation
of violence zones created in May for quick, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as the need for
parties to the conflict to develop confidence-building
measures, including the release of detainees and people
who have been kidnapped, the delivery of the remains of
the dead and the identification of disappeared persons,
in order to create better conditions for the success of
the political process and a lasting ceasefire. We also
hope that by 28 November, at the start of the eighth
round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva convened by
Special Envoy De Mistura, the humanitarian situation
will be showing signs ofimprovement.

The priorities in Syria are clearly defined. We
need a political solution that will end the war and
ensure a peaceful political transition, consolidate the
local cessation of hostility agreements and ensure
humanitarian access to the millions of people who
need it in areas that are under siege or hard to reach,
regardless of who are conducting the sieges and who
are subjected to them.

