Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I thank our briefers, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller. I first would like to join my colleagues in acknowledging the important commemoration of the Holocaust this year. Never again must such atrocities be endured by humankind. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to stand with the State of Palestine as it strives for a peaceful and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We reaffirm the internationally agreed two-State solution. Moreover, the current and expanding Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian territory constitute a flagrant violation of international law - a fact that no amount of legalistic creativity can change - and these settlements remain a substantial obstacle to peacein the Middle East. We therefore call for all settlement activities to stop, without preconditions. It is our duty to protect our universally accepted body of international law on this issue. To do otherwise would allow a jaundiced view of international law to weaken the existential pillars on which all States rely, especially the small and militarily weak ones. The international community has not given up on the two- State solution, and we should collectively and robustly resist any attempt to change the situation on the ground so as to make this internationally agreed goal more and more elusive. Each of us has the option to remain silent or to stand on principle. We remain invested in the peace, security and development of Palestine, Israel and all their neighbours. The continuing conflict hinders Palestine in its quest to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In its 2018 voluntary national review, the Government of Palestine cited the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a key deterrent to fostering an internal enabling environment to achieve the SDGs. With regard to Gaza, the humanitarian situation there remains one of great concern. Israel's blockade of Gaza breeds poverty and deprives Gazan residents of their rights. Accordingly, we call once again for the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip. We reiterate our strong support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its mandate. UNRWA continues to play a vital role in supporting the basic needs of millions of Palestinian refugees in the West Bank. At the same time, we remain concerned about the ongoing financial shortfall for the Agency and encourage States Members of the United Nations to step up their financial support in order to close the current funding gaps. In this vein, we note that UNRWA also needs access in order to do its work and fulfil its mandate. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains concerned about any attempts to deviate from the settled parameters governing the delicate quest for peace between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. The Security Council has made clear that it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations. We reiterate that the Palestinian people must have the right to govern themselves and reach their potential in a sovereign and We should continue to promote dialogue, contiguous State. negotiations and_ political consultations. The Finally, those who commit crimes against humanity and war crimes should be held accountable. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore welcomes the recent landmark recommendation of the International Criminal Court to open an investigation into these matters. We owe it to the young people in both the State of Palestine and the State of Israel to resolve the conflict. Their despair is heartbreaking.
