The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.

I, too, would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for his briefing, and I would also
like, through Mr. Annabi, to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the entire
personnel of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) for their excellent work. The
United Nations has contributed very significantly to the
last five years' progress in Timor-Leste, and we fully
support the continuing work of the United Nations in
that country.

Denmark associates itself with the statement that
the representative of Luxembourg will make shortly on
behalf of the European Union.

My Government welcomes the continuing
positive political developments in Timor-Leste. Recent
events show that democracy in Timor-Leste is still
fragile but also vibrant and functioning. Noticeable
progress has been made in the electoral field through
the holding of local elections and progress is reflected
also in the National Parliament's endorsement of the
first Provedor (or ombudsman), for Human Rights and
Justice of Timor-Leste.

We further welcome the recent visit to Timor-
Leste of the President of Indonesia and the subsequent
signing by the Foreign Ministers of the two countries
of a Provisional Agreement on the Borderline between
their countries. Efforts to solve ail outstanding issues
and to further improve and strengthen the relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia must continue.

My Government is concerned about the lack of
progress in the fight against impunity. The issue of
serious crimes committed in Timor-Leste in 1999 is a
concern not only for the two countries, but also for the
international community at large. The fight against
impunity is of significant importance to the people of
Timor-Leste and for the development of the country.
The perpetrators of these crimes must be brought to
justice.

In that respect, we welcome the recent visit by
the Secretary-General's Commission of Experts to
Timor-Leste and the expected visit to Indonesia by the
Commission. We urge the two parties to fully
cooperate with the expert Commission and look
forward to the report of the Commission.

With the closure of UNMISET and the
establishment of the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL), the focus of international assistance
is now on peacebuilding and development in Timor-
Leste. My Government supports an approach based on
national ownership that places the people of Timor-
Leste in the driver's seat. We therefore welcome the
fact that the number of international United Nations
advisers will be reduced over the coming months to
give room for the Timorese to assert their leadership.
We urge the United Nations to ensure a smooth
transition from UNMISET to UNOTIL.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Australia, to whom I give the floor.
