Mr. Kaul (Germany): We are very grateful to the
International Commission of Inquiry for the intensive and
thorough work it has carried out and for the report
delivered to the Council.

In view of the priority aim of achieving peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region, it is of major
importance for the whole international community to stop
the uncontrolled flow of arms to the area. Therefore, we
have a common interest in enabling the Commission of
Inquiry to fulfil its obligations. For this reason, we
strongly support the suggestion that the countries
mentioned in the report should do their utmost to
contribute to investigating the sources of their nationals
who may be involved in purchasing and supplying arms
to the region. It is in the interest of the countries of the
Great Lakes region themselves to ensure that the
Commission is able to complete its task, and thus, to
make sure that in the future there will not be a new flow
of arms.

This is the reason why we have voted for the
resolution adopted today. Germany sees the work of the
Commission as part of the endeavours of the international
community to contribute to the stability of the region and
therefore has supported its operations. Let me once again
underline the importance we attach to the neighbouring
countries intensification of their efforts to prevent any
military activities by members of the former Rwandan
regime. We call upon the States neighbouring Rwanda to
fully cooperate with the Commission in its effort to
contribute to a better implementation of the arms
embargo. Zaire, especially, is requested to enter into talks
with the Commission about the possible deployment of
United Nations officials monitoring the observation of the
arms embargo.

In his letter of 14 March 1996, the Secretary-General
points out the need for appropriate resources for a
continuation of the work of the Commission. We share
his view. It would be short-sighted not to provide the
necessary means for a task of this importance.

Finally, let me express our hope that the Tunis
Declaration of Heads of State of the Great Lakes region
of 18 March 1996 will be implemented soon. A stable
peace will be achieved only if the refugees can safely
return to their home countries.

