Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): The Polish delegation

welcomes the extension of the mandate of the United

Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) for

a final period of nine months, until the end of August

1998. UNPREDEP has played an important and highly

effective role in the preservation of peace and security in

the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and in the

region. On many occasions members of the Security

Council have referred to this mission as one of the success

stories of the United Nations, and we fully share this view.

The deployment of UNPREDEP and the activities of this
peacekeeping force have clearly demonstrated the
justification for and the merit of the concept of preventive
diplomacy. The further presence of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force will undoubtedly have a
stabilizing and confidence-building effect in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the entire region.

The Polish delegation agrees with the assessment of
the Secretary-General, contained in his report of 20
November 1997, that peace and stability in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia continue to depend
largely on developments in other parts of the region.
Indeed, an uncertain and fragile regional situation
prevails. We are concerned about the increased violence
in Kosovo, incidents on the border of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with Albania, slow
progress in implementing the civilian aspects of the
Dayton Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
a lack of progress in the demarcation of the border
between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

In the internal sphere, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia has made commendable strides towards
implementing democratic reforms, yet persistent socio~
economic difficulties and inter-ethnic tensions are still
fraught with destabilizing potential. These external and
internal factors, as well as the request of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, were taken into account by the Polish delegation
in deciding to support the extension of the mandate of
UNPREDEP at its current strength. We look forward to
the recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
post-UNPREDEP international presence in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Finally, let me pay tribute to the military and
civilian personnel of UNPREDEP for the dedication they
have shown in performing their tasks and duties. I also
wish to express my country's appreciation and support to
the Special Representative of the Secretary~GeneraL
Mr. Henryk Sokalski, and to the Force Commander,
Brigadier General Bent Sohnemann, for the commendable
manner in which they have conducted their activities in
a difficult and sensitive environment.

