Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Jordan's initiative to convene this open
debate on the question of the Middle East. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I have
also listened attentively to the statements delivered by
the representatives of Palestine and Israel.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the
question of the Middle East and affects regional peace
and stability. As the current situation in the Middle East
remains volatile, resolving the question of Palestine and

Israel has become more important and urgent. China
hopes that the parties concerned will redouble their
efforts in the following aspects so as to move towards
an early solution to the question between Palestine and
Israel.

First, both Palestine and Israel should adhere to
the strategic choice for peace talks. The creation of an
independent State of Palestine through peace talks and
the peaceful coexistence between the two countries
is the only way out for the problems between the two
countries. China urges Palestine and Israel to keep
peace in mind and come together to resume peace talks
as soon as possible and make progress therein. We hope
that Israel will demonstrate good will and sincerity,
stop the construction of settlements and completely
lift the blockade on Gaza. At the same time, Israel's
legitimate security concerns should also be addressed.
Secondly, with regard to the question of Palestine,
the Security Council should step up and assume its
essential responsibilities and respond positively to the
reasonable demands made by Palestine and other Arab
States. It should play a greater role in promoting peace
talks, putting an end to the occupation and facilitating
the reconstruction of Gaza. It should take practical
actions to promote progress on the question of Palestine.

Thirdly, the international community should
strengthen coordination and widen its vision. China
hopes that the existing mechanisms for the peace
process in the Middle East will be further utilized.
Meanwhile, countries ofthe region and relevant regional
organizations should be encouraged to play a positive
role. Efforts should be stepped up so as to resume peace
talks between Palestine and Israel as soon as possible
so that the situation can move in the right direction.

Fourthly, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
must be alleviated effectively as reconstruction there
faces a multitude of challenges, including the Israeli
blockade, the volatile situation in Palestine and the
massive gap in financial resources. We therefore urge
the international community to deliver on its promises
of aid, to cooperate with the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in every way possible and play a positive role in
safeguarding the rights of the Palestinian refugees and
providing humanitarian assistance.

China firmly supports the people of Palestine
in their just cause seeking the restoration of their
legitimate national rights and, in its own way and
through its own channels, has always engaged actively
with the parties concerned to facilitate dialogue and
promote peace. We have always supported the creation
of an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and
enjoying full sovereign rights. We have also supported
Palestine and Israel living in peace and security. We
are open to all initiatives that may contribute to the
resumption of peace talks.

China's special envoy for the Middle East paid
another visit to Palestine and Israel in April and has
engaged actively with both parties to facilitate peace
talks and promote peace. China will continue to make
great efforts with a view to finding a solution to the
question of Palestine and alleviate the humanitarian
situation.

The Syrian crisis has entered its fifth year and has
caused profound suffering to the people of Syria. It
has also gravely affected regional peace and stability.
A political solution is the only way to restore peace,
stability and development in Syria. China has always
supported the United Nations playing a positive role in
finding a political solution and supported the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, in his
good offices. We also welcome the efforts ofRussia and
Egypt, among others, to promote a political solution to
the question of Syria.

China calls on the international community to
remain steadfast in its commitment to a political
solution and to exert positive influence on all the Syrian
parties urging them towards a swift ceasefire and end
to the violence so as to find a settlement plan that fits
the particular situation of the country and takes account
of the interests of all parties.

