Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): First of all, I
wish to join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate on the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. We also wish to
acknowledge the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Peru.

The adverse impact of the trade in small arms and
light weapons on socio-economic development and
international peace and security has been universally
emphasized, and the Security Council has been
reminded repeatedly of its obligation to play a positive
role in bringing the proliferation of such weapons
under effective control.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2006/109) - for which we thank Ms. Hoppe for
introducing - some success, albeit mixed, has been
achieved since 1999, when the Council became seized
of the threat posed by the illicit small arms and light
weapons. The Council has contributed to that
achievement through various proactive measures,
including by imposing arms embargoes in conflict areas,
stifling funds obtained from the illegal exploitation of
natural resources by rebel groups and strengthening
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)

programmes. No less significant - despite my
delegation's reservations regarding its purely political
and voluntary nature - is the adoption of the

International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons.

Despite the progress achieved, the scale of the
problem remains huge, and a lot needs to be done.
Available reports indicate that, at the end of last year,
there were 600 million small arms and light weapons in
circulation worldwide, which were directly or
indirectly linked to the loss of 50,000 lives.

West Africa is a region that has, sadly,
experienced widespread havoc and untold suffering
from illicit small arms and light weapons as a result of
the ease of their availability and handling and their
indiscriminate use by rebel groups, including child
soldiers and criminal gangs. For us those weapons are,
in a profound sense, nothing short of weapons of mass
destruction. That explains the determination of the
Economic Community of West African States to
convert its moratorium into a legally binding
convention. The Second Continental Conference of
African Governmental Experts on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons, which was held in
Windhoek, clearly enunciated Africa's position on the
issue. The eradication of such weapons therefore
remains a matter of utmost priority.

My delegation believes more could be done to
that end through financial and technical assistance to
assist Member States, especially those contiguous to
conflict zones, to strengthen their capacity to enforce
the agreed measures, including prosecuting persons
who violate embargoes.

We also share the concern about the need for
concrete measures to prevent the illegal exploitation of
natural resources to fund the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. We endorse the suggestion that past
reports of the Expert Panel on that matter, and similar
bodies working in that field, could provide useful
information on lessons learned.

Effective DDR programmes are widely
recognized as a key component of, and a precondition
for, successful peacebuilding. Nonetheless, it must be
emphasized that DDR, while a necessary first step,
must be underpinned by the provision of employment
opportunities for ex-combatants. We therefore welcome
the decision on strengthening the financing of such
programmes through the expansion of measures
covered under the budget for peacekeeping operations,
even if that is also partly dependent upon voluntary
contributions. We should, however, avoid adopting a
one-size-fits-all approach, and take into account the
peculiarities of the countries concerned and the
regional dimensions, as and when necessary.

Unsecured stockpiles of collected weapons are
attractive sources for the illicit trafficking in weapons
into neighbouring countries and into potential zones of
conflict. An integral part of a weapons-collection
programme should be the destruction of surplus
stockpiles in a transparent manner, taking into
consideration the security needs of the country
concerned.

Control over arms transfers is a crucial area
meriting an effective international instrument,
especially with regard to transfers to armed rebel
groups, organized criminals and terrorists. While it is
the right of States to acquire weapons for self-defence
and law enforcement, it is equally their responsibility
to ensure that weapons legally acquired do not end up
in the hands of non-State actors, only to be used to fuel
violence and conflict.

Although some progress has been made in that
sphere, the lack of uniform regulation is detrimental to
our common cause. What is required is a transparent,
non-discriminatory and non-selective international
standard on transfer control and end-user certificates.
We also share the Secretary-General's sentiment
regarding the future inclusion of international transfers
in small arms and light weapons in the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms. We welcome Interpol's
efforts to establish a system for tracing weapons and
explosives.

Effective transfer controls will be illusory
without addressing the issue of brokering, which is
central to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The establishment of robust regulation would
prevent unscrupulous brokers from acting with
impunity. We therefore look forward to the
establishment of a group of governmental experts to
consider further steps to enhance international
cooperation to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons.

The inextricable nexus between development and
security has been widely acknowledged. While
supporting efforts to curb the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, we need to intensify our
efforts to address the underlying causes of conflict,
including the scourge of poverty. The demand for
weapons will remain strong as long as conflicts fester

and solutions to their fundamental causes are not
addressed. It is therefore important that the efforts of
developing countries towards sustainable development
are supported by the international community,
especially by our development partners, through
redeeming the pledges and renewing the commitments
made at the 2005 World Summit.

One of the 12 core recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General pertains to the need
for the Council and the General Assembly to work in
tandem to promote long-term strategies to deal with the
problem of illicit small arms and light weapons.
Viewed from that perspective, the Secretary-General's
report is opportune, coming a few months before the
convening of the conference to review the progress
made in the implementation of the Programme of
Action. It is our fervent hope that the outcome of this
debate will further galvanize momentum within
Member States and illuminate the path towards the
attainment of comprehensive measures to contain illicit
small arms and light weapons. We look forward to
working with other members of the Council to adopt a
resolution on this issue.

