Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a great pleasure
to see you, Sir, chairing this important meeting of the
Council on the subject to which your personal
commitment, your country's proactive interest and the
dedication of the Canadian delegation are well known.
For some time now we have been pleased to see the
Council's engagement in the humanitarian aspects of
issues before it. Today's open meeting is a sequel to that,
and we are happy to participate in the debate.

I will take this opportunity, if you will allow me,
Sir, to thank you personally for your very gracious words
of appreciation for Bangladesh's presidency of the
Council last month. We acknowledge the presence of the
new president of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Kellenberger, and we thank him for his
comprehensive statement touching upon important aspects
of the issues of the protection of civilians. The presence
of the Secretary-General at the outset of our debate today
is very much appreciated, and we believe his statement
also effectively drew attention to the subject under
discussion.
Since the debate we had on the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, issued last September, the subject has received
increasing attention in the Council's work. We consider
today's deliberations to be the culmination of that
initiative in that there is now a draft resolution based on
the recommendations of the Secretary-General contained
in that report.

The draft resolution is on a subject which is of a
somewhat evolving nature in the sense that the nature of
the conflict, changing as it does, defines the protection
needs of the civilians. We feel that the experience of the
United Nations in dealing with situations of armed
conflict has also changed, for various reasons. This only
shows that the task of defining Council action in meeting
the needs of civilians in armed conflict will have to

 

evolve over time. Therefore, one set of steps cannot be
considered a panacea for all situations.

Having said that, we do feel that some commonalities
exist between the protection needs of civilians in differing
situations of armed conflict, and that they could be
effectively addressed. Our support for the draft resolution
is based on that premise.

It is perhaps no wonder that in the draft resolution,
while considering ways to provide for the protection of
civilians, steps have been considered to address the relevant
issues on a case-by-case basis and as appropriate. From this
point of departure, we see it address the special protection
needs of women, children and other vulnerable groups,
including refugees and internally displaced persons. The
mention of the existing legal framework, including the
Charter, international humanitarian law and human rights
and refugee law, although considered inadequate, appears
to be comprehensive.

We support enhancing the capacity of the United
Nations for rapid deployment in conflict situations. We also
support preventive deployment, which can be an effective
action to prevent an impending crisis. Bangladesh supports
the focus on situations where refugees, internally displaced
persons and other sections of the civilian population are
deliberately placed in vulnerable situations. We need to
improve the security of refugee camps so that armed
elements cannot threaten the situation there. The need for
United Nations peacekeeping missions to include a media
component to disseminate information relevant to their
purpose and mission is a welcome proposal.

We support the consideration given to the
appropriateness of temporary security zones and safe
corridors for the protection of civilians and the delivery of
emergency assistance. We reiterate our support for the issue
of incorporating measures relating to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
particularly child soldiers, in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The incorporation of a
mass media component, a novel approach in our opinion,
should also be useful in many situations.

It is equally important to provide training to personnel
on international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, as well as in negotiation and communication skills,
cultural awareness and civil-military coordination.

We welcome the Council's decision to set up an
informal working group on a temporary basis on the
general issues of sanctions, and support its consideration
of the recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General's report. It is heartening to note that the General
Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has considered the recommendations. While
looking forward to the next report of the Secretary-
General on the issue under consideration, we affirm our
intention to support the draft resolution.

