Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are delighted to see you, Mr. Minister,
preside over the Security Council. We are also pleased
to see Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Counsellor Archila and
the entire Colombian delegation among us today. We
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary General (S/2019/530) and
for his detailed briefing on the Mission's work and
developments in the country over the past three months.

Everyone with whom we spoke during the visit
underscored the important role played by the Verification
Mission and the need for its presence in the country as
an important factor in ensuring the implementation of
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace.

The report of the Secretary-General prepared us
very well for a successful mission to the country, which
took place from 11 to 14 July. We thank the Government
of Colombia and the Verification Mission for the
excellent organization of the visit. At today's meeting,
we will base our statement on our impressions we took
back from the visit, because it is better to see things
once than hear about them 100 times. We were able to
see the situation with our own eyes and to understand
at first-hand the country's delicate social fabric and
the difficulties and successes in implementing the
peace agreement.

A notable part of our visit was learning about
an incredible fruit called the "tree tomato", which
has great consumer appeal. The representative of the
United Kingdom cannot even imagine how well he
hit the nail on the head, because when he mentioned
Russia as a prospective export market for that fruit I
was searching the Internet for places to buy it in New
York. I do not believe that Russia is the only potential
export market for it. Perhaps even the European Union
might want to be involved, in particular Germany, as
I seem to recall that my friend Mr. Heusgen also quite
enjoyed the product.

Turning now to serious matters, I would like to
begin by confirming that Colombia is a fine example of
effective international assistance for stabilization in any
country. That support was possible because Colombians
themselves brokered the life-changing final peace
agreement. Over the past two and a half years since it
was signed, a great deal has been done in the country.
In 2017, the process of the handover of weapons by
former combatants was concluded and, very recently,
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace fully began its work.
Those positive steps ensure that the Colombian peace
process enjoys the support of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council. We welcome the commitment
of the Government to its obligations under the peace
agreement. We again received assurances ofthat during
our visit to Colombia. That commitment needs to be
continued and put into practice, although we understand
that that is not always easy.

The most striking example of such commitment in
the past three months was the signing by President Ivan
Duque Marquez on 6 June of the statutory law of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. It is no secret to anyone
that disagreements surrounding that document had
polarized the society for quite some time, in spite of the
fact that it is stipulated in the final peace agreement.
Many such difficult but necessary decisions will have to
be taken in the future. That is why we fully agree with
the Secretary-General that the impending constitutional
reforms in Colombia require broad internal dialogue.
At this critical stage, the Government's most important
task should be that of unifying society.

However, apart from that much remains to be done
along the long road to genuine stabilization. During
our visit, we heard criticisms about the stalled agrarian
reform and the insufficient funding of Government
programmes. We heard concerns about the future fate
of the territorial areas for reintegration, which are key
for people returning to a normal peaceful life. Former
combatants who laid down their arms must become full-
fledged members of Colombian society, with the same
political and socioeconomic rights and opportunities.

One important aspect of which many have spoken
is ensuring security in areas that have been liberated
from the internal armed conflict. As we see in the
report of the Secretary-General, the absence of the
State in vast areas is leading to an increased risk of
insecurity for the civilian population, including for
disarmed former combatants. Their lives are threatened
by illegal armed formations attempting to gain control
over territory. We heard a great deal of testimony to
that effect during the mission. We very well understand
that people do not have many options when it comes
to ensuring their security. They can either rely on the
protection of the Government or they can take up arms
themselves. The dangers inherent in the second option
need no explanation.

The same goes for agrarian reform. People do
not just need to protect themselves; they also need to
feed themselves. If the Government does not keep its
promises, people will start growing the crops that are
best able to feed them. Simply put, a failure to resolve
issues of security and employment will inevitably lead
to an increase in the number of dissidents. We have long
followed with concern media reports that some former
combatants are leaving Government programmes
and rearming.

During the mission, we often asked our
interlocutors what, in their view, would be the key
to a successful stabilization process in the country
and they told us something interesting. In addition to
reintegrating former combatants and ensuring security
and programmes for socioeconomic development, many
civil society representatives told us that genuine peace
in the country will not be possible without inclusive
work with absolutely all players within Colombia,
including the National Liberation Army. It is hard not
to agree with that. We believe that the Government
should also listen to its people's opinion on the issue.
In that context, we were pleased to see the letter sent
to the Secretary-General on 26 May, underscoring
readiness to find a political solution to disagreements
with the Government.

In conclusion, I reiterate that here in the Council,
we have repeatedly said that Colombia is a showcase
of effective international support, and today it should
become a showcase for national ownership over the fate
of the country. As a permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia stands ready to continue to provide
support to the Colombian peace process so long as the
Government remains committed to fully implementing
the final peace agreement.

Today, a reference was made to the situation
concerning migrants from Venezuela, a large number
of whom are in Colombia. I would like to say that the
resolution to Colombia's domestic issues depends not
on the situation in Venezuela, but first and foremost
on Colombians themselves. We trust that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, in which
Russian representatives also work, will continue to play
a significant role in supporting the reintegration of the
former members of armed groups into peaceful civilian
life and political activity.

