Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): My role at
this stage is facilitated by the fact that collectively
the members of the Council have emphasized better
than I could have the areas in which United Nations-
European Union cooperation is positive, fundamental
and strategic. My concluding remarks will therefore be
easier to make and briefer.

(spoke in English)

I would refer to the words that President Obama spoke
in Europe, as quoted by the American representative,
which reminded us of how much the European Union
has delivered, first of all to the Europeans; this is
sometimes seen much more from the outside than from
the inside of the Union. I think that this is something
that we have a responsibility as Europeans to bring
back home, and too see with a certain lucidity what we
have achieved. The anniversary of D-Day reminds us
of how much Europe has done for Europe itself, for the
neighbourhood and for peace and stability in the world,
compared to how much war, instability and bloodshed
Europeans had brought to the world in the previous
centuries and decades.

Speakers also highlighted how crucial and strategic
the EU-United Nations partnership is. I would quote the
Spanish Permanent Representative, who said,

(spoke in Spanish)
"[t]he relationship could not be any better".
(spoke in English)

I think that this encapsulates the general outcome
of our exchanges today.

Speakers also stressed the added value of our
role as the European Union and our cooperation
with the United Nations on the many different issues
that I mentioned in my introductory remarks; I will
not go back to this. It also added to the already long
and good list some new elements, integrating my
introduction and mentioning key areas for the European
Union and for our cooperation. These included the
Balkans, in particular Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, but in general terms, the
work that the European Union is doing with every single
partner in the Western Balkans and with the region
as a whole. It included also the work we are doing in
faraway places, such as Myanmar, where we cherish our
support and our cooperation, and also in general terms
with our friends in South-East Asia, in the Far East
and with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
particular on the issues of non-proliferation and, as we
were reminded by our friends from New Zealand, on
counter-terrorism.

Here I would underline the words of the Egyptian
representative on the importance of building a counter-
narrative radicalization discourse, especially building
on the European experience in valuing diversity
and respect, which is the most powerful message we
can put in place all together to counter the terrorist
narrative. Also key is the work we do together on
post-conflict issues, on crisis prevention, on the link
between development and security that is at the core
of the European Union's external action, and the work
we do on human rights, democracy and the rule of
law, on the fight against xenophobia, Islamophobia
and anti-Semitism, which is a key component of our
internal and external policies.

I would cite also our ongoing work, together
with the United Nations, on respect for international
law and its principles, starting with sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Here I would like to acknowledge
the words of the Ukrainian representative, and I
thank him for recognizing the constant and consistent
support that we are giving and will continue to give to
Ukraine, especially with regard to its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

I should like to react on only one issue, migration,
because participants highlighted the work that we are
trying to do and that we are doing. Operation Sophia
has already saved tens of thousands of people directly,
but it has also allowed us to save more than 100,000
people at sea. We would like to see no one die, either in
the Mediterranean or in the desert.

Here I would stress your words, Mr. President,
when you say that this is a collective responsibility. We
are doing our part; it is sometimes not easy politically
inside Europe to do this, but we believe that this is our
human duty and our political responsibility. We need the
rest of the world to join us in this effort, because while
the people who are dying in the desert are less visible,
they are still a tragic loss that we cannot afford. So my
plea to all present and to the international community
as a whole and the United Nations system in particular
is this: let us join forces to ensure that no one loses his
or her life in desperate journeys, at sea, in the desert or
on land. We need others here to support and contribute
to this effort.
One speaker mentioned the fact that the European
Union is working to counter migration. No; we are
trying to work to manage together a phenomenon that
we know very well is here, is going to stay, is huge and
does not relate only to Europe, because we know very
well that the major flows are within Africa and within
Asia, and in some cases they have been from Europe
to Latin America. I myself come from a country that
has experience in this respect, so we know very well
that this is not a problem that we need to stop but a
phenomenon that we need to manage together in a sense
of partnership. This is the approach that we are taking
in a spirit of common challenge, common responsibility
and common solidarity, knowing also that migration
can open up opportunities of different kinds for our
societies if it is managed and addressed with a sense
of partnership.

That is exactly the meaning of our Valletta summit,
which our Angolan friend was mentioning as a good
common point. This is exactly the spirit in which
tomorrow in Strasburg I will present the new migration
package andr partnerships that the European Union will
put in place, exactly in this spirit of working together,
first of all for the sake of people's lives and rights.

I thank the members ofthe Council for this excellent
exchange. Many speakers mentioned the role of the
European Union and its member States. We see that
in most respects we are the primary donor everywhere
in the world, and the primary economic partner and
economic investor in many different parts of the world.
We are a major security provider with our 17 missions
and operations in the region and many other places,
mainly but not only in Africa. Together with our member
States, we are a major diplomatic and political actor,
especially on mediation. We would like all of this to
be at the service of our common principles and values,
knowing that the key elements of the European Union
foreign and security policy are and shall remain those
of dialogue, diplomacy and multilateralism. That is the
European way. That is the United Nations way. And we
look forward to strengthening our cooperation even
more for the sake of peace and security in the world.
(spoke in French): I found to be very useful and constructive.

I thank you very much, Sir, for this exchange, which The meeting rose at 12.50 pm.
