I would like to start by quoting the Secretary-General, who said that the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent conflict. To that end, and in pursuit of that goal, the protection of civilians has become one of the core issues on the Council's agenda. I would therefore like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on this very subject, with the participation of your Minister for Foreign Affairs. Allow me to take this opportunity to also thank our briefers, Mr. Qu Dongyu, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme; and Mr. Jan Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council. Conflict is now the leading cause of acute hunger around the world. In the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, where much of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood and where climate change is already exacerbating tensions, an acute food crisis has been precipitated by the ongoing conflict and intensifying insurgent activities. Indeed, 3.5 million people are projected to face acute to severe food insecurity in the Lake Chad basin. To that number we can add another 3.3 million people in need of immediate assistance in the Central Sahel. I fully agree with what was said by Mr. Egeland in that regard. As noted by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, populations find themselves having to flee and leave their fields, livestock and other food sources behind. This escalates food insecurity for both forcibly displaced persons and their host communities, which are often providers of last resort despite their already scarce resources. Recent years have seen progress made regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict through the implementation of a comprehensive protection framework based on international humanitarian law and Security Council practices. However, more remains to be done. In places such as the Lake Chad basin, dramatically affected by climate change and where Boko Haram is active, or Yemen, where restrictions on land and sea routes are commonplace, and many other conflict zones, thousands of people are trapped without life-saving humanitarian assistance. We hold the strong belief that all people deserve full access to humanitarian aid. This is why my delegation would like to join its voice to those of other members of the Council in strongly condemning the use of the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare and the unlawful denial of access to humanitarian assistance and humanitarian personnel to the civilian population in armed conflict. We would also like to remind all parties of their obligations under international humanitarian law and the need to bring the perpetrators of violations and abuses to justice. Repeated attacks on the human dignity of populations and the enjoyment of their rights as a result of acts of intercommunal violence or by non-State armed groups in the Sahel further exacerbate the fragility of those populations. Women and children are the primary victims of such violence and suffer significant trauma. We would like to stress the need for humanitarian assistance to be gender- and age- sensitive, and to be inclusive of those groups in the process of building more resilient and sustainable communities. Every major outbreak in recent memory, be it Ebola, severe acute respiratory syndrome or Middle East respiratory syndrome, has had both direct and indirect negative impacts on food security, but the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) may prove especially deadly for people living in conflict zones and suffering from acute hunger. Various factors related to the pandemic are exacerbating the challenges in regions already facing major humanitarian crises. Labour shortages are undermining crop production and processing. Disruptions due to transport blockages and quarantine measures will prevent farmers from accessing markets, and confinement measures could hinder the delivery of humanitarian aid, and thus the distribution of much-needed food to refugees and internally displaced persons. The Niger has put in place a response plan in favour of the population estimated at nearly $500 million in food. The forecast support plan provides for the mobilization of 81,500 tons of cereals for sale at moderate prices and 56,000 tons of free food for distribution to the most vulnerable. As the Council may also know, thanks to a bold policy implemented by President Issoufou - the Nigeriens Feed Nigeriens initiative, which has made it possible to ensure food self-sufficiency - it has been proven that drought is no longer inevitable and is not synonymous with famine. However, in the face of COVID-19, that momentum must be supported at the national, regional and international levels. That brings me to my other point. As I quoted at the beginning of my statement, the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent conflict. Prevention includes acknowledging and addressing the deep-seated chronic and acute vulnerabilities affecting countries. It also requires concerted action by Governments, the humanitarian community and development actors to tackle the structural root causes of vulnerabilities, as well as strengthening the resilience of the affected communities. One such approach is a better use of scientific advances, including the peaceful application of nuclear research for agrometeorological and development purposes. In conclusion, I would like to remind the Council that, in May 2018, it unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018). We hope that resolution will continue to guide our actions in order to break the cycle of conflict-related hunger sooner rather than later.
