Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself fully with the statement that will be
made shortly on behalf of the European Union by the
Permanent Representative of Spain.

First of all, I should like to thank you, Mr.
President, for having organized this public debate on
the situation in the Middle East, in response to the
legitimate and fully justified request by the
Palestinians, as conveyed by the Ambassador of Yemen
on behalf of the Arab Group.

France believes it is normal and essential that the
Security Council, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations, be able to debate and express its Views on the

current situation, which is unquestionably a threat to
international peace and security. In his statement last
Thursday, the Secretary-General was the voice of
wisdom and reason. It is urgent that the Council
support the path that be outlined.

The new escalation of violence between Israelis
and Palestinians is extremely grave. As the Secretary-
General himself stressed last Thursday, the parties are
at the edge of the abyss of total war. The number of
dead and wounded continues to increase: 977
Palestinians and 279 Israelis killed since September
2000. This toll is intolerable. Both sides are losing.
France deplores the loss of human life and sympathizes
with the Palestinian and Israeli populations in their
suffering; they are the primary victims of this vicious
circle of violence and the absence of any hope for
peace.

The entire international community, and the
Council in particular, are in agreement on the
following two points of diagnosis. First of all, there is
no military solution to the conflict. The dramatic
deterioration in the situation in the last few days
cruelly illustrates the stupidity of using force, violence
and terrorism. Secondly, the parties need the assistance
of the international community to emerge from this
trap of violence without falling back into it, so that a
real constructive process can be restarted. Naturally,
this would assume that there is a shared political will
on both the Israeli and Palestinian sides to resume
direct dialogue, without which efforts from the outside
would be in vain.

The policy of military reprisal has been pursued
for more than a year now, and resorting to violence
leads nowhere. Violence does not give Israel security;
it plunges the Israeli and Palestinian peoples into
intolerable conditions of life. The struggle against
terrorism must be pursued with the utmost energy, but
it must be accompanied by an equally energetic search
for a political solution. Peace and security go together.
That was the approach courageously taken by Itzhak
Rabin; it is also the approach taken here in the Council
by the Secretary-General.

There can be no durable ceasefire without the
relaunching of a political perspective that corresponds
to the legitimate aspirations of Israel and the
Palestinians. For Israel, this means full recognition of
its right to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders. For the

S/PV.4478

 

Palestinians, it means the establishment of a viable,
independent and democratic State as well as an end to
the occupation of their territories.

A peace process can take place only between
partners. Destroying the Palestinian Authority's
infrastructures runs counter to the demands made on it
to shoulder its responsibility for a return to calm. Israel
also has its part to play in ending provocations such as
extra-judicial executions and in lifting the restrictions
inflicted on the Palestinian people that feed the cycle
of violence. President Arafat must have full freedom of
movement.

It is urgent and imperative to re-establish the
political track, which has disappeared, and to re-launch
a genuine political process of dialogue and negotiation
in the Middle East as a whole with a view to achieving
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace settlement on
the basis of the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
application of the key principle of land for peace,
which has been at the heart of the peace process since
it began at Madrid, 10 years ago.
It is this belief in the need to re-launch the
political process to give the peoples once more some
hope for a negotiated peace that motivates the
European Union's ideas, and those of France in
particular. As the Council is aware, those ideas include,
on the one hand, the holding of elections in the
Palestinian territories centred on the theme of peace.
On the other hand, they involve recognizing a
Palestinian State as a point of departure for a
negotiating process. These two proposals complement
each other closely. On the one hand, they involve
confirming that most Palestinians believe in the
principle underlying the peace process. On the other
hand, they involve restoring the feeling in Israel that
there is a majority in the Palestinian camp that supports
peace, and that there are institutions with mandates to
resume negotiations.

We are well aware that these proposals raise

sensitive questions regarding implementation. Holding
a popular referendum under international monitoring
would of course mean - on the basis of the Tenet plan
and the recommendations of the Mitchell report - that
both sides take steps to establish an effective ceasefire
and that trust be restored. These measures should lead
to the Israeli Army's withdrawing to the positions it
held before September 2000 and to a lifting of the
restrictions. Our ideas are a contribution to the ongoing
reflection. It is a matter of re-mobilizing peace
supporters in both camps and emerging from the cycle
of violence.

In this context, France also fully supports the
courageous and responsible efforts of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Israel, Shimon Peres, and of the President
of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Abu Alaa. Those
efforts should be supported and continued. In broader
terms, we pay tribute to, and encourage, the various
initiatives for dialogue and informal exchanges of
views made recently by peace supporters on both the
Israeli and Palestinian sides. I am thinking in particular
of the two groups meeting around Yasser Abd Rabbo,
Sari Nusseibeh, Yossi Sarid and Yossi Beilin. I would
also like to recall the peace initiative of the presidents
of the Knesset and of the Palestinian Legislative
Council, which opens up a path to dialogue among the
elected representatives of the two peoples.

Everyone's efforts and ideas are needed and
useful. Above and beyond the ideas put forth by France
and some of its European partners, many other
countries - particularly in the Arab world - have an
essential role to play, and can make a useful and
constructive contribution. The two countries that have
signed a peace treaty with Israel - Egypt and
Jordan- are involved in patient and constructive
diplomatic efforts that we must encourage. In addition,
the involvement of Saudi Arabia, whose Crown Prince
suggested some particularly interesting ideas, must be
welcomed. We hope that all of this will yield fruit and
that it will be widely supported within the Arab world.

Of course, the involvement of the United States, a
sponsor of the peace process since the Madrid
Conference, is essential. We hope that it will be active
and resolute. It will be all the more successful if it is
done in concert with the other members of what is
referred to as the "quartet", namely, the United
Nations, Russia and the European Union.

In closing, what is to be expected of the Security
Council? Listening to the Palestinian representative -
and I believe that I will soon be listening to the Israeli
representative - it seems to me that there is today an
opportunity to be seized to engage in a collective and
constructive effort so that the Security Council can
adopt a text that can contribute to a lasting ceasefire
and to restarting a genuine peace process. France is
ready to work resolutely to that end.

S/PV.4478

 

