Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of April.

The question of Palestine remains the foremost issue
in the Middle East, and the heart of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. Undoubtedly, the Arab-Israeli conflict, which
has lasted for over six decades, will not be resolved until
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories comes
to an end; the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, as
acknowledged by legitimate international declarations,
are realized; and a sovereign, independent and
contiguous Palestinian State is established.

Palestine achieved a great breakthrough last
November when it ascended to the status of a
non-member observer State in the United Nations, with
the support of the majority of the Member States. We
hope that the achievement will be further built upon
by greater international recognition of the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, with holy Jerusalem
as its capital.

The continued expansion by the Israeli occupation
authorities of settlement activities in the heart of the
West Bank, Jerusalem and its surroundings, especially
after the ascension of Palestine as a non-member
Observer State; the continued expulsion of Arab
inhabitants from their homes; and the expropriation of
their properties are blatant evidence of the insincerity
of Israel's claims about its desire for peace, and further
undermine efforts to create a Palestinian State and its
national authority. The gross legal and human rights
violations carried out by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the Palestinian people and its lack ofrespect for
its international obligations are further evidence of that
insincerity.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
condemnation of all Israeli practices that have seriously
hindered international efforts for peace and exacerbated
the tense and unstable situation in the entire region.
We renew our call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to shoulder its full
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
to pressure Israel to halt its illegitimate activities and
for the expeditious resumption of peace talks towards
a fair and comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian
question on the basis of the two-State solution, as
indicated in the Arab Peace Initiative.

We are deeply concerned about the grave
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people, especially in the Gaza Strip, as a result of
the continued blockade and closure of the entry
points, leading to grave violations of international
law, including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. We call
on Israel to end the blockade, pursuant to resolution
1860 (2009); to remove all its military checkpoints from
other Palestinian cities and villages; and immediately
and unconditionally to release Palestinian prisoners
held in inhumane conditions in Israeli jails.
The United Arab Emirates is following with great
concern the deteriorating humanitarian conditions
of the Syrian people and Syrian refugees and the
escalating violence and displacement in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We call on the international community
to shoulder its humanitarian and political responsibility
to halt the great tragedy being endured by the Syrian
people. We emphasize the sovereignty and integrity of
Syria and the need for a political process that would end
the bloodshed and preserve the unity of Syria through
an orderly transition of authority. The United Arab
Emirates has shouldered its responsibilities towards the
Syrian people by providing relief and aid to the refugees
in neighbouring Arab States and by supporting Arab
international initiatives in that regard.

We renew our support for the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League ofArab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to resolve
the crisis peacefully, in accordance with the terms of
reference of his mandate.

We renew our commitment to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and were deeply disappointed by the
postponement of the conference on the establishment of
a zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destructionin the Middle East, which was to be held
in March 2015. We call for that conference to be held
without delay, for all relevant parties to participate, and
for Israel to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and subject all its facilities to the
comprehensive guarantee system.

We call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to
cooperate fully with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, to fulfil its international obligations, and
remove all doubts and concerns about its nuclear
programme. We hope for a peaceful solution to that
crisis that would remove the shadow of danger from
our region, alleviate doubts concerning the nuclear
programme in Iran and reaffirm its peaceful nature.

