Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): Italy welcomes the Security
Council's adoption of today's resolution, which follows the
Secretary-General's recommendation to establish a rapid
reaction capacity, as proposed by France, the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands. This resolution aims to
allow the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
to implement its mandate in a more satisfactory manner and
authorizes an increase in the operation's personnel such as
to include this new force. I would recall that the Italian
Government has expressed its willingness to provide this
capacity with its full support.

Italy has always believed that the continued presence
of UNPROFOR is indispensable to foster political stability
and provide support for humanitarian relief to a population
so brutally victimized by a long and ruthless conflict. We
also believe that the establishment of a rapid reaction
capacity is a prerequisite to reinvigorating the action of
UNPROFOR and to fully restoring its effectiveness and
credibility, which have been steadily undermined by the
failure of the parties - especially the Bosnian Serbs - to
collaborate.

This gradual process of deterioration in the situation
and in the conditions in which UNPROFOR is called on to
perform its activities culminated in the Bosnian Serbs'
taking hundreds of Blue Helmets as hostages. This act
defies all international laws, and we firmly condemn it, as
we do the Bosnian Serbs' heinous practice of attacking the
defenceless population in the safe areas. While we express
our satisfaction over the recent release of most of the
hostages and note the positive role of mediation and
persuasion played by the Belgrade Government, we
hereby request the Pale authorities immediately to free all
UNPROFOR personnel they still detain.

Today's resolution emphasizes, and rightly so, that
there can be no military solution to the Bosnian conflict.
This is why we believe that the reinforcement of
UNPROFOR being decided on today cannot be separated
from a vigorous relaunching of the negotiation process.
We thus request all the Bosnian parties to renounce
attempts at military solutions, which would inevitably
cause terrible new suffering to the civilian population and
further distance the already fragile prospects of peace. In
this context, the information received from the United
Nations Secretariat today on new military initiatives by
Bosnian Government forces north-west of Sarajevo raises
very serious concerns. At the same time, we issue a new
appeal to the Bosnian Serbs to finally accept the peace
plan of the Contact Group, which - let us not forget -
has already been accepted by the Government of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also hope that
the international community will intensify its efforts to
foster the peace process.

Finally, I wish to affirm the urgent need that
delivery of humanitarian aid to the Bosnian people,
particularly in the safe areas, be fully resumed and
continued without further disturbances. We consider the
obstacles to these deliveries to be unacceptable, and we
condemn the cynical recourse to such obstructive acts as
a means of pressuring and intimidating the civilian
population.

Today's resolution is meant to give more force and
credibility to UNPROFOR's action, and can, we hope,
make an important contribution to this end.

