Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the French presidency for convening today's
debate. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my thanks to Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo, the five outgoing members. I thank
them for their contributions to the Council over the past
two years. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director for Drugs and Crime
Yuri Fedotov and Special Representative Said Djinnit
for their briefings.

At present, the international community is faced
with the serious task of preventing and combating drug
trafficking and other organized transnational crimes.
Drug production and trafficking, money laundering
and other criminal activities have become increasingly
rampant. They are interwoven and seriously jeopardize
social stability and economic development. Given
the fragile security situation and the difficulties in
controlling borders, West Africa and the Sahel have
been key target areas for international drug trafficking
activities. Drug trafficking activities using transit
countries in West Africa and the Sahel region have
severely affected the economic and social development
of the countries of the region, threatening regional
peace and stability. In that regard, China has expressed
its deep concern.

In order to tackle the root cause of drug trafficking,
China believes that the international community should
work hard in the following areas: first, ensuring that the
primary responsibility for combating drug trafficking
and other organized transnational crimes lies with
Governments. China welcomes the unremitting efforts
by countries in the region. Meanwhile, it must be
noted that the countries in West Africa and the Sahel
region, in their efforts to address drug trafficking and
other organized transnational crimes, are faced with
bottlenecks in resources, technology and capacity, and
urgently need the strong support of the international
community. The international community, while fully
respecting the ownership of countries in the region,
should help them formulate strategies in that field,
improve their law enforcement work and strengthen
their capacity to counter money-laundering, so that
those countries can address drug trafficking and
other organized transnational crimes more effectively.
Meanwhile, under the principles of broad participation
and responsibility-sharing, international cooperation
must be strengthened, in particular efforts must be
made to crack down on the drug consumption market,
so as to reduce demand and suppress the root cause of
drug production and trafficking.

Secondly, China appreciates the efforts made
by the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Mano River Union and other
African regional and subregional organizations, as well
as the efforts by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNDOC) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA). They have worked closely with
one another and have coordinated and proposed many
programmes and initiatives regarding West Africa's
land border security, maritime security, criminal justice
and law enforcement. Thus, UNODC and UNOWA have
played a positive role in helping countries in the region
to combat drug trafficking. We hope that the United
Nations will continue to play a coordinating role and
promote resource consolidation and allocation so as to
provide strong support to the efforts of countries and
organizations in the region.

Thirdly, the fight against drug trafficking and other
organized transnational crimes is linked to social and
development issues and requires the joint efforts of all
Governments, regional and subregional organizations,
and/or United Nations agencies, which should work
within their own mandate and make use of their
own advantages and expertise in ensuring effective
international cooperation. The Security Council
can proceed from the perspective of maintaining
international peace and security, preventing conflict and
promoting post-conflict peacebuilding. The Council
should remain seized of the issue of combating drug
trafficking and other organized transnational crimes in
order to promote the international community's greater
attention to that issue.

Fourthly, in the long run poverty and
underdevelopment constitute the root causes and catalyst
of drug trafficking and other organized transnational
crimes in West Africa and the Sahel region. We hope that
United Nations agencies in the Sahel will work together
closely and strengthen the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region.
Meanwhile, we call upon the international community
to honour, as soon as possible, its commitments in
assistance and investment, and to make special efforts
to assist the countries of the region in capacity- and
infrastructure -building so as to improve their capacity
for autonomous development and eliminate the potential
causes of conflicts.

