At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers, Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Abdou Abarry. Indonesia has been following the progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since we joined the Council in January 2019. We join the Secretary- General's call on all Congolese stakeholders to work together to continue laying the r ' foundations for peace, stability and sustainable development.'se!A llow me to touch on the following points. First, the Great Lakes region has great potential for sustainable peace. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General explained, in order to sustain peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we need to work together on a range of issues in the region, including through the promotion of non-military measures to tackle the threat posed by armed groups, as well as community reintegration, which we need to explore further. We need to maintain the momentum of peace that was started by the Democratic Republic of the Congo in January 2019. We call on all partners to use that momentum to enhance their support and assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. A silo mindset will no longer work. All of the United Nations system and its partners in the region should work together. We need to enhance efforts to ensure that the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues on a peaceful path and that its people experience peace, stability and prosperity even beyond the 2023 elections. The role of neighbours and regional organizations is essential to help maintain that peaceful climate. Neighbours know best. We welcome the efforts of Special Representative Zerrougui to continue engaging with all parties from across the spectrum. Building trust is important. Secondly, we need to increase humanitarian assistance in the country. That is an essential element for the advent of a sustainable peace. We join the Secretary- General in commending the Congolese Government for having taken swift and decisive action to limit the spread of the coronavirus disease. Nevertheless, we also realize that other humanitarian challenges are facing the country. These include the re-emergence of the Ebola virus disease and, as set out in the most recent report on food security, the fact that nearly 22 million people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now acutely food-insecure - the highest number in the world. We call for all partners to increase their humanitarian support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also join the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire so as to provide ample access for humanitarian assistance. Thirdly, Indonesia continues to support the efforts of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its leadership. To that end, we need to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. Increasing attacks by armed groups such as the Allied Democratic Forces have claimed numerous innocent lives. Last June, such attacks claimed the life of an Indonesian peacekeeper, an engineer who was there to help with the infrastructure and the livelihoods of the people in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. He was the first casualty in MONUSCO in the past two years. To be able to carry out its mandate of protecting civilians, MONUSCO needs first to be able to defend itself. The safety and security of peacekeepers remains a high priority for Indonesia. It is time for us to seriously look at our peacekeeping efforts to increase their professionalism, performance, funding and capacity. We will continue our efforts to save lives and protect civilians through community engagement, winning their hearts and minds to build trust. Just as we promised at the beginning of our membership, in January 2019, Indonesia will continue to be a true partner to our brothers and sisters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
