The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Burundi, Costa Rica, C6te d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Egypt, Guatemala, India, Ireland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Serbia and Montenegro,
Sierra Leone and South Africa, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kalomoh to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Malloch Brown to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Carolyn
McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. McAskie to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I shall not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table or invite them to resume their
seats on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table. I thank members for their
understanding and cooperation.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Mr. Mark
Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme; and Ms. Carolyn McAskie,
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.

Post-conflict national reconciliation is a subject
that should be systematically integrated in the United
Nations in order to prevent the resurgence of conflicts
and to create more stable societies. This question lies at
the intersection of the ethical responsibility and the
political responsibility of the international community
to create conditions for lasting peace in societies
emerging from conflicts. It presents challenges for the
work of the United Nations. In recent years, the United
Nations has been involved in post-conflict situations in
which reconciliation has had to be addressed in order
to overcome antagonisms among those who must learn
again to live together in a single society.
In the light of that reality, we should ask
ourselves some questions. What role should the United
Nations have in processes of national reconciliation?
Should we incorporate the need for reconciliation into
exit strategies for post-conflict situations? Should the
United Nations design strategies for reconciliation? Is
there a role to be played by other principal organs of
the Organization? As we have noted in listening to
various non-governmental organizations under the
Arria formula, these and other questions underlie an
issue in which civil society demand coherent and
timely responses. Other questions that could be
approached in this debate concern the principles and
mechanisms of reconciliation, the instruments for
seeking truth such as truth and reconciliation
commissions, consensus-building among political
actors, reparations for victims and the role of justice.

I invite delegations today to present their
observations and comments on how the Security
Council and the United Nations system as a whole can
approach the question of post-conflict national
reconciliation in the future.

I would like to inform delegates that I have
received a message from Archbishop Desmond Tutu,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate, on the occasion of this
debate. The message will be circulated in the Chamber.
I will therefore read only a few paragraphs from it. He
says the following:

"I begin by commending your Excellency
for convening this session on peace and
reconciliation and the role of the United Nations.
I am sorry not to have been able to be present.

"This body was set up precisely to
guarantee and promote peace and stability in our
world and is thus most appropriate. Our world is
wracked by conflict, hatred and strife, particularly
between those who share the same borders, who
should be fellow citizens or at least good
neighbours in juxtaposition

"When human beings have been humiliated,
oppressed, slighted or have imagined themselves
to have suffered these things, then almost always
they have wanted to get their own back, to even
scores, to avenge their setbacks. These things are
etched in the tribal memory, and so strife, which
may have been provoked by something fairly
insignificant, continues because the resentment,
the grudge, has lost nothing in the telling and
retelling. That is how we tend to behave - but it
is not inevitable or invariably the case. Two
conspicuous examples show that it is possible

"Nearly everyone predicted that South
Africa would be overwhelmed by a racial
conflagration. It did not happen. The courageous
leadership of Mr. F. W. de Klerk and especially of
Nelson Mandela, ready to compromise,
remarkably ready to forgive in a display of
magnanimity and generosity emulated by
followers, helped that land to walk the path of
forgiveness and reconciliation and to become, so
improbably, a beacon of hope for lands hag-
ridden with conflict and strife.

"And East Timor, where the United Nations
played a pivotal role in its birth: its leaders also
chose not to engage in retribution and revenge but
to concentrate on building up a nation on the
foundations of forgiveness and reconciliation."

These are excerpts from some of the paragraphs
of the letter received from Archbishop Desmond Tutu.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Tuliameni
Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.


