I would like to thank our briefers for their useful presentations and highlight three points regarding the situation in Somalia. First of all, France is concerned by the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Somalia and across the region. We welcome the measures taken by the Somali authorities to combat the spread of COVID-19 with the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and other partners. France is mobilized, in coordination with the European Union (EU) and the African Union, to support our African partners in their response to the pandemic. The EU has dedicated around €27 million to Somalia and is also implementing a humanitarian air bridge to Africa, which France fully supports. Moreover, France has strongly advocated for a collective effort to consider a moratorium on the debt servicing payments of African countries. France has also mobilized €1.2 billion to support our African partners in four priority areas: health, economic recovery, humanitarian assistance and scientific research. Secondly, France considers that Somalia is now at a critical juncture regarding both its political situation and the process of preparing its security architecture post-2021. On the political front, all Somali actors must continue to work for the preparation of peaceful, inclusive, transparent and one-person-one-vote presidential and legislative elections in late 2020 or early 2021. That requires broad consensus on the electoral framework; therefore, we encourage the Somali authorities to address remaining issues relating to the electoral law with the assistance of UNSOM. In that context, France also calls on the Federal Government of Somalia and all federal member states to urgently resume their dialogue. Such dialogue will be key not only for the holding of the upcoming elections but also for other critical reforms, especially in the security sector. In that connection, we strongly condemn the clashes in the Gedo region, which are guided by political interests at the expense of the security transition. Somalia is also at a critical juncture on the security front, as Somali institutions are set to take over the responsibility for security by 2021. In that context, we welcome the resumption of joint operations led by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army against Al-Shabaab in Lower Shabelle. We call on the Somali authorities to extend those operations to other areas, to update the transition plan and to accelerate the establishment of a plan for the generation of new Somali forces and the integration of regional forces into the National Army. The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/398) shows that more progress is urgently needed on that front. Lastly, France believes that the Somali authorities and their key partners, including the European Union, the African Union and AMISOM troop-contributing countries, must now seriously engage in discussions on international support to the security sector in Somalia after 2021. The European Union has shown its readiness to actively participate in such discussions and is in favour of a more transactional approach. In that context, we think that the current model of international security support to Somalia should not be taken for granted and that all options must be put on the table, including alternative options to AMISOM. In particular, we want to make clear that the European Union's current financing model for AMISOM is not sustainable. If the European Union is to continue to support the security sector in Somalia, that support will be dependent on the establishment of accountability mechanisms, the participation of the European Union in strategic decisions and the financial contribution of other partners. More generally, the European Union has also initiated a brainstorming process on its broader cooperation with Somalia, including through the strategic reviews of its three missions - Atalanta, the European Union Training Mission for Somalia and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia.
