Mr. Alarcon de Quesada (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express my satisfaction
at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the Council's work this
month. I wish to thank you for your words of welcome and
for the courtesy you have extended me during the time in
which we have been in contact as we prepared for this
meeting of the Security Council.
I also wish to express my thanks and appreciation to
your predecessor, Ambassador Elaraby, to whom I owe a
debt of gratitude for his cooperation last month.

It was also on a July afternoon - according to the
story, on a day warmer than today - when little Alice
heard a clear-cut, inexplicable warning from the Queen:

(spoke in English)

"'No, no!' said the Queen. 'Sentence first - verdict
afterwards". (Carroll, Alice in Wonderland, chap. XII)

(spoke in Spanish)

That message has dominated attempts made by the
United States of America since February to manipulate
information and falsify data to make it practically
impossible, or at least as difficult as it could be, to analyse
the 24 February incident and the circumstances and
conditions that produced it. That effort has been
accompanied by an intense publicity campaign seeking to
pass sentence in advance, just as everything possible was
done to prevent the truth from becoming clear.

Out of respect for the members of this body and for
all of the representatives to this Organization who are not
members of the Council, but to whom the Council must
answer, I would like to clarify several issues. In the spirit
of issuing the sentence "sentence first, verdict afterwards",
this Council was convened hastily in February. A
presidential statement was adopted in which the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) was asked
to examine this incident and to present its conclusions to
the Council, with the Council's promise that it would
consider them without delay.

The Council of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) met in Montreal on 6 March and
adopted a resolution asking its Secretary General to conduct
an investigation and submit the results 60 days thereafter.
On 6 May 1996 - 60 days later - the Council of the
ICAO met to examine this document, the provisional
report on the progress of the investigation regarding the
shooting-down, and so forth. This report shows that on 19
March - 13 days after the Council of the ICAO adopted
its resolution regarding the investigation - the same
communication was sent to the Government of the United
States of America and to the Government of the Republic
of Cuba. It was accompanied by a list of requests for
information from the relevant authorities, and of requests
for action to be taken, in the United States or in Cuba,
with a View to the preparation of a report. In that same
communication, a request was made for the relevant
authorization to visit the two countries to allow the work
to proceed.

The Republic of Cuba responded immediately to this
communication by inviting the ICAO investigation team
to visit Cuba whenever they wished. The team arrived in
Havana on 24 March 1996, five days after that
communication was sent.

The provisional report says that on 30 March 1996
the Cuban authorities had completely responded to all the
requests made by the team. This is followed by an
account of all the requests made, with which Cuba had
complied by 30 March 1996. The preliminary report also
states that the ICAO investigation team visited
Washington between 2 and 4 April. It returned to
Montreal, and then went back to the United States - to
Miami, Florida, where the team remained from 14 to 19
April. The investigators do not say anywhere in the
report - and they would not be able to do so - that the
United States was in full compliance with their requests,
as Cuba had been.

Paragraph 3.2.4, page 4, of the 6 May provisional
report of the ICAO also states that further contacts and
talks were being held with regard to the submission,
inter alia, of information that it proceeds to list. I shall
not read this out, as it is almost a full page long. I shall
merely highlight the issues to which, by 19 April the
United States had not responded: transcriptions of
communications from land control - this refers to the
interceptor planes. On 6 May the ICAO said that it was
still awaiting submission by the United States of the
transcription of communications between land control and
the interceptor planes. For anyone who wishes to see
them, our delegation has copies of these transmissions,
which the Permanent Mission of the United States of
America to the United Nations distributed in New York,
in this very building, to the press of this country on 27

 

February. None the less, on 6 May that information had not
been submitted to the ICAO investigators. We will
subsequently be able to consider why that was so.

The list of information to be provided by the
Government of the United States continues: radar data from
the customs coordinations centre of the United States; radar
data from the incident registered by the Caribbean regional
centre in southern Florida; radar data from the Miami
ARTCC and air force installations in Florida; radar data
recorded by United States navy air traffic control in Key
West; radar trace of a plane that was north of the 24th
parallel on that date; and information on the degree of
observance of measures adopted regarding prior incursions
into Cuban airspace.

As members can see, ICAO had set a certain date for
receipt and consideration of the investigation report, but
when that date passed, it had to indicate that it had not yet
received from the United States of America the
transcriptions of radio communications, or any radar data,
or any information on measures adopted regarding earlier
violations of Cuban airspace, in spite of the fact that it had
been said, and has been repeated, that measures in fact had
been taken before 24 February.

As a result of that situation, on 6 May, the Council of
ICAO had to agree to extend the investigation deadline by
an additional month, and it asked its team to continue to
work. In other words, they had to continue to wait for the
United States to provide this basic data, which one
presumes should have existed since February, and the
ICAO Council had to delay its meeting until 6 June. On 6
June, the only thing the ICAO Council could do was to
defer once again its consideration of the report, which had
not yet been completed because they had not yet received
all the information which they were awaiting from the
United States side. The Council therefore had to delay this
until the very last week of its session. The session even had
to be extended one more week to accommodate the
situation, to see whether it would be possible at last to
obtain United States cooperation. On the very eve of the
closing of the most recent session of the ICAO Council,
that body was finally able to fulfil the Security Council's
request to examine and report on this incident.

Something strange happened. If the ICAO Council met
on 26 June, many members of the Security Council were
probably able to read in the United States media as early as
20 June what the United States had already determined was
going to be the conclusion of the Council's consideration of
the report, which in fact it did not yet possess. And on 20
June, no less than the Under-Secretary of State of the
United States, speaking from nowhere less than the White
House, distributed to anyone who might be interested a
text of what it was assumed would be the investigation
team's final report - which no one in Montreal had yet
received - and indicated to the media in advance what,
in his view, was going to be the decision of the United
Nations:

(spoke in English)
"Sentence first - verdict afterwards".
(spoke in Spanish)

That weekend the members of the ICAO Council
finally received the investigation team's report, and were
able to discuss it on 26 and 27 June. As a result, it was
agreed to send the resolution before the Council, which
was the result of discussion among the members of that
specialized agency of the United Nations. The ICAO
Council declined, and not on a whim, to endorse the
investigation team's report; it was no coincidence that it
refused to endorse it, but simply transmitted it to this
principal organ of the United Nations, as what the
President of the Council of ICAO defined the collective
ruling, the collective view of the States members of the
Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization,
as reflected in the resolution the Security Council has
received, and not in any other document.

However, as many Members of the United Nations,
albeit not Security Council members or members of the
ICAO Council, may be interested in knowing something
about the reasons why the investigation developed in this
way, why the report to the Council of ICAO was made in
the way that it was, and why that Council reached the
decision to which I have already referred, I would like to
comment on at least a few of the central points relating to
the allegedly proven data which I referred to at the
beginning of this statement.

I would invite Security Council members to look at
page 77 of the investigation team's report. They will see
there how the members of the team explain how they
analysed the question of the place where the incidence
occurred and the elements they used to calculate or
estimate that location. In paragraph 2.3.7.3, they explain
they arrive at it by means of a combination of:

"the communications recording provided by the
United States", (S/1996/509, annex, appendix B)

 

which was disclosed here in February but which there was
concealed until May,

"in particular the reference to a large passenger ship
and a fishing boat". (Ibid.)

The investigators add that those three elements

"supported the view that the shoot-downs occurred
near those vessels". (Ibid.)

The following paragraph states that

"Eyewitness accounts obtained from the Majesty of the
Seas and the Tri-Liner were mutually supportive" and
that "the position of the Tri-Liner relative to the
Majesty of the Seas, and the resulting estimated
locations of the shoot-downs could therefore be
considered to be the most reliable position estimates."
(para. 2.3.7.4)

Three basic elements - radio communications;
eyewitnesses from vessels, or, to be more specific, one
vessel, Majesty of the Seas, and an alleged fishing boat
which allegedly would have been in the area; and the
combination, the mutual relationship between the location
of those two vessels - together with the radio
communication would allow for the most reliable estimate.
Allow me to indicate some important issues relating to
those three elements. As I said, we shall be distributing a
document, distributed by the Permanent Mission of the
United States of America on 27 February, distributed here
in this City of New York, here in this United Nations
building, with this peculiar warning on each page of the
document:

(spoke in English)

"This is the authoritative version of these transcripts
as of 12.00, 27 February 1996. Destroy all others."

(spoke in Spanish)

Perhaps that version too was destroyed, because one
need only look at the ICAO report to see that what was
submitted to ICAO was a transcript, supposedly as official
as this earlier one provided by the United States, but with
six minutes missing. The first six minutes of the radio
communication, which are present in the February
document, have disappeared in May when at last the
information is generously handed over to the investigation
team. And it happens that those six minutes relate
specifically to the location of the aircraft that penetrated
Cuban airspace and to the location of the vessel Majesty
of the Seas.

There is mention of eye-witnesses from the Majesty
of the Seas and the Tri-Liner. I invite members of the
Council to consider the text of the report carefully.
Indeed, it would be extremely useful to examine the
verbatim record of the meeting of the Council of ICAO
at which the information I am speaking of was discussed
at considerable length. Nowhere, either in the preliminary
report of May or the final report of June, is there any
reference to the investigation team having directly,
personally interviewed any witness from either vessel, the
Majesty of the Seas or the alleged United States fishing
boat, supposedly named Tri-Liner. The investigators say
that when they went to Miami in April, they spoke with
individuals from an aircraft involved in the incident. At
the ICAO Council meeting, Mr. Frostell, the head of the
investigation team appointed by the ICAO secretariat,
indicated that they had not spoken with any member of
the Tri-Liner crew and that they had not visited that
vessel.

Hence, there has not even been any proof of the
very existence of the alleged fishing boat supposedly
known as the Tri-Liner. Yet in the portions to which I
have referred, the report makes use of the versions
provided by so-called eye-witnesses from that fishing boat
to establish its position in relation to the Majesty of the
Seas - whose existence no one denies - to attempt to
estimate the possible location of the downing.

To make matters even more obvious - since the
questionable situation faced by the team is so clear from
this portion of the report and from its conclusions - they
state that they were unable to provide independent proof
of the location of the Majesty of the Seas.

With regard to the communications recording, I wish
to point out something which is contained in the report
and which was the subject of considerable discussion at
the ICAO Council meeting: the mystery of this
document - far from being made clear through the
efforts of the investigation team - became increasingly
complicated in the course of the investigation. I refer here
to the February version; the May version of the recording
was not actually submitted by the United States to the
ICAO secretariat. They state clearly that in May they had
the opportunity to listen to what the United States said
was a recording of these radio communications, which
were subsequently transcribed. The transcription clearly

 

demonstrates the difference from what had earlier been
transcribed and distributed in February: six minutes had
been eliminated, plus other, less important, differences
between the two United States versions.

As to Cuba, the report states that by 30 March Cuba
had submitted not only its radar data but also its radio
communications. It had also made it possible for the team
to interview any witnesses it wanted. We also submitted to
them the original tape on which the Cuban side had
recorded these radio communications. In addition, we
submitted the equipment that had been used to make those
tape recordings.

It is now July. The ICAO investigation is over; the
discussions in Montreal are over; the Security Council is
about to conclude its work; and the ICAO investigation
team is not able to change what it said in Montreal and
what is stated in the report: that, from the United States
side, they listened to - merely listened to - a cassette,
inserted into a tape player in the presence of representatives
of the Government of the United States, who were, as the
report tells us, the custodians of that cassette. Given that, as
even the United States indicates, what they were permitted
to hear in May was clearly different from what existed in
February - that the transcription was lacking six
minutes - I do not see why we should have any greater
confidence in other parts of the version which the
investigators were only permitted to hear, the original tape
of which was never submitted by the United States
Government.

Those are the ins and outs of the radio
communications. As to eye-witnesses, I have already
indicated what the report itself says. The radar situation is
no less interesting: two months after an incident occurred,
the United States authorities were not yet in a position to
provide any data from any of their radars, despite the fact
that, as the report itself indicates, the United States
authorities had been warned a day in advance, on 23
February, that on 24 February there would be a flight or
flights that should be properly tracked and logged by all
radar installations.

Paragraph 2.2.2 of the report says that in the early
afternoon of 13 February - 13 February, 11 days
earlier - the Department of State's Office of Cuban
Affairs contacted the FAA's Office of International
Aviation Office, informing it that something might occur in
connection with these flights and that they should be
alerted. The following paragraph says that on 23 February,
the various United States communications control centres
received instructions - warnings - from the authorities
to the effect that certain flights that were to take place the
next day should be appropriately documented.

In spite of this, not a single one of these installations
was in a position to provide any data whatsoever by 19
April, when the investigation team went to the United
States. According to the report, on 21 May meetings were
held anyway in Montreal between representatives of the
Government of the United States and the investigation
team to see if the team might at last be able to obtain the
remaining data. Council members can look in the
introduction to the report and see - and I will read the
paragraph word for word - that it says:

"Additional information was requested, and was
provided on 21 May 1996 by the authorities in the
United States regarding the mission of the P-3 Orion
aircraft, and radar data from Naval Air Station at
Key West, CARIBROC and NORAD's SEAD
sector". (S/l996/509, annex, appendix B, para. 12)

The report goes on to explain exactly what was
submitted as regards the radar data of the Key West
Naval Air Station. What was submitted was the 21 May
news that the Key West installation had erased its radar
data, had eliminated it, and that it had done so within 15
days of the incident, around 6 March - almost
immediately after the staff of that installation was advised
that an investigation was being conducted and that
someone would be coming to ask for that specific data. I
do understand why even information as categorical as the
elimination of data was not made known to the
investigation team until 21 May.

The United States should explain the level of care
and seriousness used in the work of their federal agencies,
since despite being warned by Washington that a flight
should be recorded because there might be an incident on
it, and then, once the incident had taken place at exactly
the installation closest to where the events occurred, the
one that was involved in the incident - because one can
see in the report that planes have to fly over Key West
and could possibly land there at any given time - simply
erased its data. Furthermore, as the report states, no
United States radar data proved useful in describing the
final minutes of that flight, that is to say, the final
minutes of the incident.

It does not seem to me difficult to understand the
way in which the United States handled the data and the
information that it was obliged to provide, the way in

 

which it manipulated or concealed the information, the way
in which it adulterated the radio communications, the way
in which it did not facilitate contact by the investigators
with the supposed witnesses of the supposed fishing boat
that supposedly was in the area, but that no one saw and
with whose crew members no one spoke - all this in order
to be able to claim that the incident took place somewhere
other than where it actually did - in other words, to
present the case as if it were a question of destruction over
international waters and not, as was the case, well within
the territory of the Republic of Cuba.

Furthermore, the United States delegation is trying to
persist in that same effort at manipulation and confusion as
regards the supposedly civilian nature of the aircraft
involved. I must make a few clarifications in this respect.
I do not believe I can improve upon what ICAO itself
believes should be the criteria for deciding if an aircraft has
civil status or not. As is stated in an ICAO secretariat
document, prepared at the request of its Council precisely
to help make this fundamental issue as clear as possible:

"The use of the aircraft in question is the
determining factor" - I repeat: the use of the aircraft
in question is the determining criterion - "and not
other factors such as the registration and the markings
on the aircraft ..."

In other words, the first question would have to be,
what was the use of the aircraft involved in the incident of
24 February? That needs to be defined before trying to
apply to them the legitimate concern for the protection and
development of international civil aviation, as the United
States side arbitrarily insists on doing. Neither their use nor
their mission related to the transport of passengers, mail or
cargo; they had nothing to do with international civil
aviation and a great deal to do with its abuse, a great deal
to do with putting at risk the thousands of aircraft that truly
are of a civil nature - most of them United States
aircraft - that have the right to navigate that airspace, that
have full cooperation from Cuba for that purpose, and that
should have the due attention of the United States
authorities.

These authorities should be concerned with true civil
aviation and with seeing that there is no abuse in that area,
because their own aircraft are the ones that use the airspace
the most and their nationals are the ones who fly through
there - hundreds of thousands of passengers a year, all
enjoying the technical aid and cooperation of Cuban
authorities. There has never, ever been a single incident
involving a United States civil aircraft, out of the hundreds
that pass each day through these corridors linking Cuba
with the United States.

It should be the principal concern of the United
States Government - especially now, but at all times as
well - to see to it that nothing violates, endangers or
distorts genuinely civilian international communications
in this zone, so near to its territory.

I have spoken of the aircrafts' mission, but more
than this is at issue. All the aeroplanes used by the group
responsible for the 24 February flights are of a single
model, the Cessna 337. But, as anyone who is at all
familiar with the subject of aviation knows, this Cessna
model, and no other, happens to have a dual-purpose
design: civil and military. If anyone interested in aviation
should look through Jane's All The World's Aircraft, a
fairly widespread publication, they will find in any of its
editions a description of the Cessna 337 - or, according
to its United States Air Force designation, the 02. It is
known as the 337 when it is used to carry passengers,
cargo or mail, and as the 02 when used by the United
States military in Viet Nam and Central America. In other
words, it is a plane designed and developed equally for
tasks or missions of a military nature. You can find a
similar description in any United States military aviation
handbook, in which the O2 is nowhere referred to as a
civilian aircraft but only as one of the models that is used
for certain military tasks, as it has been by the United
States Government. The mission that was being carried
out had nothing to do with international civil aviation; the
equipment used can also have military purposes,
according to the United States' own handbooks.

But there is more. Three years ago and earlier, in
1992 and 1993, in Miami, a United States
Congresswoman from Florida organized a major
campaign to petition the Pentagon to provide several
Cessna 337s or 02s to the group that participated in the
incident of 24 February. She was very explicit and active,
making many statements and taking a number of
initiatives. It would seem that she was successful, because
on 19 July of that year the Miami Herald published a
report on its editorial page, written not by just any
journalist but by Mr. David Lawrence, the editor of the
Herald.

In this account, Mr. Lawrence tells us of a trip he
took with the group known as Brothers to the Rescue, the
group in question. Like any good journalist, he
accompanies his account with photographs, including
some of the plane that was used. In one, the marking

 

"N2432S" is quite sharp; in another, four letters are clearly
visible on its wing: "USAF". In other words, this is not
merely a type of plane that is used by the military; it is not,
as the Congresswoman claimed, just that similar aircraft
were to be found in airports in Florida ever since the end
of the conflict in Central America; Mr. David Lawrence Jr.
actually flew in the one bearing the marking N24328, from
which the United States Air Force marking had not even
been erased.

That is one thing. Another is that, today, 26 July, at
4.25 p.m., this aircraft is at the Opa Locka airport in
Miami. It still bears the markings of the United States Air
Force; it still belongs to Brothers to the Rescue and may be
involved tomorrow, the day after, or at some point in the
future in one of that group's operations.

On 26 June 1996, at the meeting of the ICAO Council,
what I have said here was acknowledged by Mr. Frostell,
who said that, indeed, this plane was still at Opa Locka and
that it still bore United States military insignia. It is true
that the "F" is a bit faded; it would seem that it is
beginning to wear out, but you can still see it. It still
belongs to Brothers to the Rescue and at any time could be
used for acts of provocation against Cuba.

I do not know if members can recall earlier situations
in which this Council or any other international body has
considered any incidents related to international civil
aviation. But I can say that there has been no other case
before the international community of premeditated
activities undertaken by an organization that is involved not
in civil aviation but in illegitimate activities that not only
violate international law, United States regulations and
Cuban sovereignty, but are also related to very serious
crimes against the Cuban people.

Cuba has had long experience in opposing actions
taken against it and its people by small aircraft operating
from United States territory. Cuban sugar fields have been
burned by small aircraft. Cuban cities have been attacked
from small aircraft. Explosives have been hurled from small
aircraft. Sabotage has been carried out from small aircraft.
Biological substances have been introduced into our country
from small aircraft. From aircraft such as those of this
group, actions of sabotage have been and are being planned
against installations of the Republic of Cuba.

In this connection, let us consider page 83 of the
report, which describes contacts between the United States
authorities and Mr. Juan Pablo Roque, who had connections
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and who
worked with it, providing information beginning in the
summer of 1993 and ending in November 1995. It is
logical that the FBI should have informers in various
places, including among that group; I would imagine that
there are many of them even now. The FBI must be
awash in information. This person provided the Bureau
with information on the group to which he belonged. I
shall read from the report of the group of investigators,
which, since it is within quotation marks, I must suppose
to be information provided by the FBI to the investigation
team.

It reads as follows:

"'Twelve of the contacts were related to the
Brothers to the Rescue. These reports include
discussions of possible plans to smuggle or airdrop
weapons into Cuba, and other plans to violate Cuban
airspace'." (5/1996/509, annex, appendix B, para. 2.6.9)

The explanation that the Council has just heard tries
to suggest to listeners that the situation was accidental,
surprising and unprecedented, a situation in respect of
which the Government of the United States had been
taking measures prior to 24 February, as it had some
information about possible violations.

The report of the investigation team says something
to this effect. But there is much more, and an attempt is
being made to keep it carefully concealed. I have another
United States document, dated 5 July 1996. I do not have
all of it, as it is very long and has thousands of pages. It
is a document of the National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB), an entity which is often referred to in the
press. On 5 July it examined the matter to which
Ambassador Albright referred: the suspension of the
licence of a pilot. It was originally suspended indefinitely,
but the suspension has now been reduced to 150 days,
which means that, if there is no change in the situation,
that person will be able to fly again by October.

At 8.35 pm. on Friday, 5 July, the NTSB held a
meeting before an administrative judge of the Board, to
consider the question of the suspension of Mr. Basulto's
licence. Curiously, at that same meeting, Mr. Basulto
seemed to be pre-empting the United States Ambassador
to the United Nations by making statements that seem to
us to be very relevant. The United States presents its
great, heroic, tough act of suspending a pilot's licence as
an example of the vigorous application of its laws.

 

On page 1785 of that document Mr. Basulto himself
pointed out the inconsistencies of the United States
Administration. He indicated that his licence had been
suspended for 82 days after 24 February, but that during
that period he had flown his plane and absolutely nothing
had been done about it. He also said that the United States
Government, in the allegations it made when suspending
the licence, referred to another incident - the only one that
the United States Administration accepts. It was referred to
in an earlier text of the draft resolution the Council is likely
to adopt today, and concerns an aircraft that entered Cuban
airspace on 13 July 1995. Everyone knows that this is a lie.
Everyone knows that this is an unacceptable mockery of
humanity. It even mocks the Security Council: the text
refers to a plane in July 1995 for the simple reason that
what happened that day was made public. It had been
announced many months earlier, and had been covered by
United States television. As he said, "I am being accused of
that, but eight other aircraft were flying with me on that
day." That is an interesting detail from the 5 July meeting.
However, there are other points of interest which the
Council should take into account. The report also refers to
measures taken earlier by the United States.

The United States inspector, Mr. Charles Smith,
supervisor of the office of the Miami district of the FAA,
refers to meetings which he held in 1992, 1993, 1994 and,
of course, in 1996, with people from this group, to try to
convince them not to violate international law or United
States regulations, and to warn them that they were
committing offences which could be and should be
punished.
Ambassador Albright said that steps had been taken
before 24 February. Some inspectors or local authorities
with a sense of responsibility, aware that those violations
also put other United States travellers at risk, may have
talked to those individuals. What does Mr. Smith say? He
says that in July 1995, given that the violation was
publicized and well-known, he received a very explicit
response from the head of the group: he had to do what he
had to do - and he did it. Mr. Smith interpreted this to
mean that he was wittingly going to ignore rules and
regulations and violate Cuban airspace. This was a man
who was warned year after year by the authorities. But he
had no reason to believe that any punishment would be
meted out.

The testimony of Mr. William Schultz, a member of
the Brothers to the Rescue group, appears on pages 1839
and 1840. Speaking before the administrative judge of the
United States Transportation Safety Board, he says that he
too had violated Cuban airspace. He flew over Havana on
13 July. He also says that he took with him a journalist
from Channel 10, Miami, and a cameraman. He added
that he was not charged by the FAA with any violation.
He also explained that after arriving at Miami he saw on
television that a number of planes, among them his own,
were flying above Havana, obviously within the 12-mile
zone, because they were physically over the capital of the
Republic of Cuba. We have reached a total lack of
respect for the truth. I do not see it in the text, which
seems to be final; it has changed many times. But even
yesterday, an earlier United States draft text stated that
one plane had penetrated Cuban airspace on 13 July, even
though the United States Government knows that there
were at least eight planes, and even though the pilots of
those planes themselves have said so. They refer to the
injustice done to Mr. Basulto. Why take away someone's
licence just so that you can refer to it in the Security
Council? The policy is not to prevent these incidents, but
to promote and encourage them.

I have already spoken of the trip taken by the editor
of the Miami Herald. But what about the trip taken by
Ambassador Dennis Hays? Who is Dennis Hays? I do not
know if he is already an Ambassador or if he is still in
the process of being confirmed by the United States
Senate. And there, on 8 May 1996, before the United
States Senate Foreign Relations Committee, where they
were considering his possible confirmation as Ambassador
to some Caribbean country, Senator Christopher Dodd, a
well known person in North American politics, expressed
alarm at information he had, that this was Mr. Dennis
Hays, who until last summer was the Director of the State
Department Office for Cuban Affairs. Senator Dodd, a
cultured and informed political figure, had been told or
had found out that the Miami press had said that Mr.
Hays also flew with Brothers to the Rescue. He had also
been a crew member of those airplanes when serving as
Director of the Office for Cuban Affairs. Senator Dodd
asked about this before the Senate, at a level which I
imagine must be taken seriously in the United States.

Following a detailed explanation, Senator Dodd
asked:

(spoke in English)
"Did you ever fly with Brothers to the Rescue?"

Mr. Hays responded:

 

"Yes, Sir. I believe it was in late '93 and '94. My
redecessor had also flown with them".

(spoke in Spanish)

It is a tradition. Mr. Hays was appointed Director of
the Office for Cuban Affairs and among his assignments
was also to accompany the planes, which most likely bore
North American insignia, which most likely were going to
violate Cuban airspace, which most likely were going to
commit sabotage. Does the United States really believe it
can convince anyone that it has done anything at all to
discourage or prevent these things? No, Cuba does not
accuse the victims, it does not turn the victims into the
guilty. The main culprit is the Government of the United
States of America. The main responsible party is an
Administration which has been unable, not just to comply
with international law, an obligation it must feel it has, but
even to ensure respect for its own aviation rules and
regulations.

In this document, which sets out the discussion with
the administrative judge of the National Transportation
Safety Board, there is a very specific description which
complements the investigation team's assertion that the
United States expected an incident on 23 February. Not
only is there the indication given on the thirteenth. Several
United States civil aviation officials give testimony to this
judge to the effect that there is background that dates back
even earlier. One of these officials, Mr. Houlihan, on page
1796, says that one week before 24 February - in other
words, on 17 February - he was called to a meeting in
which he was warned that on 24 February, that is a week
later, Mr. Basulto and other pilots of the organization called
Brothers to the Rescue would fly towards Cuba with the
purpose of creating a political incident: one week before, 17
February.
This is repeated to him on 23 February, and on 24
February, at 7.45 a.m., he is told that that flight with that
purpose will take place. Are the United States authorities
really so innocent? Do they really possess the moral
authority to present themselves as zealous defenders of the
law, as concerned for the lives of others, as the active
promoters of security in international aviation, as having the
authority to give advice to everyone on how to behave with
regard to these possible incidences? Or are they the
authority responsible for the occurrence of this incident?
They knew about it beforehand. They informed Mr.
Houlihan at least one week earlier. The information was
repeated on the eve, and they knew what was happening
throughout the incident.

I invite members to turn to page 5 of the ICAO
report. It is a voluminous report and it is not easy to read
completely. However, page 5 is at the very beginning. It
is the first map which appears in this report. It is a map
drawn from United States information. It simply shows
the Florida peninsula, the Florida strait, the outline of the
Republic of Cuba, and two lines. One is the planned
route. The planes would have flown down the eastern part
of the Florida peninsula towards the centre of Cuba and
then would have moved to the west to return to Key
West. That was the planned route, the route for which
they were given authorization to take off from Opa Locka
on 24 February.

The other line is the actual route, the one that they
actually took. It has nothing to do with the authorized
route. Instead of descending by the east coast of Florida,
they crossed the Florida peninsula to Key West and from
there moved south, then west - all of this within the
region under United States air traffic control - and then
follow a straight line to the capital of Cuba. I repeat: the
two lines are from the United States; they are their
information - the request they made and what they
actually did. Consider for a moment some timings. At
1.15 pm. they took off from Opa Locka; at 2.55 pm.
they were almost at the 24th parallel. There was still
some distance to go. They have been on route for one
hour and 45 minutes, three quarters of the time of the
whole incident, from the take-off from Opa Locka to the
shootdown of the planes and the return of third plane.
Three quarters of the time, an hour and 45 minutes.
Where? Over Cuban territory, in Cuban airspace, or over
United States territory in United States airspace?

What did the United States do to avoid an incident,
or the playing out of an incident? There is a violation
here, Madam Ambassador: from the moment of take-off
the authorized flight plan was ignored.
It was ignored throughout the flight. It was ignored
for an hour and 45 minutes. And the experts in
interception manuals - those who know the most, those
who pontificate, those who advise the rest of the world as
to what mechanisms to use in order to peacefully and
smoothly avoid incidents - why did they do nothing?
Where are the radio communications from any of those
authorities - their own version? Where are they? What
did Opa Locka say? What did Miami say? What did Key
West say? Where are their warnings to those flights?
Where is the signal that they should turn back, that they
should land or that they should fly where they had the
right to do so? Did it ever occur to you, Madam

 

Ambassador, that flying without authorization over an area
they had not been authorized to overfly could have
endangered the life of any United States citizen who might
be using that same airspace in a lawful way? Did it ever
occur to you that for an hour and three quarters, these
persons disregarded the United States authorities, who were
vigilant, who had been warned and who were documenting
this - why? - to allow them to fly directly over the
capital of the Republic of Cuba, and then to say later that
the very specific information they had ended here, that the
last minutes were either erased or disappeared, or that their
sophisticated technological methods were not able to
specify what happened in the last stages of these flights.

But these authorities were fully aware of the initial
stage of the flight and, as everything had been prepared in
advance, not only did they do absolutely nothing, but it
almost seems as if they were waiting with their arms
crossed - and with the radar shut off, of course - for the
incident to occur and be announced, so that they could
become the great champions, before the Security Council,
of international law, of civil aviation, of humanitarian
principles, and so on.

The United States concealed information, falsified data
and impeded the analysis, and, in addition - using
procedures that are truly regrettable - tried to make
consideration of this item before the Security Council as
difficult as possible.

The Security Council now has before it a draft
resolution that, in its first operative paragraph, would
endorse the conclusions of the ICAO report and the
resolution the ICAO Council adopted. In other words,
members would endorse the conclusions that the Council of
ICAO refused to endorse; it asks that the Security Council
approve the conclusions of a report and at the same time
the resolution of the body charged with studying it. That
body rejected the suggestion repeatedly made by certain
parties that it endorse the report, and it rejected it because
of the great number of inconsistencies, contradictions and
gaps the report contains.

The Council would be asked, in paragraph 5 of the
draft resolution, to reaffirm the principle that

"each State shall take appropriate measures to prohibit
the deliberate use of any civil aircraft" (S/1996/596, para. 5)

and so on. The author is the United States. What real
significance would it have if the Security Council accepted
this formulation by a State that clearly has taken no
measures whatsoever to prohibit the deliberate use of civil
aircraft in a way inconsistent with the aims of the
Chicago Convention? What are the "appropriate
measures"? Should the Council also provide military
aircraft to persons who will violate the rules of civil
aviation? Should it appoint ambassadors to accompany the
provocateurs? Should it tolerate, allow, promote, incite
these activities? With what moral authority can the United
States talk about something that it systematically violates
day after day?

Paragraph 7 urges

"all States that have not yet done so to ratify as soon
as possible the Protocol adding article 3 bis to the
Chicago Convention" (S/1996/596, para. 7).

Will the United States do this? Will it set an
example? Has it already taken the steps to ratify the
Protocol? Since it is the only author of this draft
resolution, one would assume that one who exhorts, one
who asks the entire world to do something, would itself
be prepared to follow through. At best, this is possible.
But the end of the paragraph is truly a bad joke:

"and to comply with all the provisions of the article
pending the entry into force of the Protocol" (ibid.).

Has the United States really been applying the
provisions of article 3 bis? Has it ever truly applied any
part of this article? Is it going to do so now? Is it going
to change its policy? Is it going to take genuine measures
to prevent the deliberate use of aircraft that are registered
as civilian by the United States but that are dedicated to
violating the rules of international civil aviation?

I should like to say the following: I know that some
delegations that are members of the Council - not all,
because a number of States here have not ratified this
article - attach great importance to this issue. The
Republic of Cuba wishes to offer to all of them the
possibility of showing that they genuinely, and not only
rhetorically, adhere to article 3 bis. The Republic of Cuba
proposes, and is already taking the relevant steps, to ask
the Council of the International Civil Aviation
Organization to analyse, at its next session, problems
related to the abuse of civil aviation in our region and to
the improper use of aircraft registered as civil aircraft in
the United States, in contravention of the Chicago
Convention. We hope that the Council of ICAO will
agree to discuss this issue, which would mean an analysis

 

of the necessary conditions for compliance with the
provisions of this article in one specific part of the world.

We hope that all the States that defend 3 bis and that
want to see it enforced will cooperate with us so that this
article, and its just purposes, can be truly applied in
practice - not used simply so that a State that has not
ratified it and does not comply with it can utilize it
demagogically, exhorting others to accept it. I repeat that
very soon the Council of ICAO will be called upon at the
request of Cuba to examine this crucial question of the
improper use of civil aviation in this region that unites us
and separates us, specifically violations of international civil
aviation and its norms. This, I might mention in passing,
does not mean only violations of the sovereignty of the
Republic of Cuba - which might be of interest to the
United States - but also means threats to the safety of
citizens of the United States, who are the majority users of
the international air corridors over the Republic of Cuba; to
United States aircraft, which represent the majority of the
aircraft flying over Cuba; and to United States passengers,
who represent the majority of those who use the airlines
that fly over the territory of the Republic of Cuba.

A month ago, the ICAO Council considered this
question and adopted the decision contained in its
resolution. I recall very vividly the moment when
consideration of this subject began. I heard the
representative of your country, Sir - the representative of
France to ICAO - draw attention to the fact that,
independent of or beyond the specific issue to be
considered by ICAO at that time, what was before the
ICAO Council was above all the question of the prestige
and credibility of ICAO. This subject, which was first
raised in the discussion by the representative of France, was
reiterated on many occasions by most members of the
ICAO Council. I regret that the verbatim records of all that
was said there are not available to members, and that no
steps have been taken to make them available. Of course,
my delegation is quite prepared to provide to anyone who
might be interested in the whole truth of events in Montreal
with this information, which of course we have in our
possession.
In the end, on 27 June, I believe that the ICAO
Council, as I said there, managed to preserve its prestige.
It managed to prevent its credibility being damaged by the
manipulative attempts it had to confront. It is up to this
Council now to act. It is up to its members to respond on
behalf of the credibility and prestige of this organ.

