Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate, which offers the
opportunity to share views on peace and security
in Africa. Let me also thank our briefers for their
invaluable contribution to this debate. Your country's
focus on this important topic during your presidency is
highly appreciated.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Namibia applauds the continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) and particularly with regional and subregional
organizations on the continent. We also welcome
enhanced cooperation in peacekeeping in Africa.
My delegation wishes to stress the need for the AU
and the United Nations to outline their roles clearly
according to their comparative advantages. Partnership
between the United Nations and the AU offices, while
essential, cannot substitute for ownership by Africa of
its challenges. It is both pragmatic and right to seek
out African views on conflict resolution and conflict
prevention through formal and informal sessions
between the two organizations.

We wish to underscore the important role that
regional and subregional arrangements and agencies
can play in the promotion of peace and security, as well
as economic and social development.

In the wake of the historic adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change in 2015, peace and
security have to underpin the delivery of an environment
in which the development agenda can flourish.

The African Union has demonstrated its ability to
take the lead in the effective resolution of conflicts.
Over the years, the African Union member States
have been able to step in promptly to help maintain
peace and security. Namibia remains committed to
contributing to peacekeeping operations. Indeed it is
the presence of African peacekeepers that has provided
international peace operations with political legitimacy
on the continent.

The African Peace and Security Architecture road
map for the period 2016-2020 also remains essential
to provide legitimacy and effectiveness on the ground.
We have noted that the organs of the Architecture are
increasingly shouldering their responsibility under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

African mediation and rapid response efforts are
two areas that rely on support by partners such as the
United Nations. In order to make the African Peace
and Security Architecture more effective under the
current challenging economic and other circumstances,
it is important to make full use of available expertise
and knowledge on the ground and at regional level. It
is essential that actions taken are based upon African
programmes already developed at high-level forums.
These programmes speak directly to the needs identified
by Africans themselves, are often gender sensitive, and
will never be seen as imposed from the outside, and
thus not succeed.

Namibia values the role that the United Nations
Office to the African Union plays by providing technical
advice on matters of capacity-building and operational
support. However, further efforts to build institutional
capacity would be crucial to bringing coherence to the
consolidation of peace in Africa.

I would like to applaud the recent appointment by
the Secretary-General of former German President
Horst Kohler as his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara.
We call on all parties to offer their cooperation and
support in order to see genuine progress and resolution
of this long standing conflict.

Finally, Namibia welcomes progress made in
increasing the participation ofwomen in leadership roles
towards resolving conflicts. Indeed, it is imperative to
integrate gender perspectives into institutional reforms
in post-conflict countries. We encourage Member
States in post-conflict situations to mainstream gender
perspectives in institutional reform for the protection of
women's rights and call for the incorporation of women
in mediation processes.

