Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening by
the presidency of this interesting debate, organized by
the Permanent Mission of Peru on an issue that clearly
requires the attention of the Council.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Kuwait on its presidency and to welcome the new
Ambassador of France, Nicolas de Riviere. We wish
also to express our appreciation to today's briefers
for the arduous efforts they are making in countering
terrorism and for having enriched this meeting by their
contributions, based on their practical experience.

The link between terrorist groups and transnational
and national organized crime has been recognized and
proved by the Council as a threat to international peace
and security. The interconnection of these two great
evils takes a high toll in human lives, brings political
destabilization and undermines social and economic

progress. It is therefore undeniable that the outcomes
of the clear relationship between such criminal groups
must be combated and prevented. Prevention plays a
very important rule in this struggle, since by relying on
measures to that end States can strengthen their response
systems in order to improve their effectiveness. We
must therefore strengthen public-private partnerships,
international cooperation and relationships with both
subregional and regional agencies, whose technical and
logistical support are of considerable value.

Terrorist groups resort to crimes such as abduction,
trafficking in arms and drugs and trafficking in
persons, among the others mentioned today, in order
to finance their illicit activities. States must therefore
strengthen the prosecution and criminalization of
money-laundering and corruption, with the support
of the judiciary, national financial analysis units and
regional financial intelligence groups.

The Dominican Republic attaches priority to
prevention along with the dismantling of the ties between
terrorists and drug traffickers. Drug trafficking, from
production all the way through the illicit consumption
of illegal substances, is a heinous cancer that is eating
away at the well-being and progress of our peoples.

On 7 June last, the Permanent Missions of the
Dominican Republic, the United Kingdom, France, the
United States, Peru, Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, along with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, organized
an Arria Formula meeting on the issue of transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking in the Caribbean
region as a threat to international stability. This made
it possible for Council members to debate the complex
dimensions of these problems, including current trends
and modalities, as well as the efforts of parties to
combat these phenomena.

We would highlight here the importance of
closely cooperating with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL in analysing and
exchanging the relevant information in order to help
identify the criminal ties between terrorists and other
criminal groups.

Finally, putting an end to terrorism and organized
crime is a fight we must all undertake. It is for that
reason that we commend the time and effort put in by
the Permanent Mission of Peru to bring to light the ties
between terrorism and organized crime. As Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
it held educational meetings on this important issue and
is leading the current negotiations on a draft resolution
on the same topic.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu on his last day in the Council
for his wise opinions. It has been an honour to be his
colleague. He is a very intelligent and interesting person
and I wish him every success in his future endeavours.

