Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): At the outset, allow
me to thank our briefers, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative Nebie and Brigadier General Maio,
for their briefings and their and their teams continued
efforts in the Central African Republic. We know how
difficult and challenging their missions are, as is the
context they are operating in.

Let me also take this opportunity to offer my
condolences on behalf of the British Government to the
family of the peacekeeper who lost his life in Bambari
last week. That senseless death, one of three in the
past five weeks, serves to illustrate the deteriorating
security situation in the Central African Republic,
which concerns the United Kingdom, like other
Security Council members, very deeply.

Security in areas that were once considered
relatively stable - for example, Bambari and
Bangui - has deteriorated. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to respond to and quell the violence and
uphold their mandate to protect civilians.

Today, as the report of the Secretary-General's
(S/2018/6ll) states, a quarter of the population have
been driven from their homes as they seek safety.
There are now more internally displaced people in the
Central African Republic than at any other point in the
country's history. Over half of the population is in need
of humanitarian assistance. Seventy per cent of families
do not have access to clean water and 80 per cent of
families do not have access to latrines. Despite that,
only 20 per cent of the humanitarian response plan has
been funded. The United Kingdom has given $9 million
so far in 2018, and we encourage all Member States to
respond to that appeal.

We call on all armed groups in Bangui and
throughout the country to immediately cease all forms
of violence, but we also urge political, religious and
community leaders to stop incitement to violence on
religious and ethnic grounds. We have seen the tragic
consequences of such calls to Violence over the past
few months. Those in positions of leadership have
particular responsibility for their words. The authorities
and the international community must hold accountable
those involved in attacks, violations of international
humanitarian law and abuses and violations of human
rights. We must send a clear message that this behaviour
is not acceptable and that there will be consequences,
as the national justice system continues to develop and
the Special Criminal Court makes progress towards
operationalization through the enactment of a new
legal framework and the appointment of judicial
police officers.

We welcome the progress made in extending States"
authority to all areas of the country, including through
the recent redeployment of civil servants and justice
representatives, and we recognize the real challenge
of doing so. The deployment of the Forces armees
centrafricaines units trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission (EUTM) in the Central
African Republic is an important step. We commend
the EUTM's efforts to support the re-establishment
of a cohesive and well-trained national security force.
That is not only essential for peace and security in the
short term; a well-trained force that respects human
rights will help to build trust between civilians and
the Government of the Central African Republic, and
thereby help to mend the social fabric, which has been
deeply damaged by the conflict.

As we have discussed in the Council many times,
an inclusive political peace process is the best way to
address the grievances of all parties to ensure long-
term peace and security. We very much welcome and
support the African Union's (AU) leadership on that
issue through the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation. The visit to take stock of armed groups'
grievances was a good step. The regional credibility
of the African Union allows it to positively engage
with all groups, and we strongly encourage the AU to
continue its good work. We should reflect on how we
the Security Council and the international community
can best support the African Union and enhance and
support the peace initiative. The United Kingdom is
open to the African Union's suggestions on how the
Council and the international community can play
a more supportive role, and we look forward to the
interactive dialogue later.

