Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): At the outset, I wish to
extend to you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. We are delighted to see you, Mr.
Minister, presiding over our deliberations. We have no
doubt that your country's presidency assures the
successful outcome of the Security Council's work this
month. Let me pledge my delegation's determination to
work closely with you in the discharge of your duties.

I should also like to pay special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Emilio Cardenas of Argentina,
for the brilliant manner in which he presided over the
Council's business last month. I reiterate my
Government's deep gratitude for his leadership in the
convening of the highly successful meeting on the
situation in Mozambique in January.

I wish to seize this opportunity to express once again
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, not only for his competent
leadership of the Organization, but also for his untiring
efforts and his dedication to the cause of international
peace and security. The Government and the people of
Mozambique, of course, remain indebted to him for the
constructive role he played in the successful completion
of the mission of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ).

The Council is meeting once again to discharge its
responsibilities at an extraordinary time in the history of
the people of Angola, a time when peace and stability are
within their grasp. My delegation has carefully examined
both the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) and the
draft resolution before the Council. We also listened with
keen attention and interest to the statements made today
by His Excellency Mr. Venancio de Moura, Minister for
External Affairs of Angola, and by His Excellency
Mr. E.C.I. Bwanali, Minister for External Affairs of
Malawi and Head of the ministerial delegation of the

 

Organization of African Unity (OAU) to this meeting. We
thank the Ministers for giving us a vivid picture of the
situation prevailing in the sister country of Angola. Their
statements underscore the urgency and determination with
which the international community at large and the Council
in particular must address the issue before the Council
today: the establishment, as a matter of high priority, of a
peace-keeping operation for Angola.

In that regard, my delegation particularly wishes to
welcome and support the proposal made by the Secretary-
General in his report to the effect that

"a new United Nations operation in Angola,
UNAVEM. III, immediately take over from UNAVEM
II". (S/1995/97, para. 60)

As a matter of fact, my Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, speaking before
the Council on 27 January 1995 , stressed the importance of
this issue, as follows:

"May I take this opportunity to underline the
importance we attach to the early deployment of the
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). Our recent experience [with the
deployment of a United Nations force in our country]
has shown that the sooner such a verification
mechanism is established and deployed, the better for
the success of the peace process. I would therefore
urge the Council to look into this matter more
diligently and expeditiously." (S/PV.3494, p. 5)

The relevance and urgency of this action by the
Council can not be overestimated. The signing of the
Lusaka Protocol last November was the culmination of a
long and delicate process of negotiations to address the war
situation in Angola and to contribute to bringing about
peace and stability not only in that country but also in the
entire region of southern Africa. We strongly believe that
peace in Angola can no longer be delayed. More than ever,
the United Nations and the international community at large
are duty-bound to extend the hand of solidarity to the
people of Angola and their legitimate Government in their
quest for peace and stability. In assisting the Angolan
people, we attach utmost importance to the observance of
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations as well as to the principles of sovereignty, and of
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of the Republic of Angola, all in line with the "Acordos de
Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol. We are of the view that the
international community can assist States Members of the
United Nations while fully respecting those principles.

In this context, we cannot agree that the deployment
of any peace-keeping operation should have any strings
attached. We therefore express our support for the
Angolan delegation's view that some paragraphs of the
draft resolution ought to be revised in order to enjoy the
full agreement of the Government of Angola.

We are happy to note that the Council is considering
the establishment of a comprehensive, wise peace-keeping
operation in Angola, which would include not just
political and military aspects, but also humanitarian and
mine-clearance dimensions. In its endeavours to face the
challenges of humanitarian assistance, the Government of
Angola will no doubt need the support of the international
community. In particular, the role of the United Nations
will be of great importance in providing a proper
framework for the effective coordination of humanitarian
aid. We consider the mine-clearance programme to be
essential for the resettlement of returnees and displaced
persons. The success of the programme is crucial to
efforts to rehabilitate the infrastructure in the countryside
and promote agricultural production in rural areas.

Mozambique is linked to Angola by long and special
ties of brotherhood and friendship. We are united to
Angola not just by a common historical past and by a
common language; more than that, we are united to that
sister country because our peoples fought together for the
independence of their countries, because together we
forged our national identities and together we resisted
destabilization and aggression. Even in our search for
peace, the Angolan peace process and the Mozambican
peace process trod the same path; they experienced the
same hurdles; they faced the same uncertainties.

A few days ago, in this very Chamber, the Council
celebrated the successful conclusion of the mission of
ONUMOZ in my country. But so long as peace is not a
reality in Angola, the success achieved in Mozambique
can be considered neither complete nor solid. That is why
my delegation wishes to reaffirm its unconditional support
for and solidarity with the people and the Government of
Angola. We reiterate our readiness to do our best to assist
in the efforts for peace, harmony and national
reconciliation in that sister country. My delegation wishes
to urge every State Member of the United Nations to do
the same.

 

