Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity to contribute today and
thanks the delegation of Japan, which has a long and
commendable history of promoting reform of Security
Council working methods, for convening this debate.

New Zealand strongly believes that, in addition to
any structural change, there needs to be wide-ranging
reform of the Council's working methods. In that
regard, New Zealand rejects outright the suggestion
that the Council's working methods are a matter for the
Council alone to decide. That is no more legitimate
than arguing that citizens have no valid interest in the
proceedings of their countries' courts or in the rules
and procedures of the legislatures that they elect. The
Council has the authority to make binding decisions.
Its permanent members are here by agreement of the
international community, as embodied in the United
Nations Charter. And the remaining members are
elected to serve the 187 Member States that do not
enjoy the privilege of permanently sitting in the
Council Chamber, often behind closed doors.

For those 187 - the overwhelming majority of
the United Nations membership - this Council's
working methods are vitally important. They affect our
ability to understand and contribute to the Council's
work and, in the end, like the Council's structure,
directly affect the legitimacy of the Council itself.
Over time, an opaque and insular Security Council will
lose credibility and will not enjoy the support of the
wider membership, and its role in maintaining
international peace and security could diminish and
perhaps, over time, even be usurped. Such a Council
would at best be viewed as irrelevant; at worst,
illegitimate. Furthermore, such is the overriding
importance of the Security Council's role in
maintaining global peace and security that its
legitimacy bears directly on the very legitimacy of the
United Nations itself. New Zealand believes that it is in
everyone's interest to ensure that both the United
Nations and its Security Council are credible, effective
and strong.

The presidential note in document S/2006/507
sets out over 60 concrete steps that might improve the
Council's working methods and, in turn, its legitimacy.
They are steps that, as Japan's concept paper
(8/2010/165) makes clear, would increase the
Council's transparency, its interaction with
non-members and its efficiency. In the interests of
time, I will highlight just five proposals that New
Zealand considers important.

First, while we accept that, in line with rule 48 of
the provisional rules of procedure, private
consultations are sometimes necessary, overall we
believe that Council meetings should be public
whenever possible. Further, essential information
should be shared at those meetings, and such meetings
should be outcome-focused, lest the issues be diluted
by a day's worth of bland statements from Council
members and non-members alike.

Secondly, thanks to the efforts of Japan, France,
the United Kingdom and others, the Council's
interactions with troop- and police-contributing
countries have greatly improved. However, as the
recent discussions on Chad demonstrated, key troop
contributors are sometimes still unable to participate
meaningfully in timely and sustained high-level
consultations with Council members. To address this,
New Zealand advocates the creative use of such
Council meeting formats as informal interactive
dialogues. As Council President during the Rwandan
crisis in 1994, New Zealand organized regular informal
meetings with troop-contributing countries. Our
10-32436
experience in that case and others convinces us that
such informal meetings can allow very useful
communication and that they should be used more
regularly. And of course, they better reflect the spirit of
our Charter.

Thirdly, Member States with which the Council is
dealing should also be able to participate meaningfully
in high-level Council consultations. The informal
interactive dialogue format used last year in
discussions on Sri Lanka, and more recently on Chad,
worked well. This format should become a standard
Council tool for sustained interaction with
non-members whose cooperation is sought by the
Council. It would provide opportunities for prevention
of conflict and better use of the Council's role as set
out in Chapter VI of the Charter. However, while
recognizing that such issues do often require private
discussion, the Council also needs to remember the
need to maintain a balance of transparency.

Fourthly, New Zealand would like to see draft
Council documents shared with non-members sooner
and with more frequency, and believes that interested
parties should have greater influence in the preparation
of those documents. Such sharing could be part of
wider efforts to revitalize the way the Council and its
secretariat make use of modern information
technology. Websites, such as that used by Slovakia
during its Council tenure, and now by Security Council
Report, are good current examples, but more
systematic sharing through email and other modern
media would be welcome.

Finally, as France and others have pointed out,
more effective discussions among Council members
are desirable. New Zealand recalls that, during its most
recent term on the Council, informal discussions were
both interactive and strategic and allowed for
substantive discussion and negotiation. Interactive
engagement would improve Council effectiveness and
collegiality and should be encouraged.

Those are just five of the many changes that
could improve this Council's working methods. As a
next step, New Zealand looks forward to Japan, as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
issuing a revised version of presidential note
S/2006/507, and urges that it be accompanied by a
concrete implementation plan, and we call for regular,
10-32436
annual or biannual debates, to assess that
implementation.

If the Security Council is to maintain
international peace and security, it must have the
support of the Member States from which it derives its
authority. Those Member States - the 187
non-permanent members - deserve better
transparency, they are entitled to better interaction and,
above all, they seek a more effective Security Council.
Such outcomes may be in the hands of the members of
this Council, but they are in the interests of all Member
States.

