Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
first like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing on the most recent developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which remind us
of the gravity of the situation there. We commend his
endeavours and reiterate our full support for his efforts
to ease tensions and avoid a confrontation. We would
like also to thank Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director
of B'Tselem. We commend him for his courage in
participating in this meeting to discuss the violations by
the Israeli occupation authorities of the human rights of
Palestinians, who are living in very difficult economic
and social conditions because of these practices.

We are meeting today a few weeks after the
conclusion of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session, whose echo
continues to resound. The strong support given to the
Palestinian people by Heads of State and Government
in their statements sent a clear message about the way
in which Member States have addressed the Palestinian
question for the past seven decades, namely, that Israel,
the occupying Power, must be compelled to stop its
violations of the most basic rules of international law
and that it must implement its legal obligations as
stipulated by international conventions and treaties,
notably the Charter of the United Nations, which
we have all adopted as our guiding light and which
embodies our belief in basic human rights, the dignity
and worth of the individual and the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small.

Unfortunately, these rights remain but a dream for
our brothers and sisters in Palestine. The echo of this
message did not simply stop at the General Assembly
but spread to many other meetings held during the
high-level week, as well as the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee on Palestine and the ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

Those two meetings reaffirmed the priority that a
large number of States give to these issues with a view
to alleviating the Palestinian people's suffering as a
result of the crises they are facing, especially on the
humanitarian and economic fronts. Those States are also
trying to maintain the dignity of Palestine's 5 million
refugees and not to disappoint the more than 500,000
male and female students among those refugees. Based
on its commitment to supporting UNRWA so that
it can continue to offer its vital services to refugees,
last month Kuwait decided to donate an additional
$42 million to the UNRWA budget.

Unfortunately, despite the resonance of these
messages, they have produced no results, because the
Israeli occupying forces have continued their grievous
systemic violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The Israeli occupation forces have
continued to use excessive force against Palestinian
civilians taking part in the Great March of Return,
which was a peaceful demonstration. As we heard
earlier from Mr. Mladenov, those forces have continued
to use live ammunition against demonstrators, raising
the number of those killed to more than 205 and of the
injured to more than 20,000. In the past two weeks
alone, we have witnessed the deaths of 10 Palestinian
martyrs, including three children, and 882 Palestinians
have been injured. And Friday, 28 September, saw the
highest number of casualties in a single day since May,
when seven martyrs were killed.

This killing and terror spree did not simply stop
there. Attacks have continued to dominate the stage
in the occupied territories. Aisha Al-Rabi, a mother of
eight, died a martyr from a head injury received during
an attack by settlers who threw rocks at the car that
her husband was driving as they were returning home
from a family visit in Hebron. Before she was killed,
she had been preparing for the forthcoming wedding
of her daughter Salam. The Council no doubt agrees
with me on the need to condemn this heinous crime.
These actions, which constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity, are the responsibility of the Israeli
occupation authorities alone. In that regard, we join
our voice to that of Special Coordinator Mladenov
in demanding that those who killed this Palestinian
mother be quickly brought to trial.

We also want to note the impending danger of
the implementation of the unjust decision to raze the
town of Khan Al-Ahmar and forcibly move its Bedouin
residents away from the demolition site as bulldozers
and demolition machines, accompanied by large
numbers of Israeli troops, drew nearer. These events
resulted in injuries to many of the community residents
and those who stood in solidarity with them, including
an Israeli citizen, as they were severely beaten while
defending their homes and property. We reiterate our
rejection of Israel's aggressive and systematic policies
targeting unarmed Palestinians, which are all part
of an illegal plan to annex these lands and impose a
policy of fait accompli that aims to partition the West
Bank, undermine its geographic continuity, negatively
affect the possibility of a two-State solution and
maintain the foundations for a racist regime against the
Palestinian people.

We also strongly condemn the Israeli Government's
recent endorsement of a decision to build a new Jewish
settlement neighbourhood in the city of Hebron, where
more than 200,000 Palestinians live, south of occupied
Jerusalem, reportedly the first such endorsement in
Hebron since 2002. We can add that to the record of
unjust Israeli settlement decisions that clearly violate
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), which among other things confirms that
Israeli settlement activity constitutes a clear violation
of international law and is an obstacle to peace. It also
states that Israel should immediately and completely
end all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and also affirms
that the international community will not recognize
any changes to the pre-1967 borders, including those
pertaining to Jerusalem, except those changes that are
agreed to by the two parties through negotiations.

Arrests, the demolition of homes, the destruction
of property, the unprecedented expansion in the
construction of illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the
forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the
targeting of civilians and the siege of the Gaza Strip,
which has gone on for nearly 12 years, have all become
part of the Palestinian people's daily routine for years.
Nevertheless, the Security Council unfortunately
remains incapable of compelling the occupying Power
to implement its resolutions, thus giving Israel a
green light to continue its practices and entrench its
occupation and thereby undermining any chance for
a genuine peace that would guarantee the Palestinian
people their legitimate rights, including their right to
independence, sovereignty and a dignified and free life,
the most basic of human rights.

Many decades have gone by since the Palestinian
question was put on the United Nations agenda. It is
constantly being discussed, and many resolutions have
been adopted about it. However, the question remains
unanswered, and no solutions have been found. The
resolutions have not been implemented because of the
obstinacy of Israel, the occupying State, and because of
its explicit and blatant refusal to implement resolutions
of international legitimacy and its deliberately mocking
disregard of those resolutions. The time has come to
make sure that the members of the Security Council
give this issue, like others, its fair share of attention,
as Israel continues its attacks and acts of aggression,
which could be considered the inevitable result of the
absence of any serious call from the Security Council
to Israel to end that continued aggression and to fulfil
its obligations as the occupying Power, in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

In conclusion, we want to emphasize the strategic
option, which is to arrive at a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by all
Arab States at the 2002 Beirut summit. This solution
would be based on Israel's withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian territories to the borders of4 June 1967, and
it includes dealing with all final status issues in a way
that can enable the Palestinian people to enjoy all of
their legitimate political rights, including the right to
self-determination and to establish an independent State
on their territory with East Jerusalem as its capital.

