The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab J amahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South
Africa, Sudan, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) and Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) took seats
at the Council table; Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr.
Cappagli (Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr.
Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. de Moura (Brazil),
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Valdes (Chile), Mr.
Stagno (Costa Rica), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Hidayat
(Indonesia), Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan),
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic), Mr. Diab
(Lebanon), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr.
Bhattarai (Nepal), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand),
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria), Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman), Mr.
Akram (Pakistan), Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr.
Staehelin (Switzerland), Mr. Kasemsarn
(Thailand), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia), Mr. Pamir
(Turkey), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine), Mr. Al-Shamsi
(United Arab Emirates), Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau
(Viet Nam) and Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
15 October 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which was issued as
document S/2002/ 1147, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations, to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on Wednesday, 16 October 2002, on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 14 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"In accordance with article 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
discussion of the agenda item under consideration
by the Council on Iraq, which will start on 16
October 2002."

This letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council (S/2002/ 1140).

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
also received a letter dated 15 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Group, I have the honour to request that
Ambassador Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, be allowed to
participate in the debate in the Security Council
on the item entitled 'The situation between Iraq
and Kuwait', in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council."

This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council (S/2002/1148). If I hear no objection,
I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Mokhtar Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamani to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting today in response to the request contained in a
letter dated 10 October 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations
(document S/2002/1132).

I welcome the presence in our midst of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette,
whom I invite to take the floor.


