Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to congratulate Australia on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month.
I thank it for its significant efforts, which have been
reflected in the holding of a large number of events.
I thank His Excellency Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his outstanding leadership of the Council's work, and
congratulate Argentina for its excellent presidency last
month. I wish also to commend Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al-Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. I commend also
Mr. Mladenov, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). I thank him for his briefing,
during which he underlined the efforts of his team to
achieve the goals of the Mission.

Iraq strongly condemns the recent attack against
a UNAMI convoy. Iraq is suffering from the greatest
terrorist threat in the world. Despite this, the Iraqi
Government and people were able to hold free elections
for the third time since the change. The peaceful transfer
of power while upholding constitutional standards has
consolidated the young democratic experience of my
country. We have created an inclusive, comprehensive
national unity Government that takes into account all
elements of Iraqi society, including all religions and
ethnicities.

The Government is working to include all parties
so as to build national unity. The Government is
addressing pending issues so as to implement the plan of
action to which it committed itself, to ensure a safe and
stable future guaranteeing equitable treatment for all
citizens under the law. Its priorities are combating the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and corruption,
and bolstering relations with its neighbours.

The new Government has taken a number of
decisions, in particular to stop targeting terrorists
in populated areas so as not to harm people or their
property. The Government is cooperating with the
international coalition forces. It is committed to
strengthening, arming and training the Iraqi military
and security forces, the Peshmerga and the various
Iraqi tribes.

The Government is cooperating with all political
blocs to adopt a budget so as to address the issue of
revenue-sharing and improve economic performance,
which was negatively impacted by the lack of a budget
for 2014 and the drop in oil prices. Among the fruits
of the Government's efforts so far we would note the
agreement reached between the oil ministry and the
government of the Kurdistan region, which will promote
the settlement of pending issues between Baghdad and
Erbil. When the international community realized the
threat posed by ISIS, it stepped up its efforts and began
cooperating to combat terrorism.

Today we must strengthen cooperation in particular
with the countries of the Arab region. We have clearly
voiced our wish to cooperate and to strengthen relations
with brotherly, friendly neighbouring countries.
Such relations must be based on mutual respect,
non-interference in internal affairs and respect for
common interests, which will serve the interests of our

people and prevent any exacerbation of the crisis in the
region.

Turning to cooperation, we must prioritize the
struggle against terrorism, which has harmed our
religion and our values, and targeted peace, security
and peaceful coexistence; and today threatens our
countries and our nations with the danger of partition
and collapse. ISIS is a terrorist entity that has taken
over major facilities in order to strengthen its activities,
which are fuelled by the theft of oil revenues; it is
therefore necessary to eliminate that organization and
prevent it from taking root.

In turn, the Iraqi armed forces and the Peshmerga,
in cooperation with popular forces and in coordination
with members of clans and tribes in the provinces of
Diyala, Salah al-Din, Anbar, Kirkuk, Mosul and Babil,
and with major international support, are confronting
terrorism in order to rid the country of it. A certain
number of territories and regions have been liberated,
such as the region of Beiji. We have lifted the blockade
of the Beiji refinery, the town of Amerli and the Mosul
dam so as to prevent the flooding of Iraqi cities along
the Tigris river. We have also opened the roadblocks
so as to overcome all threats to the capital and the holy
cities of Karbala and An-Najaf. Iraqi forces continue to
cooperate with international coalition forces to address
terrorism and to restore their control over the whole of
Iraqi territory.

In that regard, we stress the role of the religious
authorities who had the wisdom of supporting national
efforts to foster cooperation between the Iraqis in
combating the terrorist threat posed by ISIS. These
efforts have brought together all active forces in the
Republic, representing all sectors of society - Arabs,
Kurds, Shiites, Sunnis, Turkmen, Muslims, Christians
and Yazidis. We also wish to thank the international
coalition, under the command of the United States, and
all the States that have provided support, assistance
and technical expertise and responded to Iraq's call for
backing in its struggle against terrorism. They have
supported us militarily, sending experts and weapons,
and cooperated in the field of intelligence as a result
of the efforts made and positions taken at the meeting
in Jeddah, Cairo and Paris, and of the statements and
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, including
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). This support
has helped to lift the morale of the Iraqis in their
struggle against terrorism.

The negative repercussions on Iraq of the crisis
in the brotherly country of Syria has allowed ISIS and
other terror groups to expand their control to a number
ofregions in northern and western Iraq. Daesh and other
terrorist groups have not only undermined security and
the political process in Iraq, but they have also been
the cause of an unprecedented humanitarian disaster,
murders, forced displacement, looting, abductions,
rape, the targeting ofreligious minorities - all ofwhich
has displaced some 1.8 million Iraqi citizens. Those
atrocities are a flagrant violation of human rights and
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Meanwhile, the Iraqi Government and local
authorities, with the assistance of UNAMI and United
Nations agencies, are seeking to reduce the suffering
of thousands of displaced people until they can return
to their homes. Iraq is grateful for the humanitarian
assistance that has been given to the displaced. The
looming winter, with its biting cold, is a further threat
to refugees without a roof over their heads, and portends
a humanitarian catastrophe that has led the United
Nations to raise its alert readiness to level 3. The Iraqi
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
have assisted over 270,000 Syrian refugees, whom Iraq
has hosted since 2011.

Despite that heavy burden, the Iraqi Government
has continued to provide protection to the inhabitants
to Camp Hurriya in Baghdad. The Iraqi Government
continues to meet the humanitarian needs of the
inhabitants of the camp. We pay tribute to the efforts of
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and to the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General for the Relocation of Camp Hurriya Residents
Outside of Iraq, Ms. Jane Hall Lute, who is seeking the
transfer of the camp residents to other countries. We
thank the countries that have taken in some of those
people, in particular Albania, which recently agreed
to host 240 of them. We appeal to the international
community and the Iranian Government to take in their
own nationals so as to resolve this problem as soon as
possible.

Iraq's international policy is based on respect for
common interests, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, and respect for international law and
its own obligations. In that respect, the President of
the Republic has visited the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
while the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister
have visited Jordan, Iran, Turkey and Kuwait to bolster
cooperation, underscore the importance of the struggle
against terrorism, and strengthen economic relations.
To that end, we commend the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia's announcement that it will reopen its embassy
in Baghdad. That is a clear sign of improving relations
between the two countries, and of their cooperation in
the counter-terrorism struggle in the region.
Iraq is striving to further its relations with Kuwait.
We commend Kuwait for voicing its support for Iraq
at the Jeddah, Paris and New York conferences. Iraq
continues to do its utmost to find the remains of missing
Kuwaitis and the national Kuwaiti archives. We are
committed to achieving tangible results in those two
areas.

In conclusion, we thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliassson
for their recent visits to Baghdad, given the positive
impact of such visits, which highlight the ongoing
support of the United Nations for the Iraqi people.
We pay tribute to the efforts of UNAMI, which has
provided support and advice to the Iraqi Government.
We hail the courage of the UNAMI staff, who continue
to provide humanitarian assistance, notwithstanding
the current difficult conditions in my country. We also
wish to express our full gratitude to Mr. Mladenov and
his team for their commitment. We wish them every
success in their activities of support and assistance to
Iraq.

