The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to documents S/2006/516 and
S/2006/584, containing letters from the Secretary-
General dated 12 July and 26 July 2006, respectively.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council affirms its
commitment to the implementation of the peace
process and of the road map established by the
International Working Group (IWG). It welcomes
the initiatives of the Prime Minister, Mr. Charles
Konan Banny, and the ongoing dialogue among
President Laurent Gbagbo, the Prime Minister
and all other Ivorian parties.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Prime Minister. It welcomes his
determination to implement the decisions taken
by all Ivorian parties at the high-level meeting
held in Yamoussoukro on 5 July 2006. It strongly
2

encourages him to continue his efforts and
demands that all Ivorian parties cooperate with
him fully and in good faith.

"The Security Council welcomes the launch
of the mobile courts throughout Cote d'Ivoire and
the Prime Minister's announcement of the
completion of the pre-cantonment of the Defence
and Security Forces of Cote d'Ivoire and of the
Armed Forces of the Forces nouvelles. The
Security Council further welcomes the
establishment of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) Monitoring Group, the
measures taken to implement the quadripartite
control of pre-cantonment operations and the
beginning of operations to dismantle and disarm
the militias. It takes note of the signing of a
presidential decree allowing the Independent
Electoral Commission (IEC) to propose any
technical adjustments to the electoral code for the
transitional elections.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that the IEC's structures have not been deployed
throughout the country as well as the local offices
of the National Commission of Supervision of the
Identification. It urges the Ivorian parties to settle
these issues without delay.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the obstructions to the normal functioning of the
mobile courts which followed the calls for such
action made by political leaders, in particular the
Chairman of the FPI and the President of the
former National Assembly. It notes that the
procedures of the mobile courts were decided in
consultation with President Laurent Gbagbo, It
urges all parties to ensure that the mobile courts
function without further hindrance.

"The Security Council expresses its utmost
concern and condemns the acts of violence
committed by organized groups, in particular the
Young Patriots, which led to the deaths of
civilians, and further condemns the attack of
24 July against the High Representative for the
Elections, despite the presence of the Republican
Guard at the scene.

"The Security Council condemns also the
incidents of 15 July at the premises of the Radio
Television Ivoirienne (RTI). It calls on the
Ivorian authorities to strengthen security
06-45659
measures at RTI. It underlines the importance of
guaranteeing the independence and neutrality of
the media in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the implementation of measures against those
responsible as provided for in paragraphs 9 and
11 of resolution 1572 (2004) and underlines that
the reports of the events described above will be
examined by the Sanctions Committee
established by paragraph 14 of resolution 1572
(2004).

"The Security Council demands that the
Defence and Security Forces of Cote d'Ivoire,
including the Republican Guard, act within the
law of the land at all times to ensure full security
of the population, including foreigners, and
support the implementation of the road map led
by the Prime Minister. It reaffirms in this regard
paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 1633 (2005). It
recalls that the Defence and Security Forces and
the Forces nouvelles must ensure the security of
the mobile courts hearings in the areas under their
control.

"The Security Council demands also that all
Ivorian parties cooperate fully in the operations
of the Impartial Forces, in particular by
guaranteeing the safety, security and freedom of
movement of their personnel, as well as
associated personnel, throughout the territory of
Cote d'Ivoire, and affirms that any obstacle to
their freedom of movement or to the full
implementation of their mandates will not be
tolerated. It recalls paragraph 4 of resolution
1643 (2005) in this regard.
"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of the concomitant implementation of
the identification and DDR operations and of the
acceleration by all Ivorian parties of the
implementation of the road map in order to create
the conditions indispensable for the holding of
free, open, fair and transparent elections within
the agreed timetable.

"The Security Council therefore considers
that it is necessary to deploy throughout the
territory of Cote d'Ivoire as many mobile courts
as possible towards the objective of 150 mobile
courts called for in the Prime Minister's plan and
to complete the second phase of the DDR
programme, the cantonment of combatants,
before the next meeting of the IWG. It encourages
the Prime Minister to take all the necessary
actions to this end, with the agreement of all
Ivorian parties, as well as for the organization of
the elections. It calls on the IWG to monitor such
progress and to report to it on its assessment of
the progress made.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the IWG and endorses its ninth
communique, dated 20 July 2006. It reiterates its
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the High Representative
for the Elections."

This statement will be issued as document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.

