Mr. Satoh (Japan): The draft resolution before the
Security Council, which would establish a United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), is a
historic step towards the independence of East Timor. I
would like to congratulate the East Timorese people on the
progress they have thus far made in reaching their goal and
to assure them that the Government and the people of Japan
will extend their utmost support and cooperation to them as
they work towards final independence and nation-building.

I would also like to applaud all those concerned,
especially the Governments of Indonesia and of Portugal
and the Secretary-General, for their efforts to realize this
historic achievement. The decision of the Indonesian
Government to hold a popular consultation in East Timor
and the decision of the Indonesian People's Consultative
Assembly to declare void the 1978 decree that integrated
East Timor into Indonesia are particularly significant and
highly commendable. The successful completion of the
democratic presidential election in Indonesia is encouraging
in this context too: it is a testimony to the continued
progress of democratization in Indonesia and is in itself
reassuring for the future of East Timor, which needs to
develop friendly and cooperative relations with
neighbouring countries, Indonesia in particular.

With the adoption of this draft resolution, the
process of nation-building in East Timor will commence.
The process will include the filling of the vacuum in the
civil administration of East Timor as well as the longer-
term goal of capacity-building and development. The
process will by no means be easy. It is therefore
important for the outside world to provide as much
support and cooperation as possible to UNTAET and to
the people of East Timor and their future government.
Japan, for its part, is determined to do its best to help
them in their efforts at nation-building.

It is essential for the success of nation-building that
the people of East Timor overcome their present
differences and achieve national reconciliation so that
they can work together in unity. We also believe it vitally
important for the people and the future government of
East Timor to build friendly and cooperative relations
with their Asian and South Pacific neighbours. Such
efforts at reconciliation and cooperation, both among the
people of East Timor and in their relations with the
outside world, are, I am sure, what the leaders and the
people of East Timor already intend to do. What the
outside world must do is to encourage such efforts on the
part of the East Timorese and respond to their efforts
positively and productively.
UNTAET is going to face a daunting task, and it is
the responsibility of the entire membership of the United
Nations to make UNTAET succeed. First, we have to
make UN TAET succeed in establishing law and order in
East Timor. The elimination of concerns about people's
safety is a precondition for nation-building. In this
context, we commend the multinational Force for its thus
far successful efforts to restore and maintain peace in the
territory, and we pay tribute to those countries that are
contributing troops to the Force.

Japan has pledged a contribution of around $100
million to the trust fund requested in the draft resolution,
with a view to facilitating the participation of Asian and
other developing countries in the force. As we all know,
it is important for the force to have a truly multinational
character, particularly with the participation of Asian
countries, in order to ensure its smooth operation, and we
strongly hope that the multinational character of the force
will be maintained with the eventual transfer of
responsibilities from the multinational Force to the
international force of UNTAET.

Needless to say, it is the responsibility of the
Indonesian Government to stop any sabotage activities

 

launched from its territory. And, given that the anti-
independence militias' activities have yet to cease in East
Timor, stronger efforts by the Indonesian Government to
prevent any interference with East Timor are required.

Secondly, we must make UNTAET succeed in
improving humanitarian conditions in East Timor. Equally
important is ensuring the early return of displaced Timorese
who wish to return to East Timor. This task requires the
efforts not only of UNTAET but also of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and other humanitarian agencies as well as of non-
governmental organizations. The role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in coordinating
activities of various agencies is therefore particularly
important in this field. Here again, the cooperation of the
Indonesian Government is indispensable for the
improvement of the humanitarian conditions of displaced
East Timorese in West Timor and for their early return to
East Timor.

Japan, for its part, will consider additional
humanitarian assistance in response to the anticipated
appeal by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on top of the financial support of $2 million it
provided to UNHCR and to the World Food Programme in
the initial stage of their engagement.
Thirdly, we have to make UNTAET succeed in
creating a civil administration for East Timor and in
building the new nation's capacity for economic and social
development. It is also important that this be done with the
involvement and participation of the East Timorese people.

The responsibility of UNTAET is particularly great,
not only because it will have to start from scratch but also
because its will require comprehensive and long-term
planning. Cooperation from the international community
and from the relevant international financial institutions is
critically important in this context.

Japan's commitment to help UNTAET and the future
East Timorese government in their efforts at nation-building
has already been stated by then Foreign Minister Masahiko
Koumura in his statement in the General Assembly on 21
September, and I would like to reaffirm it here today.

Japan looks forward to the day when we will welcome
an independent East Timor as a new member of the Asia-
Pacific community and as a fellow Member of the United
Nations. It is also our sincere hope that the independence
of East Timor will become a success story of United
Nations engagement. With this in mind, we will do our
best to support UNTAET and the people of East Timor.

