Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like others, we wish to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for today's enlightening and detailed briefing.
We welcome this discussion and we thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Africa.

Humanitarian crises in Africa, as elsewhere, are
multifaceted. They are often the result of different but
mutually reinforcing factors, such as conflicts, natural
disasters, pandemics, poverty and bad governance.
Like many processes that lead to death and destruction
on a large scale, humanitarian disasters often
undermine States as the basic unit of the international
system and have a wide range of regional
repercussions.

Until recently, conflict and, usually, civil strife
were the most important factors causing humanitarian
disasters in Africa. Fortunately, however, remarkable
progress has been made in this domain in the past
decade. Conflicts have ended in Angola, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Burundi, to name a few. In addition, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, after decades of
war the country is now in a transitional phase and is
rigorously preparing for national elections, while in
Sudan the 20-year civil war ended this year with the
signing of the comprehensive peace agreement.

Nevertheless, our efforts are not as successful as
we would have liked them to be, and there are still a
number of ongoing conflicts that have created
protracted humanitarian crises.

The situation in Darfur continues to be a source
of great concern and presents additional challenges on
the humanitarian level. According to the Secretary-
General's November report on Darfur, 3.4 million
people are affected by the crisis, while the number of
internally displaced persons is 1.75 million. In this
respect, we welcome the recent launching of the 2006
work plan for Sudan, which has called for $1.7 billion
in resources to face the enormous humanitarian
recovery challenges in the country.

In northern Uganda, the horrific war waged for
the last 18 years by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
has targeted civilians, especially children. During the
course of the conflict, over 25,000 children have been
abducted, while 1.7 million people have been
displaced.

The examples of both Sudan and northern
Uganda highlight the regional implications of conflicts
and the humanitarian spillover that they often create.
For example, since the conflict in Darfur began in early
2003, more than 200,000 Sudanese have fled over the
border to Chad, while the LRA has been operating in
three countries - Uganda, Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These examples underscore the
need for regional cooperation in order to target
humanitarian crises and address the root causes of the
conflicts. They also demonstrate that individual States
cannot be indifferent to the problems facing their
neighbours. Regional partners have come to understand
the importance of regional and transborder
cooperation, as the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region clearly demonstrates. The growing
importance of the regional dimension of humanitarian
crises has also affected the Security Council in its
conduct of work. The promotion of inter-mission
cooperation is a clear example.

According to many Africa analysts, crises of
governance, often coupled with natural disasters or
pandemics, are the main root of humanitarian disasters
on the continent. Counterproductive economic policies
and a lack of political will to address the problems
created by these policies are common phenomena.

Zimbabwe, for example, is facing a critical
economic situation involving food shortages and a
ballooning budget deficit, together with inflation,
unemployment and the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Approximately 20 per cent of the population is infected
with AIDS, while there are 1.5 million AIDS orphans.
It is obvious that Zimbabwe is in urgent need of
international humanitarian assistance in order to face a
real emergency affecting a large section of the
population.

We welcome the fact that the United Nations is
making significant efforts to address the situation. We
welcome Mr. Egeland's recent visit to Zimbabwe, as
well as the agreement signed by United Nations
agencies and the Government of Zimbabwe for food
assistance and HIV/AIDS programmes. We also note
the exchange between the Government of Zimbabwe
and the United Nations over the need for assistance
with shelter.

Today's discussion once again demonstrates the
need for the United Nations to have a comprehensive
approach towards resolving humanitarian crises.
Greece will contribute its share, commensurate with its
possibilities, and we will consider positively the steps
proposed by Mr. Egeland. The three pillars of
development, security and human rights are especially
relevant in addressing humanitarian problems. In this
approach, the role of the Security Council as guarantor
of international peace and security is of vital
importance.

