Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): There
is no doubt that the crisis in Syria is one of the most
serious topics under consideration by the Security
Council. That is why my delegation, which represents
an elected member of the Security Council, understands
that it has a duty to share its opinion on such a grave
international issue with the Council's electorate - its
members.

Once again, we thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
and his entire team for their tireless efforts in the
quest for a political solution in Syria, and we reiterate
Uruguay's full confidence in their efforts.

We acknowledge the announcement of the
resumption of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, which
will begin on 10 July, as well as the intention to
convene successive meetings in the coming months.
We commend Mr. De Mistura on the fact that
representatives of civil society organizations, in
particular women's organizations, will take part in all
meetings to be held in Geneva. The role played by civil
society organizations and by women's organizations in
particular is extremely important and could contribute
immensely to the discussions.

Following the conclusion of the sixth round of talks
and ongoing contact and discussions with the parties
since then, maintaining the momentum of the meetings
in Geneva was required in order to work on implementing
agreements made and to allow for tangible progress to
be made on the four baskets of topics highlighted in
the road map provided by resolution 2254 (2015). At
the same time, the meeting that will be held next week
in Astana will provide an opportunity to reinforce
the cessation of hostilities agreement and to draft the
details for the implementation of the safe zones that
were established at the beginning at the beginning of
May by the three guarantor countries.

Almost two months after the signing of the
memorandum establishing the safe zones, which
Uruguay believes was a major step forward in
strengthening the cessation of hostilities agreement
and in reducing extreme violence in the majority of the
country, we still do not have official information on the
implementation of the agreement and we are concerned
about the fact that unhindered access to those areas has
not been granted to the United Nations. We reiterate
that it is crucial for the guarantor countries to ensure
humanitarian access and the free movement of people
wishing to enter and leave those areas at will.

The Geneva and Astana processes are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing. It is for that reason that
tangible results must be achieved in Astana in order
to reduce violence and guarantee the cessation of
hostilities in the four safe zones. In that way, the next
round of Geneva talks will take place in a positive
environment in which further progress can be made.

On previous occasions, we have mentioned that
the United Nations and the Special Envoy are not the
protagonists in the tragedy that has been taking place
in Syria since 2011; they merely mediate between the
parties. The primary responsibility for ending the
conflict lies directly with the Syrians themselves - on
the one hand, the Government and, on the other, all
individuals and entities that make up the opposition,
including the almost 100 armed groups that operate in
Syria, many of them with fighters, funding and foreign
military support. The absurd fragmentation of the
Syrian opposition, along with the foreign presence and
military support, exacerbate an already major problem.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy to guarantee
the inclusiveness of the process of political transition in
Syria and we are pleased to be able to acknowledge the
fact that civil society, including religious leaders and
women's groups, is taking part.

Another kind of responsibility lies with third
States, in the region and outside of it, that directly or
indirectly take part in the situation in Syria, working
towards objectives that are almost always far removed
from the real goals and aspirations of the Syrian people.
In that regard, Uruguay understands that the Security
Council's responsibility in this issue is to continue
applying pressure and persuasion to ensure that the
parties to the conflict remain at the negotiating table
in order to make gradual progress on the road map
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).

It is more important now than ever to strengthen
political will in the three multilateral forums in which the
crisis in Syria is being discussed: the Security Council,
negotiations in Geneva, and the Astana process. A few
days ago marked a year and a half since the adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015). At the time, all of us present
knew that we had a historic opportunity to end the
crisis. Regrettably, despite the good intentions of the
Special Envoy and successive efforts to implement the
resolution's provisions, little progress has been made
on the road map since then.

In addition to the enormous humanitarian costs of
the crisis in Syria, the conflict has also been a driver
of violent extremism and fundamentalist terrorism and,
consequently, is a key factor in instability in the Middle
East and in the rest of the world.

In conclusion, we reiterate our belief that there is
no place for a military solution to the conflict. Only
through a political transition process, implemented
by the Syrians and mediated by the United Nations,
will we be able to emerge from this web and stop the
humanitarian tragedy.
