The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Cuba, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Qatar and the Syrian Arab Republic, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other a orementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 18 July 2008
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2008/473
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Tuesday, 22 July 2008, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to participate
in the meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Abdelhady-
Nasser (Palestine) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 July 2008 from
His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, representative of
Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. IfI hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Paul
Badji.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Badji
(Senegal) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs. I now give him the floor.


