Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is a special day for remembering. I would first of all
like to convey my profound condolences for the victims
of the 9/11 incident, and to the families our sympathy.
The international community stands firmly together in
our battle against terrorism.

I thank you, Madam, President for convening this
meeting. I also wish to thank Ambassador Nebenzia for
his briefing.

China welcomes the summit of the leaders of
Russia, Turkey and Iran that took place on 7 September
and culminated in a joint statement. China commends
the tireless efforts of the three countries to push for a
diplomatic solution to the Syrian issue. The Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Syra, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, is currently stepping up his engagement with
the parties concerned with regard to the establishment
of a Syrian constitutional committee. We believe
that those developments will play and important and
positive role in improving the situation in the Syrian
town of Idlib and in advancing a political settlement of
the Syrian question.

There is no alternative to a political settlement for
Syria to achieve peace and stability. All parties should
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and other universally recognized,
basic norms of international relations; fully respect
Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity; and avoid the use or threat of use of force as
a reflex.

The international community should join forces
to continue its fight against terrorism and consolidate
the counter-terrorism achievements made thus far. All
parties should take measures to spare innocent civilians
any harm. We call on the international community
to increase humanitarian assistance to Syria. The
international community should continue to leverage
the role of the United Nations as the primary mediator,
support the Geneva talks and the Astana process in
playing their due roles, and encourage the Syrian
parties to find a progressive solution that is in line with
reality and addresses the concerns of the parties by
adhering to the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process
and implementing Council resolution 2254 (2015).
We hope the discussions on the creation of a Syrian
constitutional committee, facilitated by Special Envoy
De Mistura, will serve as a new starting point for
launching the political process. That places a burden on
all parties concerned to meet one another halfway and
contribute together to that end.

