Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of January. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Kafando of Burkina Faso for the
loyalty and effectiveness with which he guided the
Council's work during the month of December 2009.

We appreciate the importance of the task
entrusted to Gabon and would like to assure all
members of the Security Council of our full readiness
to cooperate effectively in the Council's work. Indeed,
it is a tremendous privilege for us to take part in the
work of the Security Council as one of the
non-permanent African members. I therefore take this
opportunity to thank all Council members for the very
warm welcome extended to our delegation. Our thanks
also go to thank the Secretary-General and to the
Secretariat team for their availability.

Before turning to the fundamental issues
addressed in the report (S/2009/674), I would like to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, for
the very comprehensive presentation of that report.
The situation in Afghanistan is of the greatest
concern to my country because of solidarity with the
Afghan people, but also owing to its implications for
and its impact on international peace and security. We
fully support the efforts made by the Afghan
Government, with the support of the international
community, in the areas of security, particularly the
fight against terrorism, and the strengthening of

democracy and development in Afghanistan. That
active cooperation enabled the Afghan Government to
hold presidential elections on 20 August 2009 in a
particularly difficult political and security
environment.

While it must be recognized that despite all those
efforts, the situation on the ground remains of concern,
nonetheless the current initiatives for peace and
development in Afghanistan bear out our vision of a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. The new strategy
seeking to reconcile military intervention and
development assistance in the country is, in our view, a
decisive factor in the stabilization process in
Afghanistan.

In fact, the military approach alone is not
sufficient. It is essential that it be accompanied by
development activities, such as building schools and
clinics, agricultural development and the ongoing
emancipation of Afghan women. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the decision of the Afghan
parliament to endorse the law on the elimination of
violence by criminalizing sexual violence. That
significant advance deserves the Council's
encouragement and the support of the United Nations
system, not only to facilitate the adoption of that draft
law but also to assure its full implementation.

We welcome the activities of the international
community to that end, and in particular the
commitment of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan to the country's reconstruction process,
despite ongoing threats to the security of its personnel
on the ground. We pay tribute here to United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers for their heroic
service, sometimes at the risk of their lives.

We urge the international community to continue
to support the Afghan Government in its efforts to
promote the country's political, economic and
sustainable development, with the ultimate goal of
allowing Afghan men and women to assume ownership
of their destiny and to write with their own hands the
pages of Afghanistan's story as a stable and prosperous
country.

The International Conference on Afghanistan, to
be held at the end of the month in London upon the
initiative of France, Germany the United Kingdom,
will offer the international community a new
opportunity to make a comprehensive assessment of
the political, economic, social and humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. The situation in Afghanistan
remains grave and of concern. It goes without saying
that greater solidarity in the renewed efforts of the
international community will be key to fully restoring
stability and security in that country.

