Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Ambassador Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and for his commitment to
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We also thank
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, to whose statement we listened
attentively.

The deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan, as described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/463), which reflects a
69 per cent increase in security incidents compared to
last year, saps the confidence of the civilian population
in their institutions and undermines the efforts of the
international community and the United Nations on the
ground. The high human, material and political costs
borne by Afghanistan and the international presence on
a daily basis indicate the imperative need to
complement military action with genuine, inclusive,
regionally-centred dialogue to counteract the current
cycle of violence.

The political process, supported by military
efforts, should always be moving in the same direction
under Afghan leadership and with the necessary
international support. Here, we welcome President
Karzai's announcement on the establishment of a peace
commission for dialogue with the Taliban.

In the light of the upcoming reduction in United
States forces in the country, the joint transition plan of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
the Afghan Government is of fundamental importance.
UNAMA monitoring of that plan with a view to
bolstering Government leadership and national
ownership throughout the country should faithfully
indicate whether the Government has the human,
political and financial resources necessary to fully
resume its security responsibilities. The international
community should bear in mind that, although security
and stability are Afghanistan's most urgent need, a halt
to or reduction in military activity will not in itself
guarantee security.

In the light of the need to strengthen political
dialogue and overall planning in Afghanistan, we hail
the holding of the Kabul Conference on 20 July. It
lends momentum to a process whereby Afghans will
gradually be able to resume responsibility for their own
security, governance and economic and social
development. We welcome the Government's actions to
advance in this process; it has begun to provide details
on the 23 national priority programmes introduced at
the Kabul Conference with the aim of identifying
beneficiaries for the short and medium term. We
consider that the chances of success for this process
will be enhanced by carrying it out in line with an
inclusive vision encompassing women and members of
ethnic and religious minorities.

We view as positive the visit to Afghanistan by
the Monitoring Team operating under the direction of
the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999), which is tasked with
reviewing the consolidated list, which includes
individuals subject to sanctions, bearing in mind that
the ongoing de-listing process is in accordance with the
Afghan Government's peace and reintegration
programme, which has the support of the Council.

The work of Ambassador De Mistura, in his
capacity as Co-Chair of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, continues to be of particularly great
value in ensuring that commitments undertaken at the
London and Kabul Conferences are met and facilitating
the implementation of Afghan reconciliation
programmes.

With respect to the rule of law, we reaffirm that
the sine qua non for building sustainable peace in
Afghanistan is the implementation of justice and
accountability processes. This includes the fight
against corruption and organized crime, especially
illegal drug trafficking.

My delegation reiterates its profound concern
over the number of children who have been killed or
injured in acts of violence related to the conflict, which
has increased by 55 per cent since 2009. This, added to
the sexual violence perpetrated against children in the
country, remains a generalized phenomenon. We call
on all parties to meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law, in particular resolution
1882 (2009).

With regard to the parliamentary elections held
on 18 September, we commend all the efforts of the
Government and the support of UNAMA and the
international community in convening them. We
strongly condemn the terrorist activities and violence
perpetrated by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
anti-Government elements, which sought to destabilize
the process and limited citizens' ability to vote in some
parts of the country. We are likewise concerned by
reports of irregularities during the elections. We
believe it critical for the Electoral Complaints
Commission to look carefully at the complaints
received, so that the final results to be issued by the
Independent Electoral Commission in late October
enhance the credibility and legitimacy of the elections.
This commendable effort should undoubtedly work to
the benefit of Afghan democracy and stability in the
country and the region.

