We thank Mark Lowcock for the briefing. We also listened carefully to the philippic of Ms. Sirkin. Once again, we are discussing the humanitarian situation in Syria. Once again, we hear from some members of the Council that the cross-border mechanism is the magic solution to the humanitarian problems in Syria - the mechanism that in fact has become a political tool for drawing lines of division inside Syria. Yet they forget to mention not only that it is incompatible with international law and humanitarian principles, but also that it has never functioned in line with resolution 2165 (2014). We have repeatedly pointed that out but it has simply been ignored. What is even more disturbing is that the cross-border mechanism is used as leverage against cross-line deliveries and as a pretext and an excuse not to engage seriously in humanitarian supplies from within Syria. In our view, that borders on sabotage, and this is not just a slogan. We have concrete facts that we can present. We welcome the United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent joint assessment mission to western Aleppo. We would like to hear more about the situation on the ground and what is left after the terrorists were pushed back from there. What are the plans of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on how to assist the development of that area? We would also like to hear about the cross-line delivery to Darat Izzah and Al-Atarib in north-western Syria, which was approved by Damascus but was not carried out by the United Nations under the pretext of spreading the coronavirus from Government-controlled areas to Idlib. There are only 255 reported cases in Syria. According to that logic, we should perhaps have stopped humanitarian deliveries to Idlib from the coronavirus-affected territories from where they come? We heard Mr. Lowcock's assessment of the overall situation in north-eastern Syria, including in the Al-Hol camp. We would also be interested to hear about the situation in the Rukban camp and to learn more about the five commercial trucks that delivered goods to the Rukban local market. We hoped to hear from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock an assessment of the impact of the United States Administration Caesar Act on the humanitarian situation in Syria and on the lives of ordinary Syrians. It is hard to understand how these measures correlate with the proclaimed aim to ensure the best options for humanitarian assistance. Do not try to convince us that unilateral sanctions and coercive measures enforced by Western countries against Syria do not affect humanitarian efforts. These reassurances are hypocritical. Their waivers and exemptions do not work. On the one hand, they advocate humanitarian assistance, first and foremost through the cross-border mechanism, and, on the other hand, they suffocate ordinary Syrians. I cannot but regret that the report of the Secretary-General on humanitarian issues (S/2020/401) contains the call to cooperate with the so-called International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 - an unlawful structure that was established to implicate Syria. Mark Lowcock mentioned that he welcomed the movement of Syrian students in the country to obtain their diplomas. However, he failed to mention that 2,000 of them could not leave Idlib, since terrorists prevented them from doing so. Turning to the Brussels donor conference, we saw the financial report of the European Commission. The figures look impressive, but they are not very transparent when it comes to the recipients of this assistance. Who exactly are these recipients in Syria? Which Syrians received this assistance? We stress again that holding Brussels conferences on Syria without Syria looks, at best, questionable. Many Council members spoke about the deconfliction mechanism in Syria. In that regard, we would like to underscore that this mechanism was a voluntary arrangement. It has neither the mandate of the Security Council nor any other legal basis. We have repeatedly pointed out the drawbacks of the mechanism. This has also consistently been ignored. One of its main shortcomings is that the information provided by OCHA comes from unknown and unidentified sources. They cannot be verified. At the same time, our own inquiries have repeatedly proved that some of the deconflicted sites were in fact used as terrorists' headquarters or hide-outs and therefore could not be granted a humanitarian status. Last September we organized a special media event at United Nations Headquarters, where we clearly demonstrated the shortcomings of this mechanism. The information provided was used by terrorists and their supporters to deliberately mislead the United Nations and the international community. It has repeatedly triggered false accusations that civilian sites were bombed by Syria or Russia. The functioning of the deconfliction mechanism was one of the pretexts for establishing the Board of Inquiry. The conclusions of the Board itself proved the shortcomings of the mechanism. The Russian Ministry of Defence was compelled to use its resources to investigate the findings of the Board of Inquiry and provide its own conclusions. We will be sharing those with the Council. It is also difficult to understand why the Government of Syria was not a direct party to the mechanism. Russian representatives in Damascus, Geneva and New York will no longer accept any lists of objects for deconfliction. We suggest that from now on OCHA settles the issue of deconflicted sites with the Syrian Government. This would be the right way to proceed. Russia respects and will continue to respect its obligations under international humanitarian law. We stressed many times that the Russian Air Force uses an efficient system of target verification that excludes the possibility of civilian sites being targeted. I say this to reassure those who fear that humanitarian deliveries in Syria will now become targets. That is not true. Russia never strikes civilian convoys. Our close coordination with the Syrian Government, which in fact approves all aid deliveries, provides additional guarantees. I have a rhetorical question. I do not remember any complaints from United Nations agencies about shortcomings of the deconfliction mechanism in Raqqa, Al-Baghuz or Hajin. However, today we hear about the terrible situation in the health-care system in north-eastern Syria. Do we know why? Because Raqqa, for example, was razed to the ground with all its hospitals. How many boards of inquiry were set up then by the United Nations? We would also like to hear an update from OCHA on the implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on Compliance with International Humanitarian Law and the Facilitation of Humanitarian Assistance, signed by some armed opposition groups under OCHA's auspices. How are these armed groups respecting it and what are these groups? And how does the United Nations monitor the implementation of their commitments? In conclusion, let me reiterate that we should depoliticize the Syrian humanitarian file, as well as the overall Syrian dossier, and ensure that humanitarian aid is delivered in Syria in accordance with humanitarian principles.
