Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, as others have done before me,
I would like to convey our deepest condolences to
the Afghan people and their Government for the
terrible attacks against Afghan civilians and security
personnel. Belgium strongly supports the efforts of the
international community to ensure security, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan. Belgium has made
regular and significant contributions to the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund and will continue to invest
in the security of the Afghan people, in particular
by increasing its presence in Afghanistan from 50 to
nearly 100 soldiers next month.

Belgium would like to associate itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union,
in particular by highlighting the indispensable role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and other United Nations agencies in
supporting the Afghan people, promoting peace and
reconciliation, monitoring and promoting human rights,
and coordinating the assistance of the international
community. We also commend the Government
of Afghanistan for acceding to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects and its five Protocols on 9 August 2017, thereby
demonstrating its commitment to addressing the issues
covered by the Convention and its Protocols.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto, Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi for their briefings
and for their tireless efforts towards lasting peace in
Afghanistan. Allow me to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this quarterly debate on Afghanistan on
such an auspicious day, International Women's Day, and
only a week after the very successful second conference
of the Kabul Process. Now is the best time to discuss
women and peace and security in Afghanistan.

Unfortunately, women continue to suffer the
consequences of the conflict. Last year, the number
of female deaths increased by 5 per cent as compared
to the previous year. That is particularly tragic, since
women also hold the key to more peace and security.
Studies show that a greater participation of women
leads to more effective humanitarian assistance, more
lasting peace agreements and post-conflict recovery.
There is a direct correlation between women's level of
education and sustainable development. Encouraging
women's rights and inclusion is not a matter of political
correctness or moral debate but a proven recipe
for success. That is why the women and peace and
security agenda deserves all the support that we can
collectively provide.

We take this opportunity to commend the progress
made by the Government of Afghanistan. The
aforementioned increase in the number of female deaths
is primarily attributable to terrorist suicide bombings.
The casualties attributable to the Government forces
decreased by 19 per cent. Afghanistan has made clear
commitments and has developed an action plan on
women and peace and security. More and more women
hold important Government positions. We also welcome
the recent decree endorsing the Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women, and we look forward to
its implementation.

No one denies the significant challenges and the
long way to go. A sustained effort will be needed
to increase the essential participation of women in
education, work and decision-making. The upcoming
elections will be an important opportunity to increase
women's participation in public life. Women have a role
to play as voters, activists and political candidates. We
hope that a concerted effort by the Government, the
Independent Election Commission and civil society,
with the support of UNAMA, will make real progress
in that area possible.

Women also played a role in the recent success of
the second meeting of the Kabul Process as members
of the High Peace Council or through the support of
women's organizations for the peace offer put on
the table. Belgium fully supports the declaration of the
Kabul peace process and congratulates the Government
of Afghanistan on having obtained broad national and
international support for a generous and concrete peace
offer. It is now up to the Taliban to answer. We also
commend the Government of Uzbekistan for organizing
an international conference on peace and development
in Afghanistan in Tashkent at the end of this month.
International and especially regional support for
Afghanistan's peace process and development is
essential for achieving sustainable progress.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.
