At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the successful German presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish you all the best. We share the international community's concern that issues related to the Middle East are of the utmost importance to the Council, and we recognize that the situation in the region is serious and that effective and decisive measures are needed. Existing crises worsen and new ones emerge, generating tensions that endanger peace and security. This requires action on the part of the international community to calm tensions, maintain security and stability and find prompt political solutions to and address the causes of long-standing crises in the region. In that connection, we wish to underscore the principles of conflict resolution adopted by my country in its foreign policy. Chief among those principles are a constant focus on the peaceful settlement of conflicts, preventing escalation and resorting to mediation with high-minded ambition and integrity of purpose. We support the Organization's important role in promoting mediation and preventive diplomacy for the peaceful settlement of regional disputes. The Security Council has a historic and legal responsibility to implement its resolutions related to the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. At the heart of those resolutions is the establishment of a Palestinian State, in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and internationally recognized resolutions. We urge the international community to stand firm against the Israeli occupation authorities' provocative policies in the occupied Palestinian territory and their disregard for Security Council resolutions. Any settlement of the conflict must be based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the international terms of reference and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which provides for the establishment of the Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, the return of refugees and an end to the Israeli occupation of all Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and the Lebanese territories. My country welcomes the Security Council's condemnation of the heinous terrorist attacks recently perpetrated by Houthi coup militias against civilians and civilian sites in Saudi Arabia. It opposes the continued threat posed by Houthi militias to civilian lives. We welcome the convening of a special Security Council meeting on the FSO SAFER tanker crisis (see S/2020/721), and we call on the Council to monitor the arrival of United Nations experts at the tanker and to find a lasting solution to the crisis, which the Houthi militias have exploited to achieve political aims, indifferent to the environmental and humanitarian disasters that will befall the southern Red Sea region and my country if no lasting solution is found. We support United Nations efforts to reach a political solution to the Yemeni crisis in accordance with the three terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015). My country supports United Nations efforts to find a political solution to the conflict in Libya, focusing on security, territorial integrity and an end to foreign interference in Libyan internal affairs. We welcome the Egyptian initiative aimed at finding a political solution, establishing a ceasefire and ending the bloodshed. We call on all Libyan parties to cooperate to find an acceptable solution and a political settlement that restores security and stability in Libya. My country believes that, in order to achieve peace and stability in the region, Iran must be deterred from its expansionist and subversive policies, which violate and defy international instruments and Security Council resolutions. Examples of those policies, from Syria, Iraq and Lebanon to Yemen, are too numerous to recount in this statement. Most recently, the evidence set out in the ninth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531) has left the international community in no doubt as to the hostile intentions of Iran in the region. The Security Council and the international community must take the necessary measures to stop the crimes and hostility of the Iranian regime, for which there is solid evidence.
