Mr. Prosor (Israel): Winston Churchill, one of the
architects of the Organization, is remembered for his
speeches that rallied a nation in the dark hours of the
Second World War. His words inspired a generation
when he told the British people, "Let us therefore brace
ourselves to our duty [so] men will still say "This was
their finest hour'". And indeed it was their finest hour.
They stood tall knowing that if they did not stand up
for human life and human dignity, their very survival
would be at stake. It was a lesson for the ages, and today
they are remembered as a beacon of light during some
of the darkest days that the world has ever known. With
much of the Middle East in turmoil, the world is once
again being called upon to defend liberty, democracy
and human rights. History will look back and judge
which nations stepped forward with conviction,
conscience and courage.

This morning, I would like to speak about those
three qualities, beginning with conviction. As the
political landscape of the Middle East evolves, the
international community must demonstrate resolve.
Last month, Iran's new President, Mr. Hassan Rouhani,
took centre stage at the General Assembly. He arrived
in New York on a charm offensive, waving to excited
fans with one hand while waving off sceptics with the
other. Since his election, Rouhani has tried to reinforce
the image that he is a moderate. He was published in an
American newspaper, appeared on network television
and even started using social media.

I have news for President Rouhani - embracing
Twitter does not make him a reformer, but embracing
human rights certainly would. The Iranian regime
is notorious for violating women's rights, targeting
religious and ethnic minorities, and denying
fundamental freedoms to its citizens. Rouhani is like
the Emperor with new clothes, cloaking himself as a
moderate when Iranian radicalism remains clear to the
naked eye.

Unlike his predecessor, whose hateful rhetoric
about wiping Israel off the map made him easy to
dismiss, the new Iranian President has a strategy
code-named "SLY" - S-L-Y - Smile, Lie and Yield
minor concessions. Rouhani has perfected the art of
saying one thing and doing another. But you do not
have to believe me, Mr. President; you can read about it
in his 2011 memoir describing his time as Iran's chief
negotiator. Here in his own words is what he said:

"While we were talking to the Europeans in
Tehran, we were installing equipment in Isfahan
By creating a calm environment, we were able to
complete the work in Isfahan."

While Rouhani provides diplomatic cover, Iran
is marching towards a bomb. Since the June election,
Iran has installed thousands of new centrifuges, and
just last month, the new president declared that Iran
will not give up one iota of its nuclear rights. Make no
mistake - the Iranian programme is not for peaceful
purposes. Seventeen different countries peacefully
produce nuclear energy without uranium enrichment
or plutonium production, and yet Iran insists that its
enrichment infrastructure and technology are its right.
It is not Iran's right; in fact, it is wrong.

When negotiating with Iran, the international
community must, as Prime Minister Netanyahu said,
distrust, dismantle and verify. Everyone, including
Israel, wants to find a diplomatic solution. But one has
to wonder why Israel and a minority of other countries
are the only ones standing on the front line warning
the world that an Iran with nuclear weapons does not
threaten Israel alone. It threatens the entire region, from
Saudi Arabia through the Gulf States to Morocco. Their
voices are harder to hear, but if one tunes into the right
frequency, one discovers that they are frightened. They
know that if Iran gets nuclear weapons, it will threaten
their lives and lives throughout the region. It will not
just alter the balance of power in the Middle East. The
repercussions will be felt in Europe, the United States
and across the globe.
The world has stood at this crossroads before. On
the eve of the Second World War, Churchill warned of
the impending danger when he said,

"They should know that we have passed an
awful milestone in our history, when the whole
equilibrium of Europe has been deranged... This is
only the beginning of the reckoning [unless] we
arise again and take our stand for freedom as in
olden time."

Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past and leave a
minority to stand alone against a common enemy. The
danger is real, but this is not the first time that Israel's
warnings have been brushed aside.

When we warned the world about Al-Assad's
chemical arsenal, we were told, "Do not worry, he will
not use chemical weapons because that would not be
rational". Today the entire world knows that the dictator
in Damascus used chemical weapons against his own
citizens. And the only reason that Al-Assad has agreed
to give up those weapons is the very real threat of an
American military strike. One does not need a PhD in
physics to know that pressure works.

The Iranian economy is crumbling under the
weight of crippling sanctions, and that pressure is
getting results. Yet some States have suggested easing
the sanctions. That suggestion reminds me of a boxer
who is clinging to the ropes in the final round. Give
him a moment to rest and he will turn around and attack
with more vigour. We must keep up the pressure until
Iran agrees to play by the rules. Let me be clear - any
sort of partial deal will be completely ineffective in
containing the Iranian threat. Any diplomatic resolution
must ensure that Iran has no centrifuges, no enriched
uranium and no plutonium track. If Iran does not agree,
then the sanctions must not be eased; they should be
increased.

Now is the time to demonstrate conviction. We
cannot allow the world's most dangerous weapons to
reach the hands of the most dangerous actors. The
Security Council showed its resolve when it adopted a
series of resolutions against Iran. Having come so far
and worked so hard, now is not the time to give in. Iran
cannot be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons.

The second quality I want to speak about is
conscience. We have all seen the horrific images that
have emerged from Syria: men and women sprawled
on the floor convulsing, young children foaming at the
nose and mouth and then lying motionless. No one with
a conscience can stand by as the people of Syria continue
to be massacred, whether by chemical weapons or the
routine brutality of the Al-Assad regime.

The cynics in this Chamber will accuse Israel of
shedding crocodile tears. The Jewish people and the
State of Israel know all too well how evil can prevail
when people shut their eyes and turn their backs. To the
Syrian people I want to say, here and now - "I know
that our two nations have a long history of conflict
and that we are separated by politics and religion. But
we are eternally linked by our common humanity. We
are horrified by the pain and suffering that you have
endured. As we speak, our hand is extended to your
people. And we will continue to offer humanitarian
assistance to all those who need it regardless of race,
religion or gender."

It is hard for most of us to conceive that anyone,
much less a Government, would use chemical weapons
against its own innocent civilians. Is it logical? Is it
rational? Not at all. Many in this Chamber said that
countries would never use weapons ofmass destruction.
Surprise, surprise - it turns out one cannot apply
rational thinking to irrational players.

How many in this Chamber believed that when
Bashar Al-Assad became President, he would be the
new hope for Western-Arab relations? After all, here
was a young London-trained ophthalmologist, with a
beautiful wife, who drank high tea and ate scones at
the Ritz. It turns out the eye doctor is just another spin
doctor and his murderous rampage has Syria spinning
out of control.

We applaud the steps that have been taken by the
international community so far, but the removal and
destruction of Syria's weapons must remain a priority.
The international community must ensure that the
process is properly monitored, verified and completed
while abiding by the agreed timelines. It must also
ensure that no entity takes advantage of the process
to advance its capacities and knowledge of chemical
weapons.

Let me be absolutely clear. We cannot trust that a
regime that lies in bed with Iran and Hizbullah is not
lying when it commits itself to eliminating its deadly
arsenal. Together, Iran, Syria and Hizbullah form
the trio of terror. The trio is intent on acquiring the
ABCs of terrorism - atomic, biological and chemical
weapons - so it can more effectively murder innocent
men, women and children. The clock is ticking and time
is running out. Our conscience tells us that the sooner
Syria's stockpile of chemical weapons is destroyed, the
sooner we will safeguard the people of Syria and bring
greater stability to the Middle East.
The problems plaguing the Middle East are
centuries old and, contrary to what some in this
Chamber believe, cannot be solved overnight. How
many here thought that the so-called Arab Spring would
bring about democracy? I am reminded of the lyrics of
Leonard Cohen's song "Democracy": "It's coming from
the feel that this ain't exactly real, or it's real, but it ain't
exactly there." Leonard Cohen could have written this
song to describe the Middle East today. The promise of
democracy in the Middle East "ain't exactly real and it
ain't exactly there". The region continues to be defined
by bloodshed, repression and instability.

This brings me to the third quality I want to speak
about, and that is courage. We all want to see peace
in the Middle East. Israel welcomes the resumption of
the negotiations. Israel desires peace and is committed
to serious and meaningful negotiations with a positive
outcome. Israelis envision the day when we can live
free from divisions, hatred and violence. But making
peace requires courage. It requires leaders courageous
enough to embrace partnership and promote tolerance.

On the very same day that CNN beamed images

of Mahmoud Abbas talking about peace at the United
Nations, official Palestinian television delivered a
very different message. The Palestinian Authority and
Fatah held ceremonies to honour terrorists responsible
for the murder and maiming of innocent Israelis. At
a memorial held in Ramallah, a Fatah official read a
speech on behalf of Abbas, praising terrorist Abu
Sukkar who killed 15 Israelis and wounded more than
60. This murderer was described as "the most noble
among the noble". At another event on the same day, a
member ofAbbas's Fatah's Central Committee glorified
terrorist Dalal Mughrabi, who hijacked a bus and killed
37 civilians, 12 of whom were children. This attack was
described as "the glorious deed of a hero".

Examples of incitement are all too easy to find
in Palestinian society. Their results can be found in
the death of Gal Kobi, who was shot in the neck by
a Palestinian terrorist last month. They can be found
in the death of Tomer Hazan, who was kidnapped and
murdered by a Palestinian acquaintance. They can be
found in the death of Seraiah Ofer, who was brutally
beaten to death outside his home by Palestinian men
wielding metal bars and axes. As horrific as these
crimes are, President Abbas only found his voice to
condemn these attacks to a Jewish audience in New
York City, while speaking in English. We have yet to
hear President Abbas condemn these attacks in his
native Arabic, speaking to his own people.
The time has come for the Palestinian leadership
to clearly and unequivocally condemn violence and
terrorism. The time has come to stop poisoning the
minds of Palestinian children. The time has come to
start teaching tolerance, mutual respect and coexistence
; after all, the next peace agreement will depend on the
next generation wanting peace.

For years, Member States have been listening
to debates on the Middle East. In all this time, have
they ever heard a Palestinian representative say
anything constructive about Israel? No. We only hear
demonization and delegitimization. It is time to stop
the blame game. The United Nations library will
have to open a new fiction section for the countless
letters sent to the Security Council by the Palestinian
representative, distorting the truth. We need to speak
truthfully about the problems plaguing the Middle
East. It seems that those States which are so heavy on
the criticism of Israel are also light on the facts. Allow
me to dispel a number of myths.

Myth number one - some nations seem to believe

that a great injustice was done to the Palestinian people
when the United Nations voted to partition then-British
mandate Palestine into two States. In fact, in 1947
resolution 181 (II) of the General Assembly, which
divided the British mandate over Palestine, speaks of
the creation of a Jewish State no fewer than 25 times.
The resolution declared that "independent Arab and
Jewish States... shall come into existence". The Jews
welcomed the plan and joyously declared a new State
in their ancient homeland. But the Arabs rejected the
plan and, joined by the armies of five Arab nations,
launched a war of annihilation against the newly born
Jewish state.

Sixty-five years later, we still do not hear the
Palestinians talk about two States for two peoples.
Sure, Palestinian leaders call for an independent
Palestinian State, but they insist that the Palestinian
people return to the Jewish State. This is a euphemism
for the destruction of the State of Israel and a major
hurdle to peace.

Myth number two 4 some in this Chamber are
convinced that the root of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the settlements. In fact, from the time
Israel gained its independence in 1948 until 1967, the
West Bank was in Jordanian hands and Gaza was in
Egyptian hands. Throughout this time, there was not a
single settlement. Yet the Palestinians still sought our
destruction. And where were the Arab States? They
did not lift a finger to create a Palestinian State and
instead sought our destruction. Today, just 2 per cent of
the Israeli population lives in settlements, but they are
blamed for 100 per cent of the problems. I have said it
before and I will say it again - the settlements are not
the major hurdle to peace; the real obstacle to peace is
the Palestinians quest for the so-called right of return.

Myth number three - the Palestinian delegation
has sent letters to the Council accusing Israel of denying
people freedom of worship. The only denying taking
place is the denial of facts on the ground. One of the
first acts Israel undertook after reuniting Jerusalem in
1967 was to abolish discriminatory laws and safeguard
access to religious sites for people of all faiths. This was
in contrast to pre-l967, when everyone but Jews could
access Jerusalem. Since Israel introduced religious
freedoms in 1967, people of all faiths have been able to
visit the holy sites of Jerusalem.

In contrast, the Palestinian leadership breeds
incitement and stirs up violence on the Temple Mount.
They even went so far as to accuse Israel of altering
the nature of Jerusalem. In fact, it is the Palestinians
who are altering the nature of Jerusalem; they are
destroying artefacts and distorting history in an effort
to erase all traces of an ancient Jewish presence. The
world's silence in response to these crimes has been
deafening. Ever since King David laid the cornerstone
for his palace 3,000 years ago, Jerusalem has served
and will continue to serve as the eternal capital of the
Jewish people.

Instead of accusing Israel of restricting freedom of
movement, the Palestinians should be concerned with
holding free elections. Let me remind the Council that
Abbas's term expired in 2009. Since then he has been
extending his term without holding elections.

Where are all the concerned voices from the
defenders of democracy? Did any Member State in this
Chamber say something, or raise his voice about the
issue of elections? I am sure that many countries would
enjoy the chance to cancel or postpone elections when
the polling does not look good. Let me also remind
everyone of an important truth: in real democracy one
election does not earn one the right to rule forever.

Myth number four - Israel has been accused of
creating a humanitarian crisis in Gaza by restricting
the free movement of goods. In fact, every month,
trucks carrying hundreds and thousands of tons of

goods - including food, medical equipment and
construction materials - pass from Israel into the
Gaza strip.

In his past reports, the Special Representative has
criticized Israel for restricting the entry of construction
materials. How many here have asked us to allow
cement into Gaza so that the Palestinians could build
houses? Yet when we do, in exchange for our goods and
goodwill, Israel is repaid with tunnels of terror.

Just a week ago, the Israel Defense Forces
discovered a two-kilometre tunnel originating in Gaza
and ending just outside an Israeli community not far
from homes, kindergartens and playgrounds. The
tunnel was built by Hamas using 500 tons of cement
that had been earmarked for construction. I will repeat
that again: 500 tons of cement. To understand how
much that is, the Statue of Liberty weighs 225 tons. Just
imagine how many schools, hospitals and homes could
have been built.

In taking responsibility for building the tunnel, a
Hamas spokesman said,

"This tunnel was made by the hand of the fighters

of Al-Qassam. They will not sleep in their efforts

to hit the occupation and kidnap soldiers."
Instead of building houses, Hamas is building
smuggling tunnels; instead ofbuilding schools, they are
building terror networks. That is the reality that Israel
has to live with every day. Instead ofusing construction
materials to build a better future for the Palestinians
and the Palestinian people, the leadership in Gaza is
committed to destroying the State of Israel. It may just
be my hearing, but I have yet to hear the countries that
demand Israel allow more cement into Gaza condemn
those crimes.

Myth number five - some countries around this
table believe that international forces should be on
the border to guarantee a future peace agreement.
That is interesting, because history has shown that
Israel cannot rely on others to ensure its security.
While we support the work of United Nations forces
on our borders, history has shown that Israel cannot
rely on the international community to ensure its
own security. That was the case with the first United
Nations Emergency Force in the Sinai desert, and with
European Union Border Assistance Mission in Rafah.

The recent involvement of certain United Nations
bodies has hardly been helpful. In his remarks earlier, the
representative of the Secretariat spoke about an incident
last month in Kfar Makhoul. The report neglects to note
that, following a review by Israel's Supreme Court, the
buildings in question were determined to have been
illegally constructed. In the light of that important
fact, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) needs reminding that its
role is the coordination of humanitarian aid, not aiding
in the obstruction of justice. In that regard, OCHA
systematically abuses Israel's authority on the ground.
It seems that the only thing the Office for Coordination
is not doing is coordinating with Israel.

It is time to stop pointing fingers and laying the
blame at Israel's doorstep. Israel remains committed
to two States for two peoples. We are ready to make
an historic compromise to realize the creation of a
demilitarized Palestinian State living side-by-side with
the Jewish State of Israel. Israelis and Palestinians
will have to work together to create new and lasting
solutions to old problems. That will only be possible
if our work is built on a foundation of truth, mutual
recognition and security.

A great convulsion is shaking the Middle East,
from the Straits of Hormuz to the Straits of Gibraltar.
The tremors have shattered States and toppled
Governments, and the ground is still shifting. The
region stands at a crossroads, and it is not yet clear if
freedom and moderation will triumph over tyranny and
fundamentalism.

Let this be the moment in history when all peoples
seek understanding instead of making accusations,
when nations strive for harmony instead of dissonance,
and when our family of nations shows the conviction,
conscience and courage to make peace possible.

