Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): As this is
the first time that I am addressing the Security Council
in the Chamber under your presidency, Sir, perhaps I
could take this opportunity to congratulate you and the
Republic of Korea on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February and also
to thank very much Ambassador Masood Khan and
the delegation of Pakistan for their stewardship of the
Council in the month of January.

Mr. President, as you will be aware, the Security
Council's visit to Yemen on 27 January achieved its
objectives, which were to evaluate the implementation
of resolution 2051 (2012) and to assess the progress
made on the political transition. As co-lead with my
Moroccan colleague, I would like to brief colleagues on
our meetings with the President, the Military Committee
and the United Nations country team. I will then invite
Ambassador Loulichki to speak on the meetings with
the Prime Minister, the national dialogue preparatory
committee and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Secretary-General.

But first, I would like to thank the Special Adviser,
Mr. Jamal Benomar, and the Resident Coordinator,
Mr. Ismail Ould Sheikh Ahmed, as well as their
respective teams, for supporting this mission. I would
also like to convey my special appreciation for the
excellent work of the Department of Safety and Security,
which ensured our security throughout the visit.

President Mansour updated the Security Council
on the transition timeline. He reported that phase
one, which had involved military restructuring and
consolidated gains against Al-Qaida, was now complete.
Yemen had been saved from civil war thanks to the
GCC initiative and Security Council attention, but
deep challenges remained. Phase two would focus on
the national dialogue, leading to elections in February
2014. That dialogue would begin imminently.

As the Council is aware, since then President
Mansour has announced that the national dialogue
would start on 18 March. The President made a direct
and clear appeal to the Security Council for continued
support and called for strong measures to be taken
against those individuals who were undermining the
process. A new Yemen, built on the aspirations of the
youth who had occupied the squares, was now needed.

For its part, the Security Council mission underlined
the need for the transition timeline to remain on track.
Important milestones remained, including passing the
transitional justice laws, the launch of the national
dialogue, and the Yemeni Government agreeing the
mutual accountability framework for development
pledges.

Similar themes were discussed with the Military
Committee. The Military Committee positively assessed
the recent decrees to unify command structures and said
that the focus would now be on reforming the Ministry
of Interior. The Defence Minister argued that the
Yemeni military did not use children in armed conflicts
and reaffirmed his commitment to cooperating fully
with other law-enforcement agencies.

The United Nations country team gave a briefing
on the troubling humanitarian situation. Half of
Yemen's population of 24 million did not have access
to clean water and sanitation; 10 million people did
not have sufficient access to food; more than 6 million
people lacked access to basic health care; and 1 million
children suffered from acute malnutrition.

The 2013 Yemen humanitarian response plan
required further financial support. On the economic
front, 6 million young people between the ages of 15
and 28 were unemployed. President Mansour called
on the Friends of Yemen, especially ahead of the next
meeting, to be held in London on 7 March, to transform
the $8 billion in international pledges into concrete
assistance.
As many of us observed during last week's wrap-
up meeting (see S/PV.69l4), the Yemeni Government
continues to welcome Security Council engagement
and expects it to continue. I hope that the Council is
capable of doing so.

I shall now pass over to Ambassador Loulichki to
brief the Council on the remainder of the trip.

