Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): At the outset, I
would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency for
its very timely and well-prepared initiative to hold an
open debate on energy, security and climate. My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Germany on behalf of
the European Union.

I should now like to touch on some additional
issues that are of importance to my country.

Our heads of State or Government, at the 2005
World Summit, reaffirmed the emerging common
understanding that security and development are
closely interlinked and that there can be no security
without sound economic systems, fair trade regimes,
social welfare and the rule of law. But how can all of
these be achieved if forces of nature can easily
undermine well-planned human achievements, change
the shape of continents and lead to dramatic changes in
human habitats?

Science has proved on many occasions that
climate change, global warming and pollution may
have sudden and dramatic consequences if they are not
addressed urgently, properly and effectively. Recent
studies on these subjects have provided clear evidence
to the international community of their long-term
consequences, calling for immediate and decisive
action.

Ukraine is firmly committed to international
agreements in the area of climate change, including the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and its Kyoto Protocol. For my Government,
the sustainable use of energy and the protection of the
environment are not just empty slogans. A few days
from now, we will solemnly commemorate the twenty-
first anniversary of the Chernobyl catastrophe, the
worst technological disaster ever faced by humanity.
After more than two decades, Ukraine is still dealing
3
with the grave consequences of contaminated land, the
displacement of the population from the exclusion
zone, health issues and psychological trauma. All of
this, of course, has caused a slowdown in economic
development and created vulnerabilities, posing
potential risks to society.

Modern industrial development, in particular
energy production, is the main source of detrimental
effects on the environment. Thus it is crucial that
energy, climate change and security be tackled jointly
in order to realize the objective of a sustainable
environment. We therefore deem it imperative, among
other policy prescriptions, to build on appropriate
incentives, public-private partnerships, low-carbon-
emitting technologies and innovative solutions.

In that respect, my delegation would like in
particular to underscore the importance of the reports
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
established under the auspices of the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), in
assessing, compiling and synthesizing scientific,
technical and socio-economic data. We are also looking
forward to the publication of the 2007 Human
Development Report, devoted to the theme of "Climate
change and human development - rising to the
challenge".

Energy policy and climate change are moving
towards the centre of policy-making in many countries.
The process implies a multilateral framework, and
today's deliberations have corroborated that thesis. In
order to achieve the collective objective of combating
climate change, we have various extraordinary targets.
Achieving those targets will be a significant challenge
for a vast majority of countries. It will require the full
implementation of domestic greenhouse gas reduction
measures and effective use of the flexible mechanisms
adopted by international agreements.

We call on all parties involved to contribute
generously to the process and to spare no effort in
providing assistance and responding with sound
national strategies. Ukraine, for its part, is ready to
commit itself to implementing and promoting
sustainable development as part of our national
priorities.

