Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I thank you, Mr.
President, for allowing us to participate in this
important debate. I would like at the outset to thank the
Permanent Representative of Cameroon, the Council
President for October. We were proud of the way he
steered the work of the Council. We welcome you, Sir,
as President for this month and wish you the best as
you proceed with your work.

My delegation affirms its support for the work of
the Security Council, together with its subsidiary
bodies, such as the sanctions Committees, monitoring
mechanisms and expert panels. We consider these
bodies to be mechanisms for contributing to peace by
following up on the mandatory implementation of
Security Council resolutions.
We believe that the work of the Panel of Experts
on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and
Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo complements peace efforts in the Great Lakes
region. The report of the Panel of Experts (S/2002/ 1146)
is useful in highlighting the impact of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in fuelling the conflict in the
Great Lakes region. All the agreements reached in
resolving the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will not be implemented as long as there is a
belief that war is more profitable than peace.

The Security Council is well aware of the
commitment the South African Government has made
towards achieving a peaceful resolution of the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
that in the wider Great Lakes region. My Government
believes that the achievement of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is essential for
contributing to the renewal of the African continent
and the achievement of the goals of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).

However, we would like to inform the Security
Council that South Africa is disappointed with the
content of the final report presented to the Council by
Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem. We are disappointed
in the methodology the Panel used in gathering its
information and in the conclusions and recommendations
the Panel sets out in its report. South Africa would urge
that the Security Council require the Panel to further
investigate and substantiate the allegations and
recommendations made in the report. We believe that
the Panel's report contradicts the aims and the
intentions of the Security Council.

As a matter of principle, my delegation is of the
view that, when the Security Council establishes bodies
to assist in the follow-up work of the Council, those
bodies must follow clearly established guidelines in
conducting their work. These should include close
cooperation and consultations with Governments. It is
therefore not acceptable that an expert panel, given an
opportunity to meet with Government authorities,
withholds information on matters that are of concern to
the Governments involved. Yet Governments are
supposed to further investigate allegations of interest to
panels without being given basic information. In other
words, we would hope that panels are there to assist
Governments in carrying out the requirements of
relevant Security Council decisions.

The South African Government met several times
with the Panel. The Panel expected the South African
authorities to conduct further investigations and to
undertake any steps that might be necessary. However,
South African Government authorities were expected
to conduct an investigation with either little or no
information. The Panel's report shows that the Panel
had in its possession much information that could have
been of assistance to further investigations. However,
the Panel chose not to divulge that information, other
than to use it as supposed evidence in its report.

I should like to use this opportunity to address
some of the issues that have been raised by the Panel
with regard to South Africa, to South African-based
companies and to individuals. In paragraph 31, the
report states:

"Also working with ZDF is a convicted criminal
based in South Africa, Nico Shefer, who has
arranged for Zimbabwean officers to be trained in
diamond valuation in Johannesburg. Mr. Shefer's
company, Tandan Holdings, has a 50 per cent
stake in Thorntree Industries, a joint venture
diamond-trading company with ZDF."

On 14 June 2002, the South African Government was
requested by the Panel to provide information
concerning the trading - whether openly or
clandestinely - of Congolese diamonds in South Africa
or the transport of Congolese diamonds through South
Africa by the Minerals Business Company (MBC). It
was stated by the Panel that the South-African-owned or
-based company Thorntree Industries reportedly has an
agreement with MBC to trade its shipments of
Congolese diamonds. On 31 July 2002, the South
African Government informed the Panel that it had no
information to verify the allegation concerning the
transport through South African territory of diamonds
bought by Thorntree Industries. It should also be noted
that the issue of Mr. Shefer's arranging for Zimbabwean
officers to be trained in diamond valuation in
Johannesburg has never been raised with the South
African Government by the Panel. The question of Mr.
Shefer and Thorntree Industries is similarly raised in
paragraph 58 of the report.

In paragraph 52, the report states:

"Mr. Al-Shanfari instructed his security chief to
smuggle diamonds from the Sengamines
concession to Johannesburg, South Africa, and
deliver them to Ken Roberts, the chief executive
of Serengeti Diamonds."

That information has never been shared with the South
African Government, nor has it ever been the subject of
an inquiry addressed to the South African Government
by the Panel.

In paragraph 139, the report identifies South
Africa as one of 11 African States through whose
territory goods originating in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are likely to pass. The Panel further states
that it submitted questions to all of those countries and
held substantive discussions with government
representatives from five of them. The Panel inquired
about relevant legislation, investigations into the flow of
the commodities, measures taken to curb those flows,
other possible action to be taken and those
Governments' needs for assistance. According to the
report, virtually none of the countries that responded to
the Panel's questions had conducted any investigations
or adopted any specific procedures for the identification
or inspection of the transiting of commodities from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The report goes on to state that South African
officials confirmed the seizure of a sizeable clandestine
shipment of diamonds from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, but it provides no details. Also stated is
that none of the authorities in those countries gave any
indication that Congolese resources traded through
their territories should or could be regarded as conflict
goods, and that almost none of the countries proposed
any meaningful measures to help curb trade in
Congolese commodities that are tainted by criminality
and militarization.

In September 2001, the Expert Panel approached
South Africa regarding procedures followed by South
African law enforcement agencies in combating
smuggling activities and organized crime, as well as a
chart clarifying the division of authority and the
responsibilities of various authorities. On 14 June
2002, the South African Government provided a
detailed description of the role and the functions of law
enforcement agencies in South Africa. In addition, the
Government provided the Panel with details of relevant
legislation utilized in curbing smuggling and organized
crime. The Government stated, however, that the South
African law enforcement agencies are not aware of any
significant or organized groups that are engaged in
smuggling or other illegal activities involving
diamonds, gold, coltan or other natural resources
originating from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Panel had asked the South African
Government for examples of actual cases of smuggling
made by the South African law enforcement agencies
originating from the DRC and countries involved in the
conflict. The information provided by the South
African authorities confirmed that a national of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had been arrested at
Johannesburg International Airport in December 2001
with 13 diamonds in his possession. The Panel was
informed that the individual had appeared in court, but
that the case had been postponed until June 2002. It
was further explained to the Panel that, since the court
case was still pending, no additional information could
be provided. That was the only information provided to
the Panel regarding a seizure of diamonds with a
connection to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the information provided to the Panel, it was not
possible to indicate the origin of the diamonds.

In annex III to the report, the Panel lists those
business enterprises that it considers to be in violation
of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises. Twelve South African companies are listed
under annex III. Although no substantiating evidence
for those listings is provided, the report states that

"Countries which are signatories to those
Guidelines and other countries are morally
obliged to ensure that their business enterprises
adhere to and act on the Guidelines."
(S/2002/II46, para. 177)

With regard to the specific companies mentioned,
South Africa has never been approached by the Panel
regarding a company by the name of African Trading
Corporation. Anglovaal, Banro Corporation, Carson
Products, Mercantille CC, Saracen, Swanepoel, Track
Star Trading 151, Zincor, Iscor and Orion Mining Inc.
have never been mentioned in any of the Panel's
previous reports, and no information related to their
business activities or conduct has ever been shared with
the South African Government, nor has any of those
companies ever been the subject of an inquiry addressed
to the South African Government by the Panel.

On 14 June 2002, the South African Government
was requested by the Panel to provide a list of all South
African and South-African-registered companies
operating in or with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. During the meeting with the Panel, the South
African authorities specifically raised with the Panel
their serious concerns about its queries regarding South
African companies operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, without any indication as to
their participation in the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. South Africa underlined the fact that
unsubstantiated queries by the Panel about the
activities of companies operating legally and above
board in the Democratic Republic of the Congo could
be interpreted as casting unwarranted aspersions on
their activities. In this context, I should also like to
note the fact that South Africa is not a signatory to the
OECD Guidelines. Although we support the objectives
of the OECD, we do not understand how the Panel can
use this mechanism as a means of accountability when
we are not signatories to the Guidelines.

The report's statements about South Africa, South
African companies and South African individuals
consequently do not appear to be substantiated by hard
evidence or information, nor does the Panel draw any
distinction between legal and illegal activities of
companies in its report. In our interaction with the
Panel, the South African authorities underlined the
difficulties that are experienced when dealing with the
vagueness of certain queries received. It was pointed
out that the provision of more detailed and accurate
information would assist the South African authorities
in addressing issues raised.

I understand that my statement is critical of the
final report and that it brings into question the
approach and methodology that have been adopted in
its compilation. It is our hope, however, that the
Council will take these concerns into account in its
consideration of this report and of any new mandate
that may be given to the Panel. We suggest humbly that
the Council provide clear and specific guidelines on the
functioning, approach and operating standards of any
future mechanism it may decide to establish with
regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Council will understand that South Africa
regards this in a serious light, not only because of its
imputations, but also because of the role that South
Africa continues to play, both in its national capacity
and as the Chair of the African Union, in achieving
lasting peace, security, stability and prosperity for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its people.

Perhaps one of the most sweeping statements in
the Panel's report is contained in paragraph 65. In the
last sentence of that paragraph, the Panel dismisses the
fundamental premise on which the Lusaka Agreement
is based - the security concerns of parties to the
Agreement - and which the Security Council itself
has welcomed as a basis for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This misconception of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is based on the Lusaka Agreement and
which continues to preoccupy this Council, raises
questions about some of the equally ambitious
conclusions this Council is being asked to endorse.

Finally, it gives us no pleasure to come and
contradict a Panel that the Security Council has
appointed. However, we believe that it is important for
the Council to act on facts, rather than on incomplete
or even false information. When the Security Council
speaks, the whole world listens. For this reason, it is
important that the Council rely on accurate and factual
information when it makes its decisions.

