Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I also welcome the presence
and briefing, via video teleconference, by Ms. Sandra
Honore, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti. I also thank her and her team for their
work and commitment. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his participation and
statement at this meeting of the Security Council.

Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered
by our colleague from Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

Allow me, in my national capacity, to express my
country's solidarity with the people and the Government
of Haiti. We regret the tragic loss of human life caused
by the passing of Hurricane Matthew, in particular in
the southern region of the country.

On Friday, 7 October, the mobile hospital unit of
the Argentine Air Force, which is part of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and is made up of 12 doctors and nurses, was deployed
to Les Cayes, the capital of Sud department, which was
severely affected by the hurricane. Furthermore, the
White Helmets Commission ofArgentina's Ministry for
Foreign Affairs is developing an offer of humanitarian
assistance, be presented in the coming days, to help the
people of Haiti.

We are receiving alarming information from our
Embassy in Haiti regarding the loss of human lives, the
destruction of infrastructure, the loss of crops and a
lack of drinking water. Our humble assistance is added
to that of friendly countries in the region, which have
never turned their backs on the people of Haiti, as well
as that of Haiti's major donors and traditional partners.
That assistance is essential in order for the country to
face this new challenge imposed upon it by the forces
of nature.

Finally, my country would like to appeal to the
Government of Haiti to renew its commitment to the
deadlines set for the electoral timetable and to establish
a new date for the elections as soon as possible.

With regard to the draft resolution on MINUSTAH
being considered by Council members, we urge
its adoption by consensus in order to show unity
in confronting the adverse scenario facing Haiti
today. My country has always promoted the prompt
re-establishment of a constitutional Government and
the strengthening of democratic institutions, which no
doubt will contribute to improving the well-being of the
people of Haiti.

The meeting rose at 5.50 pm.
