The topic of today's debate is important, and I would like to thank the presidency for organizing the debate in such a way as to allow all Member States to participate. As Switzerland wrote in its two letters to the presidency of the Security Council on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, Switzerland welcomes the latest adjustments to the Council's working methods to ensure that they remain up to the standards of transparency and inclusiveness during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. In line with resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), Switzerland considers it essential to increase the participation and contribution of young women and men in the area of peace and security. Allow me to highlight three points that are particularly important in this context. First, young people constitute a large portion of the population in countries affected by armed conflict. Many young people are currently seeing their situation worsen owing to the threat of COVID-19. Their specific needs must be taken into account. Switzerland has set up a rapid reaction mechanism to support the fight against the pandemic and its impact on human security. Those efforts include civil society activities to raise Syrians' awareness of the effects of COVID-19 and to strengthen trust-building mechanisms in communities, especially among Syrian youth. Secondly, young women and men are drivers of change. Their potential for action must be strengthened at all stages of peacebuilding. Switzerland welcomes the Peacebuilding Fund's Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative, which has boosted the empowerment of young people in recent years. The youth, peace and security and the women and peace and security agendas are mutually reinforcing, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the implementation of the Council's mandate. Switzerland urges the Council to strengthen the role of young people across its agenda items, specifically by inviting more young briefers. The Council should also recognize the indispensable role of civil society in peace and security. The increased involvement of youth in sustaining peace is also a request resulting from the consultations during the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture held in Geneva in February. Thirdly, creating economic conditions conducive to youth employment is an important lever for lasting peace. Switzerland supports a joint job-creation programme of the International Labour Organization and the Peacebuilding Support Office in fragile and conflict-affected situations. The project is part of the wider United Nations effort to make more systematic use of such peacebuilding programmes. The inclusion of young people in the labour market helps to improve their prospects. In Myanmar, for example, Switzerland provides local stakeholders with expertise from its hotel industry by developing skills in the tourism sector. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Swiss vocational training programmes have helped to reduce the high unemployment rate among young people. The inclusion of young people is an important precondition for conflict resolution, sustainable peace and conflict prevention. The resolutions adopted by the Security Council, in particular resolution 2250 (2015), adopted five years ago, set out areas for action and steps to follow. Strengthening youth engagement in peace and security means acting now for the future.
