Mr. McNee: It is a great pleasure to participate in
the Security Council's consultations in my capacity as
Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Last week, we
returned from visiting Sierra Leone with a PBC
delegation consisting of the Permanent Representatives
to the United Nations of Austria, the Czech Republic,
the Republic of Korea, Liberia and Peru. The size of
this delegation, with all of its members at the level of
permanent representative, amply demonstrates the
international community's interest in Sierra Leone.

As I indicated in my last briefing, the Sierra
Leone configuration of the PBC has aligned its
engagement with the peacebuilding priorities in Sierra
Leone's Agenda for Change and decided to focus on
good governance, youth employment and illicit drug
trafficking. The recent visit provided an opportunity to
take stock of progress and consider the Peacebuilding
Commission's future contribution in these areas. The
delegation's discussions with President Koroma,
national and district officials, political parties, civil
society, youth and the diplomatic corps underlined the
progress made in recent years, highlighted major
challenges, and provided insight into current political
and societal dynamics.

The situation in Sierra Leone remains calm.
Important steps have been taken to follow up on the
joint communique signed by the major political parties
in March, 2009. The Independent Review Panel into
the causes of the political violence has started work.
With support from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Development Programme, the Political Parties
Registration Commission has also engaged with the
political parties to foster constructive dialogue and
mitigate the possibility of politically motivated
violence. Campaigns to promote tolerance have also
been conducted outside Freetown and with the youth
wings of the political parties.

But notwithstanding that progress, the promotion
of inclusive democratic politics is becoming
increasingly important. The meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission's delegation with the
political parties revealed significant divisions. Mutual
trust and inter-party dialogue remain limited. The trend
towards growing regional and ethnic polarization, as
well as increasing politicization of paramount
chieftaincy elections, is cause for some concern.
Similarly, isolated incidents of political violence, most
recently in Tongo Fields, illustrate the potential for
further instability. As the 2012 general elections
approach and political stakes rise, the temptation to
depart from peaceful and inclusive politics will also
increase. All political actors must continue to follow up
on the joint communique and work towards a more
tolerant and cooperative form of politics.

Progress on peacebuilding will help buttress
those efforts. With respect to good governance, Sierra
Leone should be commended for its efforts to combat
corruption. The suspension and removal of three
cabinet ministers over the last year sends a strong
signal. The Anti-Corruption Commission also
continues to use its independence and authority to
prosecute graft, improve public systems and conduct
outreach. Sierra Leone's rise in the Transparency
International Index is a concrete sign of this success.
Nonetheless, corruption remains a serious problem
throughout Sierra Leonean society, not in the least due
to its inhibiting effects on foreign direct investment.
Sierra Leone has also improved other aspects of
governance. Decentralization is bringing public

services to districts outside Freetown and enhancing
the responsibility of local governments in matters of
national development. Critical work is under way to
improve the capacity of the Sierra Leone police,
particularly with respect to public disturbances and
drug interdiction. The central importance of a trusted,
capable and adequately resourced police force ahead of
the 2012 elections cannot be overemphasized.

Youth unemployment is an issue requiring special
attention. One third of Sierra Leone's population is
between 15 and 35 years of age. Many idle youth are
concentrated in urban areas, unable to find jobs and
frustrated by social marginalization. That clearly
represents a latent risk of political instability.

Both the Government and its international
partners are moving to address the challenge. The
Parliament of Sierra Leone passed the National Youth
Commission Act in December 2009, and the
Government is in the process of establishing the
Commission as a focal point for youth policy. A
sectoral working group involving key Government
departments and international partners is also working
to enhance employment creation. Following
constructive discussions during the delegation's visit,
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission will meet on March 26 to identify
outstanding needs and consider how to support this
welcome and growing momentum.

Drug trafficking is a third area of concern. Sierra
Leone has developed an integrated approach that is a
model for the region. It is also a key participant in the
West Africa Coast Initiative, and it hosted a
ministerial-level conference in Freetown in February
2010. The meeting reiterated the regional commitment
to the regional action plan on drug trafficking of the
Economic Commission of West African States and
considered the operationalization of transnational
crime units in each of the pilot countries. Sierra Leone
is in the process of transforming its Joint Drug
Interdiction Task Force into a transnational crime unit.
While these efforts are commendable, more support is
needed to ensure that the subregion has the necessary
capacity and resources to combat drug trafficking and
organized crime.

In our view, Sierra Leone is a multilateral success
story, and Sierra Leoneans have made remarkable
progress. The United Nations presence has also
gradually transformed itself from a major peacekeeping
operation into the current Integrated Peacebuilding
Office. The remaining peacebuilding priorities
represent the final obstacles before the country
proceeds to long-term development.

It would be a mistake, however, to underestimate
those obstacles. Sierra Leone requires continued
attention and assistance, particularly in the period prior
to the 2012 elections. International partners provided a
welcome indication of their continued support at the
Consultative Group meeting held in London last
November. Nonetheless, more is needed, especially
with respect to filling specific gaps. In-kind
contributions of patrol vessels or police vehicles would
enhance Sierra Leone's ability to monitor its maritime
borders and manage internal tensions. Financial
contributions to the United Nations multi-donor trust
fund in support of the Agenda for Change and the
United Nations joint vision for Sierra Leone would
enable much-needed peacebuilding efforts to take
place. That funding would also directly reinforce the
excellent and innovative work carried out by Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone and the entire United Nations family.

The integrated approach adopted by the United
Nations in Sierra Leone deserves the international
community's strongest support. It is a successful model
of how national and international actors, including the
Security Council and Peacebuilding Commission, can
work together to build sustainable peace after even the
most devastating conflict. The international community
must ensure that this remains the case. It would be a
great shame if complacency at these later stages of
peace consolidation undermined the considerable
progress made to date. For this reason the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
remains fully committed to supporting Sierra Leone as
it moves towards long-term sustainable development.

