Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this public meeting. I
would also like to thank Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Kosovo.

As I stated at the previous public meeting on this
item (see S/PV.4928), the Government of Japan is very
concerned about the violence that erupted in March in
Kosovo. Based on that incident, we wish to reiterate
the following points, which we think should be given
serious consideration by all members of the
international community.
First, I would like to reiterate once again that the
most important lesson we have learned from the
violence is that we must redouble our efforts towards
the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo. There is no alternative to
implementing the Kosovo standards if we are to reach
that goal.

As became clear from the violence, there is still a
strong need for improvement in the protection of
minorities, including Serbs. Guaranteeing various
minority rights, including freedom of movement, must
be one of the most important elements of a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo. Devolution of
responsibilities to local authorities should therefore not
lead to the division of Kosovo along ethnic lines. It
must be considered with a view to ensuring that it
contributes to the creation of a democratic and multi-
ethnic society.

In addition, efforts to strengthen minority rights
in Kosovo must be accompanied by sustainable returns.
In that connection, we call for the resumption of the
direct dialogue, especially the working group on
refugee returns. We expect the Secretary-General to
include those issues in his recommendations for
incorporation into the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan.

Secondly, the violence has also demonstrated all
too clearly the need for increased security in Kosovo.
My Government expresses support for the prompt
response of the Special Representative, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, and of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) in their efforts to stabilize the
situation in the immediate aftermath of the violence. At
the same time, on the basis of an assessment of the
measures taken by UNMIK prior to the outbreak of
violence, we need to study seriously the question of
how we can achieve sustained improvement in the
security situation.

The Government of Japan also notes with alarm
the fatal incident among UNMIK officers on 17 April
and the concern that has been expressed over the issue
of discipline in relation to some of the international
staff in Kosovo. The need for peacekeepers to win the
respect of the people in the region where they are
operating should be self-evident.

With regard to the issue of the trafficking of girls
and women, Japan hopes that UNMIK will provide
further information and will take appropriate measures
to address the problem without delay.
My Government intends to adhere to its
commitment to achieving stability and prosperity in
Southeastern Europe, in cooperation with the
international community as a whole. It is our firm
belief that stabilizing the situation in Kosovo is
essential for the stability and prosperity of the entire
region.

