Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassadors Hardeep Singh Puri, Baso
Sangqu and Peter Wittig for their briefings. We wish
to express our sincere appreciation for their excellent
leadership of the Security Council Committees with
counter-terrorism mandates. With their wisdom,
professionalism and dedication, they have been doing
a tremendous job over the past two years. I wish them
every success in their future endeavours.

With its changing nature and character, terrorism
is a serious threat to international peace and security,
as well as to the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the social and economic
development of all States. Although the international
community has achieved remarkable results in
countering terrorism, more should be done to prevent
and combat that scourge. Today, when the world
continues to suffer from the terrorism menace and
when the frequency and magnitude of terrorism acts
still challenge the well-being all societies, the role of
the three Security Council Committees with counter-
terrorism mandates remains as important as ever.

Azerbaijan strongly supports the close cooperation
and effective coordination among the three Committees
and their groups of experts. The Council has repeatedly
stressed the need for enhanced interaction and
collaboration among them. Information exchange, joint
outreach activities and country visits, coordinated
activities with international and regional organizations,
joint meetings and representation are important tools
employed by the Committees for the benefit of United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. In that regard, we are
pleased to note the increased cooperation between the
experts' groups in some areas.

The lack of proper counter-terrorism capacity
is a perennial problem that should continue to be a
focus of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
Understandably, not all requests for assistance can
receive an adequate response, in view of the particular
requirements of donors and of the time that the process
takes. Given the changing nature of terrorism and the
security situation related to that, the individual needs of
States, as well as their ability to effectively implement
their counter-terrorism obligations, may vary. United
Nations entities are always there to assist Member
States, but it is also essential that States strengthen
cooperation with one another on the issues of capacity-
building assistance.

Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), I would like to underline the
extraordinary importance of the full implementation by
Member States ofthe Council's resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010), and to stress in that regard
the crucial role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate in promoting and facilitating
the implementation of those resolutions. With its vast
expertise and various tools, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is the backbone of
the overall activities of the Committee, as well as a
unique mechanism that provides many opportunities
for Member States to strengthen their counter-terrorism
capabilities. The Directorate's close interaction with
Member States is a prerequisite for the effectiveness of
both the Committee's work and the full implementation
of counter-terrorism commitments. I would like to
commend the hard work of the Committee and Executive
Directorate in finalizing the revision of implementation
assessment tools. The revised assessment process not
only ensures transparency, consistency and objectivity
in the Committee's stocktaking process but also further
enhances cooperation between the Committee and
Member States in many areas.

Turning to the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, Al-Qaida is a global
terrorist movement that continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, even though
it is currently undergoing a complex transition process
and lacks strong central leadership. Its regional and
national affiliates have been growing in strength and
importance. It has switched to an increased focus on
local issues, and thus has become more complicated to
deal with.

Against that backdrop, the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1989 (2011), must be ensured in order to
continue to effectively counter the threat posed by
Al-Qaida and its affiliates with success and in a timely
fashion. We acknowledge the Committee's efforts
to maintain the effectiveness and credibility of the
Al-Qaida sanctions list, including by regularly updating
and reviewing it. It is essential that the sanctions be fully
applied and that the list reflect current and future threats
from Al-Qaida and its associates. We underline the
Monitoring Team's special role in raising awareness of
the sanctions regime and its contribution to completing
the narrative summaries for all entries on the Al-Qaida
list, as well as to making proper amendments to it. A
fair and clear procedure for listing and delisting has
established a firm basis for a successful fight against
emerging threats. For those reasons, the Committee
should continue to approach listing requests and
recommendations with due consideration. In that
regard, we affirm the importance of the Office of the
Ombudsperson as an essential element of fairness in
the application of the sanctions regime.

Azerbaijan is greatly appreciative of the activities
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular its close interaction with
Member States. It is essential that the Committee,
with support from its group of experts, continue to
work constructively with Member States in order
to increase the number of national implementation
reports. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2055
(2012), and hope that an increase in the group of experts
will make a positive contribution to enhancing the
1540 Committee's capacity to prevent, among other
things, non-State actors from developing, acquiring,
manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring
or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their means of delivery. We also commend the Member
States that recently organized a number of important
events focused on promoting the goals of resolution
1540 (2004), as well as on capacity-building and
assistance.

Areas ofarmed conflict, especially territories under
foreign military occupation, often create conditions
conducive to exploitation by terrorists and other
non-State actors. The accumulation of a great number
of armaments and munitions in such places, beyond
the reach of international control, and the risk of the
proliferation of weapons ofmass destruction and related
materials to non-State actors pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. That requires the
diligent implementation by all States of their respective
commitments and strengthened cooperation among
them in order to effectively address such challenges.

The war on terrorism should not be used to target
any particular religion or culture, and there is a vital
necessity for joint efforts and dialogue to counter
defamatory manifestations and misconceptions.
Constructive interaction between different cultures
and religions, including within the framework of such
initiatives as the culture of peace and the Alliance of
Civilizations, should continue playing a special role
in contributing to peace and mutual understanding,
and thus to the efficient implementation of counter-
terrorism measures.

