Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special Envoy
De Mistura for his insightful update and commend his
exceptional commitment and determination to pursue
peace in Syria. We welcome his multifaceted diplomacy
to resolve the crisis.

Kazakhstan welcomes the consultations held on
18 andl9 June in Geneva, with the participation of
the delegations of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey. Such
dialogue is a step in the right direction to implement
the Sochi final declaration and to form a Syrian-owned
constitutional committee to promote the political
process under the auspices of the United Nations and
define its composition and working methods, which are
important tasks. Independent experts in various areas
should also be invited.

I must agree with my colleagues that the United
Nations should be the only platform to move forward
the political process. At the same time we understand
that without the assistance of stakeholders, it is not
realistic. That is why we commend the Special Envoy
on his attempts to involve various States of the Middle
East, the Gulf region and Europe in the process.
Similarly, a revamped regional approach is needed to
support both the Geneva and Astana processes, uphold
the ceasefire and promote the peace process. We would
like to assure Mr. Staffan de Mistura and his team of
our firm support for their efforts to move forward the
political process.

We also thank Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Operational Division at the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
his comprehensive and informative briefing on the
very critical humanitarian situation in Syria. We
have carefully studied the most recent reports of the
Secretary- General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332
(2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/619) and on
the review of United Nations cross-border operations
(S/2018/617). The humanitarian situation is grave and
deserves our attention. Kazakhstan highly appreciates
the activities of the humanitarian personnel of the
United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health Organization
(WHO), the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Society and
other international humanitarian organizations on
the ground.

We encourage more cross-border deliveries from
Iraq, Jordan and Turkey, in line with all relevant
resolutions on the matter. We learned that in May 440
trucks - 19 consignments - delivered life-saving
assistance to more than 1 million people through cross-
border deliveries. Those operations complement the aid
provided by international and Syrian non- governmental
organizations that make services from neighbouring
countries available to millions more. The work of
the Syrian Ministry of Health, in coordination with
WHO, and other organizations, under the umbrella of
the United Nations, has helped to reach a considerable
number of people in need. The Syrian Government
must ensure that it improves the level of humanitarian
access in several areas that recently came under
localized agreements. We also note with satisfaction the
fact that there is a reduction in the number of people in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, as well as a marked
decrease in the besieged locations.

At the same time, special attention must be paid
to Idlib, where nearly half of the population has been
displaced and must be rescued. We underscore that
the freedom of movement of civilians must be ensured
by all parties. All evacuation of civilians must be safe
and voluntary and abide by internationally recognized
protection standards.

Finally, we voice our support for calls by the
United Nations on all parties to safeguard civilian lives
and prevent deaths and injuries, as seen in the Dar'a
area. We also support calls for allowing freedom of
movement and for protecting hospitals, clinics and
schools, as required under international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

The hostilities must stop. The delivery of assistance
from across the Jordanian border, thanks to the
outstanding ongoing United Nations-led efforts, should
be sustained, as each month it must reach hundreds of
thousands of people in need.

