Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Issues pertaining to the safety of navigation
and the protection of the lives of persons on board
vessels, including crew members, are of primary
importance to the Russian Federation. In that
connection, we supported the Council's adoption of
resolution 2500 (2019) today.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of the international
community, the activities of pirates off the coast of
Somalia are declining. However, attacks continue to
occur, meaning that both the Security Council and
Member States should pay serious attention to the
problem. In that context, we want to emphasize how
essential it is to continue coordinated counter-piracy
efforts, including through the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia, which we are in favour of
preserving, since it has been proven to be effective.
Russia continues to contribute to combating piracy off
the coast of Somalia. Our naval forces participate in
ensuring the safety of navigation in vulnerable maritime
areas in close cooperation with other members of the
anti-piracy coalition.

We believe it is important to note the efforts of all
the members of the coalition, and in that regard we want
to draw the Council's attention to a letter sent by Iran on
3 December to the Secretary-General that sheds light on
the country's efforts to counter piracy. It is well known
that in recent years Iranian sailors in commercial and
fishing fleets have repeatedly been the target of piracy
and robbery attacks. It is totally obvious that Tehran has
a greater interest than anyone in stabilizing the situation
off the coast of Somalia, protecting its own citizens and
preventing criminal incursions. In that connection, it is
regrettable that for political reasons Iran's contribution
was not acknowledged in the resolution. In future,
we urge the sponsors of the resolution to maintain
an objective approach in considering the genuine
contributions of various countries, including those
along the north-western Indian Ocean coast, as well as
the international and regional organizations working to
combat maritime piracy.

