Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I appreciate the
opportunity to report to the Security Council on recent
developments in Darfur, based on the latest report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
(S/20l2/771), of 16 October. Since the report was issued
by the Secretary-General, a number of developments
have taken place in the peace process in Darfur.

Since 17 October, the Acting Joint African
Union-United Nations Special Representative and
Acting Head of UNAMID, Ms. A'ichatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane, in her capacity as Joint Chief Mediator ad
interim, has facilitated, alongside the Government of
the State of Qatar, dialogue between representatives of
the Government of the Sudan and a delegation of former
members of the Executive Council of the Justice and
Equality Movement (J EM), led by Mohammad Bashar.
On 21 October, the two parties signed a declaration
providing for an end to hostilities and a commitment to
negotiations that will lead to the signing ofan agreement
adopting the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The
start of negotiations is planned for November.

In the light of those developments, and in line
with the progress in the mediation process, the Joint
Chief Mediator ad interim and her team are currently
assessing the political and military assets of the
various non-signatory factions and movements, while
continuing to build confidence among all parties to the
conflict, in order to strengthen the inclusive nature of
the peace process.

With respect to implementation of the Doha
Document, work is continuing on the Darfur Joint
Assessment Mission that began in May, as noted in the
Secretary-General's report. To date, the technical fact-
finding mission has concluded its gathering of data on
economic recovery, development and the needs related
to poverty eradication in Darfur. Over a period of three
weeks, the teams met with the ministers of States and
civil society representatives in the capitals of the five
states of Darfur, during workshops that attracted 1,420
participants, 25 per cent of whom were women. The
results of those efforts will be presented at a donors
conference planned for December, in Doha.

(spoke in English)

Concerning the security provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, on 15 October the Joint
Commission met in Khartoum to address the long-
standing dispute between the signatory parties over
the results of the initial verification of Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) forces, which was conducted
from 5 to 9 March. As Council members are aware, the
Commission is chaired by the UNAMID acting Joint
Special Representative and includes representatives
of the signatory parties and international actors.The
meeting addressed, primarily, the disagreement of
the parties over the results of the verification of LJM
forces, and the disarmament and demobilization of
militia in Darfur by the Government of the Sudan.

With the facilitation of the Joint Commission, the
parties agreed to undertake jointly by 15 November,
with the support of UNAMID, a desk review of the
initial verification results and to verify additional
LJM. forces not included in the initial exercise due to
restrictions by the authorities. The completion of the
verification phase is required to enable progress towards
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
LJM. combatants or their integration into the Sudanese
Armed Forces.

Regarding the provisions of the Doha Document
on the disarmament of militia by the Government,
Government representatives to the Joint Commission
agreed to respond by 12 November to the UNAMID
Force Commander's request for additional information
about the Government's disarmament plan, specifically,
the identities, strengths and locations of the groups to
be disarmed. The implementation of such a plan by
the Government would be a significant contribution
towards controlling arms and reducing violence in
Darfur.

Turning now to the implementation of the Mission's
protection of civilians mandate, on 3 October a
UNAMID patrol proceeded to Hashaba, 50 kilometres
north-east of Kutum, in Northern Darfur, to verify
reports of an attack on civilians. Information collected
by the patrol and through other interlocutors indicates
that what appeared to have begun on 20 September
as a dispute over land access between nomadic camel
herders and sedentary farmers reportedly escalated
when Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi and
SLA-Unity elements apparently killed a large number
of the nomads' camels. Community sources stated
that armed militia then attacked the Hashaba area on
25 September - that is, five days later - including the
nearby gold mines, which are under the control of some
of the armed movements. The sources also reported
aerial bombing of the mining areas by the Sudanese
Armed Forces.

The UNAMID patrol of 3 October observed one
bomb crater during a survey of the town and mining
areas, as well as three decomposing bodies and
what SLA elements claimed were 16 freshly covered
graves containing civilian casualties. The SLA stated
that, apart from the town's gold miners, most of its
inhabitants had fled before the assault. Accounts of the
number of civilian casualties nevertheless range from
27 to 100.

UNAMID made several attempts between 4 and
16 October to return to Hashaba to corroborate the
information and to enhance security in the area.
Movement restrictions imposed on the grounds of
insecurity alternately by Government authorities,
armed militia and armed movements prevented the
patrols from proceeding. On other occasions, the risk
of heavy clashes between militia and armed movement
forces made it prudent to delay patrols on the grounds
of safety.

On 17 October, a UNAMID patrol en route to
Hashaba came under attack by unidentified armed
assailants approximately 20 kilometres short of its
destination. That integrated patrol, which was led
by the UNAMID Deputy Force Commander, was
comprised of a 16-Vehicle convoy, including 114
military and police personnel, plus a civilian delegation
including members from civil affairs, human rights,
political affairs, the Department of Safety and Security
and public information, with the specific purpose
of building a comprehensive assessment of the facts
around the 25 September attack on Hashaba. The
attackers, who fired heavy machine guns, mortars and
rocket propelled grenades from high ground, withdrew
as UNAMID peacekeepers returned fire. The patrol
returned to base without having reached Hashaba. As
the Council is aware, regrettably, one South African
peacekeeper was killed and three others were wounded
in the exchange. UNAMID is continuing its efforts to
access Hashaba.

This was the second fatal attack on UNAMID
peacekeepers in two weeks. On 2 October, a UNAMID
patrol was attacked by unidentified armed assailants in
El Geneina, in Western Darfur, where three Nigerian
peacekeepers were killed and eight injured. I would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate the Secretary-
General's condemnation of those responsible for
these reprehensible acts, and to call on Government
authorities to swiftly bring the perpetrators to justice.
In this regard, Government police informed UNAMID
on 9 October that they had arrested an unspecified
number of people in connection with the incident in El
Geneina. However, they are yet to provide information
to the Mission about the suspects or their relationship
to the attack.

(spoke in French)

The kidnapping of two UNAMID police officers
in Kabkibiya, in Northern Darfur, on 20 August was
another significant worry. UNAMID is working closely
with the Government of the Sudan to procure their
freedom. It is now 65 days since they were kidnapped,
and I urge the Government to spare no effort to ensure
the safe and sound return of the two officers.

Elsewhere, community sources reported clashes on
17 October between the Government and the forces of
the SLA-Minni Minawi near Abu Delek, 50 kilometres
south-east of El Fasher, in Northern Darfur. UNAMID
is currently verifying that information. I recall that this
area was the theatre of sporadic fighting throughout the
spring between elements of the Popular Defence Forces
and the armed movements. UNAMID has increased
the number of its patrols in camps and villages in
the area, and called on the parties to cease hostilities
immediately.

The security situation in Darfur, particularly
Northern Darfur, has deteriorated in recent weeks. This
has increased the risk for civilians and poses a threat to
the safety and security of Mission staff. UNAMID has
responded with concerted action to protect civilians and
by demonstrating its resolve to implement its mandate.
At the same time, improving security will require the
parties to the conflict and the armed groups to refrain
from violence and resolve their differences through
peaceful dialogue.

The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur lays the groundwork for addressing
the many causes of the conflict in Darfur and
promotes security. At the same time, 15 months after
the Document was adopted, its implementation by the
signatories has lagged considerably. Moreover, efforts
to involve the other armed movements have not yet been
successful. Progress in the Darfur Joint Assessment
Mission is appreciated, but the position of the
Government and the Liberation and Justice Movement
with respect to receiving assistance from donors to
implement their development framework would be
strengthened - and the Doha Document made more
attractive to the non-signatory movements - if the
parties were to demonstrate their full commitment to
promoting peace, security, recovery and development
in Darfur. That must include lifting the restrictions
imposed by the authorities on the operations of
UNAMID and humanitarian and development agencies.

I therefore urge the Government of the Sudan
and the Liberation and Justice Movement to clearly
demonstrate their commitment to the full and immediate
implementation of the Doha Document, and to support
the work of UNAMID and the agencies in Darfur.

