Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome you to
New York, Mr. President, and thank you very much
for being with us today, as well as for picking this
important topic, which, as I think you have heard from
all the speakers, in particular from our last speaker,
has very particular resonance for a very large number
of countries. Many thanks as well to Mr. Fedotov and
Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings, which we appreciate.

The United Kingdom welcomes this discussion. We
take this extremely seriously. We want to support the
region in being able to overcome the problems, and we
ourselves participate in various international operations
to help eradicate the problem, especially with regard to
piracy - but, of course, that is not the only problem,
as the last speaker set out. We are strong supporters of
resolution 2039 (2012). I would like to agree with what
the Chinese Ambassador said about how piracy and
maritime crime retards development. I therefore think
that it is important to recognize that it is not just crime
at sea, but it also robs people living on land. We should
keep that in mind.

I wanted to highlight as well the effect that
those crimes have on global trade with West Africa.
International trade is critical to many African
economies. Over 90 per cent of imports and exports are
conducted by sea. Safe and secure maritime transport is
therefore obviously key to successful trade and growth
in Africa, and it is fundamental to the sustainable
development of African States' economies. I just want
to highlight that.

I also want to pay tribute to the efforts of States
in the region, particularly your country, Mr. President,
Equatorial Guinea, for everything you have done
to shine a light on these issues and secure regional
cooperation. I thought that the statistics that the South
African representative gave us were very fundamental.
It was interesting to hear what a priority that is for the
Indian Ocean Rim Association.

For our part, the United Kingdom wants to
support the region and share its expertise. We and the
French have a maritime-domain-awareness-for-trade
mechanism that can alert ships and seafarers ofthe threat
from maritime crime. It can also inform those able to
respond to the threat that an incident is occurring. We
are continuing to develop with the French a website that
enables industry to access information on threats in the
Gulf of Guinea, and we hope that it will be published
soon. We are therefore trying, on a practical basis, to
help the region deal with this important problem.

We were very interested in the Yaounde Code of
Conduct and the international audit that took place
in Cameroon last month, which we understand that it
will be published soon. We await its recommendations.
We also would like to work even more closely as
international partners with States of the region to build
indigenous capability to address maritime crime. The
United Kingdom is working with Nigeria to improve
civilian capacity in the Nigerianjustice system from the
point of arrest to prosecution, so that we can increase
convictions and help create a deterrent.

The United Kingdom will continue to play a part in
supporting activity against maritime crime in the Gulf
of Guinea and around the globe. We will continue to
provide direct assistance through the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization, as well as directly support
regional partners.

A number of speakers today drew attention to the
root causes of piracy and maritime crime. That shows
what happens when peace, security and prosperity are
replaced with criminology, conflict and instability. I
therefore want to pledge again today that, as well as
focusing on the threat at sea, the United Kingdom will
continue to work with partners to tackle the land-based
root causes and ensure that development and security
policies are coherent and mutually reinforcing.

