Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswana attaches
great importance to the promotion of institution-
building, which is one of the main ingredients of the
concept of post-conflict peacebuilding. In this
connection, Sir, I wish to express my delegation's
appreciation for your initiative to hold this open debate
on the subject.

We welcome the participation earlier in the day of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban-Ki moon, in these
deliberations, as well as the presence of the Deputy
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste. Their personal
involvement in this debate demonstrates the high
importance of the subject matter. I extend the same
appreciation to the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Permanent Representative of
Germany, for his continue high level of interest and
effective stewardship of the Commission.

Botswana believes that peace, security and
stability are prerequisites for attaining higher levels of
development and quality of life. The promotion of
positive values and practices such as tolerance,
consultation, democracy, effective governance and the
rule of law are of vital importance to the rebuilding of
institutions that can drive major reconstruction in
countries emerging from conflict. Botswana therefore
wishes to emphasize the importance of supporting
institutional development as a crucial step towards the
prevention of conflict and laying the foundation for
sustainable socio-economic development, peace and
security. Botswana also believes that investing in
reconstruction and rehabilitation of physical
infrastructure, as well as in social and economic
programmes, is a vital part of post-conflict
reconstruction.

My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of ensuring that assistance given to
countries emerging from conflict is always
accompanied by the establishment of legitimate State
machinery in order to safeguard the interests and
welfare of citizens. This is the surest way of
consolidating the gains of peace, which could also go a
long way towards enabling the effective delivery of
basic services for human development, trade,
investment and security. The rebuilding of credible
judicial and law enforcement systems is also of vital
importance so that the country is properly anchored in
the rule of law, which is a necessary ingredient in the
promotion of durable peace and the prevention of
relapse into conflict.

Botswana also believes that post-conflict
peacebuilding can succeed if we put a high premium on
national ownership not only of the actual
reconstruction activities, but also in determining the
development priorities for which international
assistance is being provided, as well as control of
resource allocation.

Botswana maintains that it is important for the
international community to strike when the iron is still
hot in promoting post-conflict institution-building.
Short-term humanitarian relief should therefore be
accompanied by efforts to build facilities for schools,
water reticulation, primary health care and related
services, as well as the revitalization of key economic
sectors.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana's commitment to continuing to provide
assistance and develop partnerships, within the limits
of its capability, for the consolidation of peace and
security, particularly on the African continent.
Regional economic and social integration in Africa
cannot succeed as long as pockets of instability and
lawlessness disrupt the establishment of stable and
effective administrations.

We support the promotion of cooperation at the
bilateral, regional and international levels and among
the various United Nations entities, as well as the role
played by international financial institutions. We also
urge the United Nations, through the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission, to continue to promote
post-conflict institution building as a thematic and
programme area.

