The Secretary-General: Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for your thoughtful statement. Your presence
here today is a promising start indeed to the New Year and
welcome evidence of your country's commitment to the
United Nations.

As we open this new millennium, many of us have
much to be thankful for. Most of the world is at peace.
Most of us are better educated than our parents or
grandparents. We can expect to live longer lives, with
greater freedom and a wider range of choices. But we also
face new challenges, or old ones in new and alarming
forms. For instance, environmental degradation, ethnic
conflicts, bad or inadequate governance, widespread
violations of human rights, illiteracy and ill health, the
growing problem of inequality both within and between
nations, and, above all, the exclusion of too many of the
world's people from the benefits of globalization, whereby
nearly half the human race is condemned to remain in
lingering, stubborn poverty.
No part of the world is exempt from these problems.
But Africa, it seems, has more than its share. Of the 48
least developed countries in the world today, 33 are in
Africa. Out of two dozen or more conflicts raging around
the world, roughly half are in Africa. Fifteen sub-Saharan
African countries are currently faced with exceptional
food emergencies. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo alone, the food supplies of 10 million people are
threatened by civil strife. And out of 11 million orphans
left so far by the global AIDS epidemic, 90 per cent are
African children.

Those figures speak for themselves. They amply
justify your country's decision to make this first month of
a new era a month of Africa in the Security Council, just
as the Organization of African Unity has declared this
year the Year of Peace, Security and Solidarity in Africa.
It is good that Africans are taking the lead, because the
inspiration for genuine and viable peace must spring from
within the peoples that are in conflict, and especially from
their leaders.

Many parts of the continent are making impressive
progress. There is no need to give way to Afro-
pessimism. On the contrary, there could be no better
moment for the international community to rally to
Africa's support. And within its month of Africa, it is
entirely appropriate that the Council should be devoting
its first session to the problem of AIDS. Some may say
that such a topic should be left to other United Nations
bodies. I believe, however, that the Council would not do
itself justice if it held a month of Africa without
discussing what Ambassador Holbrooke has called the
number one problem facing Africa today.

Not that AIDS is a purely African problem. There
are many countries outside Africa, especially in Asia and
Eastern Europe, where it is spreading at an alarming rate.
But nowhere else has AIDS yet become a threat to
economic, social and political stability on the scale that it
now is in southern and eastern Africa. The impact of
AIDS in that region is no less destructive than that of
warfare itself. Indeed, by some measures it is far worse.

 

Last year, AIDS killed about 10 times more people in
Africa than did armed conflict.

By overwhelming the continent's health services, by
creating millions of orphans and by decimating health
workers and teachers, AIDS is causing social and economic
crises, which in turn threaten political stability. It also
threatens good governance through high death rates among
the elites, both public and private.
In already unstable societies, this cocktail of disasters
is a sure recipe for more conflict, and conflict in turn
provides fertile ground for further infections. The
breakdown of health and education services, the obstruction
of humanitarian assistance, the displacement of whole
populations: all these ensure that the epidemic spreads
further and faster on the continent.

In short, HIV/AIDS is not only an African problem. It
is global and must be recognized as such. But within that
international obligation the fight against AIDS in Africa is
an immediate priority which must be part and parcel of our
work for peace and security in that continent.

As most African Governments have now understood,
the first battle to be won in the war against AIDS is the
battle to smash the wall of silence and stigma surrounding
it.

A month ago, here at United Nations Headquarters, we
held the first high-level meeting of African Governments
and United Nations agencies directly involved in the fight
against AIDS, along with donor Governments, private
corporations and non-governmental organizations. I called
on them to formulate, by next May, a response
commensurate with the scale of the crisis, and I spelled out
the specific responsibility of each partner in the struggle.

It now gives me great pleasure to welcome this
Council as an additional partner. Its role, I suggest, must be
to prevent conflict from contributing to the spread of AIDS
and from impeding the efforts that other partners are
making to control it.

Later in this meeting the Council will be hearing more
about the economic and social as well as the more strictly
health-related aspects of the epidemic from my colleagues
Mr. Jim Wolfensohn, Mr. Malloch Brown and Peter Piot.
I believe their contributions - alongside your own,
Mr. President, and those of other Members - will help
make it clear to the whole world that the United Nations
system, in all its parts, is giving Africa's problems the
attention they need and which Africans deserve.

