Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for responding to our request to convene
this meeting. I congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also thank the representative of China for his efforts in
leading the Council during the month of February.

The Israeli occupation has committed another
crime, which can be added to the record of its heinous
crimes against innocent, unarmed Palestinian
civilians - barbaric crimes, committed
indiscriminately. Yesterday morning, the Israeli
terrorist war machine assassinated Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin and a number of his colleagues. The murder of
this paralysed, defenceless, elderly man is yet further
evidence that the Government of Mr. Sharon is
experiencing a moral crisis that daily prompts it to
deliberately violate the most basic human rights and to
completely disregard human dignity in a way that is
utterly unprecedented in the international community.

My country, as it denounces this atrocious crime
and the other crimes being committed daily against the
Palestinian people, holds Sharon's Government
responsible for the consequences of those crimes and
the genocide being carried out against the Palestinian
people. It calls upon the international community to
shoulder its legal and moral responsibility to put an end
to the atrocious crimes to which the Palestinian people
are being subjected.

The Israelis' announcement that their Prime
Minister personally and directly supervised the
assassination and the fact that he congratulated the
military establishment on having successfully carried
out that terrorist operation is yet more evidence of the
nature of the Israeli Government and of its Prime
Minister, because it reveals their intransigence and
pride in perpetrating acts of terrorism and
assassination. However, that is to be expected from
Sharon, who has been responsible for past massacres
committed in Sabra and Shatila.

It is now clear to the entire international
community that Israel does not want peace and is
taking advantage of every opportunity to abort any
initiative in that regard. It has obstinately and
consistently refused to implement any of the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, the most
recent of which was resolution 1515 (2003), adopted
on 19 November 2003, which contained the
quadripartite initiative of the road map, whose ultimate
aim was to provide a solution to the Palestinian
problem. Israel is trying to exploit the circumstances
that have prevailed since the events of 11 September
2001. It has been trying to link terrorism with the
struggle of the Palestinian people, who are actually
defending their land against the Israeli occupation and
exercising the right guaranteed by all international laws
and charters.

If Israel truly wishes to live in peace, all it needs
to do is to withdraw from the occupied Palestinian and
other Arab territories and to put an end to the atrocious
practices being carried out against the Palestinian
people. Continuing the occupation, strengthening its
grip on the Palestinian people, establishing settlements,
annexing Palestinian lands by force and building a
separation wall will never bring peace to Israel,
because the Palestinian people will not accept this fait
accompli and will forge ahead with their struggle to
obtain their legitimate rights and to establish their
national homeland with its capital in Jerusalem. If that
does not happen, Israel will be held fully responsible
for continuing the cycle of violence and instability, not
only in the occupied territories, but also in the rest of
the Middle East and perhaps in other parts of the
world.

My country calls upon the Security Council to
fully shoulder its responsibilities and to take the
measures necessary to force Israel to implement the
relevant international resolutions and to return to
negotiations with the Palestinian Authority and the
other Arab parties concerned in order to find a just
solution that will guarantee the rights of those parties
and will return peace and stability to this explosive part
of the world.

My country supports the draft resolution
submitted by the Arab Group. We call upon all
members to adopt it so that we can avoid a repetition of
such criminal acts, break the cycle of violence and
counter-violence, enable wisdom to prevail and resume
negotiations to reach a just and comprehensive solution
to this issue.

