Ms. Ba-N'Daw (spoke in French): I am grateful
for this opportunity to present the results of our work
to the Member States of the United Nations.

The mandate entrusted to us by the Security
Council had three main points: to consider the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; to
research and analyse the links between the exploitation
of resources and the continuation of the conflict; and to
make recommendations to the Security Council. The
results of our work are presented in the order
recommended in our mandate.

First is the illegal exploitation of resources and
other forms of wealth. The Rwandan and Ugandan
armies, and to a lesser extent the Burundi army, have
been engaging in massive looting of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
since 1998. This exploitation has benefited from
existing structures that date back to the war of August
1998. This exploitation takes two forms: mass-scale
looting and the systematic and systemic exploitation of
resources.

The mass-scale looting has consisted mainly of
the extraction, removal and confiscation of natural
resources, which are amassed or placed in reserve by
private individuals, companies or other groups.
Military and civilian officials of these two countries, as
well as the rebel leaders, have profited directly in most
cases.

The systematic and systemic exploitation has
required good organization and appropriate
infrastructure. In the case of Uganda, General Kazini
has set up networks and circuits with individuals he
controls. In the case of Rwanda, the organization is
more sophisticated and involves various levels. In
short, an entire system has been set up by the
authorities of certain countries with a view to greater
efficiency in the exploitation of the natural resources of
the Congo.

As regards the Government, although we cannot
speak of the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
the Panel has nonetheless identified some rather
surprising practices by which the Government of the
late President took some of the profits of parastatal
entities or granted concessions to the companies of
associates, in violation of certain procedures.

On the first point of the mandate, the Panel
concludes that certain Congolese and the Ugandan and
Rwandan armies are engaging in the exploitation of
natural resources and have set up structures to facilitate
this exploitation. That exploitation involves coltan,
gold, diamonds, timber, ivory, coffee and fiscal
resources.

The links between the exploitation of resources
and the continuation of the war are found at three
levels: at the level of personal gains of high-ranking
military and civilian officials, who benefit either from
direct financial gains or from getting important
contracts for their companies; in the field, because
there is more fighting between the regular armies of
non-invited States and the Mai-Mai and other negative
forces in the mining areas than at the official front,
where they have to deal with the Congolese Armed
Forces (FAC) and its allies; and at the level of
financing the conflict, because of the gap between the
military expenditures of the various armies and the
level of the defence budget of the various countries.

The conflict is financed in four ways, all of which
are linked to the exploitation of resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The regular armies are financed from the public
coffers. The problem often is how to meet the
shortfalls. In some cases, it is the public coffers that
provide that role. However, the public coffers often
benefit from a trickle-down effect of the re-exportation
economy based for the most part on the exploitation of
the resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There is also financing from secret funds, as well
as free financing, which allows the armies stationed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to receive funds
directly or indirectly from local companies or
individuals involved in the exploitation of natural
resources.

There is also financing through barter, in which
the authorities in control of a given area grant a mining
or other concession to one enterprise, which provides
military equipment in exchange.

The recommendations are essentially of six kinds.
However, the Panel stresses only four for the sake of
presentation: sanctions against countries and entities
illegally exploiting the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; preventive
measures with a view to avoiding the situation's
recurrence; compensation for those suffering the illegal
exploitation of their natural resources; and the
establishment of a framework for the reconstruction of
the occupied areas.
The Panel thanks all those who supported it in its
work. This is also an excellent opportunity for us to
thank in particular the Government of Uganda, which
provided all the information we asked for.

The Panel had a difficult and very delicate
mission that had to be carried out and completed in
extremely adverse and hazardous circumstances in a
sensitive region where the susceptibilities and
ambitions of the belligerents have reduced the life of
the local populations to insecurity and uncertainty. Life
in the region today hangs in the balance. We are
grateful to God for our safety and that of the many
witnesses with whom we spoke, as well as and
especially that of ordinary Congolese.

