Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, I
have the honour to brief the members of the Council
on developments in the Committee since my previous
briefing in this Chamber in May (see S/PV.8249).

I intend to first focus on the Visit that I made to
South Sudan and the region in June. Secondly, I will
elaborate on the recommendations set out in the interim
report of the Panel of Experts, which was submitted
to the Committee on 2 November and published as a
document of the Security Council on 26 November
(S/2018/1049). The Committee had an opportunity
to engage with the Coordinator of the Panel on its
findings and recommendations on 15 November, and
subsequently to consider various follow-up actions in
an effort aimed at improving the implementation and
effectiveness of the regime. Thirdly, I will provide a
brief overview of the developments in the Committee
since my briefing in May.

From 16 to 26 June, I had the opportunity to visit
South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda and Kenya, in that
order. The objective of my visit was threefold: first, to
obtain a first-hand account of the implementation of the
sanctions measures; secondly, to provide information
for the Council's review of the mandate, pursuant to
paragraph 2 of resolution 2353 (2017): and, thirdly,
to strengthen dialogue and engagement with the
States concerned regarding the implementation of the
measures, including any needs for assistance. The Visit
coincided with the review period set out in resolution
2418 (2018) and preceded the imposition of the arms
embargo on 13 July, through the adoption of resolution
2428 (2018). My visit also preceded the adoption by the
parties of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan,
concluded on 12 September.

Before turning to the Committee's actions taken
in response to the observations made during my visit,
I would like to highlight the key issues observed and
raised during the visit.

First, with regard to the humanitarian and human
rights situation in South Sudan, I personally observed
the pressing need for us all to continue our efforts
to find a resolution to the crisis in the country. I am
particularly concerned about the environment in which
South Sudan's next generation is growing up and the
effect of the acts of sexual violence on the victims and
their communities. I acknowledge and support the calls
by community leaders for accountability in that regard.

I further wish to recall the press statement of
7 December (SC/13611), in which members condemned
in the strongest terms the brutal incidents of sexual and
gender-based Violence against women near Bentiu in
northern South Sudan in recent weeks. Members also
underlined the Council's request for the Government of
South Sudan to condemn the attacks, to ensure that a
full investigation is carried out and those responsible
are held accountable, and to break the cycle of
impunity for sexual and gender-based Violence. I also
recall that the members of the Council reaffirmed
their willingness to impose targeted sanctions against
individuals or entities responsible for actions or policies
that threaten the peace, security or stability of South
Sudan including the targeting of civilians, including
women and children, through the commission of acts
of Violence, including killing, maiming, torture or rape
or other sexual violence. The Committee counts on the
Panel of Experts to present to it relevant information
in that regard. It also counts on all parties and all
Member States to ensure cooperation with the Panel, in
accordance with paragraph 21 of resolution 2428 (2018).

In connection with paragraph 22 of resolution 2428
(2018), as Chair of the Committee, I will also continue
to strengthen the Committee's cooperation with the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in order to facilitate
the sharing of information relevant to the Committee's
mandate. In relation to paragraphs 18 and 25 of the
same resolution, I will also continue to engage with
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism and the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission to allow for information
sharing.

Secondly, I am encouraged by the progress made on
the political front since my visit. I strongly hope that the
Revitalized Agreement signed on 12 September signals
the beginning of the end of the cycles of violence that
have permeated the lives of the people of South Sudan,
such that the parties honour their responsibilities in
respecting and implementing the Agreement. As noted
by many counterparts during my Visit, that struggle for
power has resulted in inconceivable suffering and must
end without any further delay.

Support from the region and the wider international
community will remain essential for the establishment
of peace and stability in the country. I am encouraged
by the common ground identified in my conversations
with senior officials in the countries neighbouring
South Sudan. I remain hopeful that the international
community will stand united in implementing the
sanctions regime as part of its overall efforts to support
the people of South Sudan in achieving peace, stability
and security.

In that regard, I intend to continue my efforts
to clarify to the leadership of South Sudan that the
sanctions regime has been put in place in support of the
political process to achieve peace. With regard to the
region, I propose to continue efforts to encourage the
regional States to keep the Committee informed of their
efforts to implement the sanctions in place, including
by submitting implementation reports on the targeted
measures of the asset freeze and the travel ban and
inspection reports in connection with the newly imposed
arms embargo, as well as by observing the procedures in
place for notifying and seeking exemption requests for
the three sanctions measures in place concerning South
Sudan. Without its full implementation, the sanctions
regime risks losing its significance and impact, and the
Committee its legitimacy, to the potential detriment of
the civilian population of South Sudan.

In an effort to further strengthen the
implementation of the sanctions regime, and in
response to the recommendations emanating from my
visit, the Committee agreed to eight different actions,
one of which was the briefing to inform the Council
of my observations during the June visit to the four
countries. The Committee also agreed to write to the
four countries, thanking them for their hospitality and
reflecting the matters discussed in connection with the
South Sudan sanctions regime. It further agreed to send
a note verbale to all Member States, reminding them of
their obligations under the expanded sanctions regime
established by resolution 2206 (2015), which was
transmitted on 23 November, and to convene a briefing
open to all Member States to allow those not members
to also engage with the Committee. It is envisaged that
that meeting will take place in January 2019.

The Committee also invited the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to brief it again this year, pursuant
to her last briefing in March last year, and to ask the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to keep the Committee
informed of relevant information, pursuant to her
last briefing in April. In reference to paragraph 22
of resolution 2428 (2018), the Committee invited the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights to
also share any relevant information with it. Lastly, in
connection with paragraph 18 of the same resolution, the
Committee invited the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to brief the Committee following
the next IGAD summit on South Sudan.

Let me now turn to the second focus of my
briefing - the interim report of the Panel of Experts
on South Sudan submitted pursuant to resolution
2428 (2018) and, more specifically, the actions taken
by the Committee in response to the findings and
recommendations of the Panel.

I will not repeat in detail the contents of the
interim report given that it was transmitted to the
members of the Council and is now available as
document S/2018/1049. Let me remind members only
that the Panel of Experts has presented its findings with
regard to the political and security situation in South
Sudan; violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law; obstruction of humanitarian and
peacekeeping missions; the illicit exploitation ofnatural
resources by armed groups or criminal networks; arms
procurement and the transfer of arms and provision of
related technical assistance in violation of resolution
2428 (2018); and the implementation of the sanctions
measures in South Sudan, which, for the first time in
such a report, include the arms embargo introduced in
July of this year, in addition to the targeted financial
and travel measures that were originally imposed by
resolution 2206 (2015) in March 2015. Based on its
findings, the Panel made five recommendations in its
interim report, consistent with the Panel's conclusion
that, in spite of the progress on the political front, the
patterns of the conflict reported to the Council earlier
have persisted, with a humanitarian crisis, violence and
instability still prevailing across most of the country.
The recommendations and subsequent Committee
actions were the following.

First, with the aim of ensuring the effective
implementation of the arms embargo introduced by
resolution 2428 (2018), the Panel recommended that the
Committee develop and make available on its website
an Implementation Assistance Notice to assist Member
States in the implementation of the arms embargo,
including by further detailing the process by which
exemptions may be sought. The Committee agreed to
revert to that recommendation upon the adoption of
updated guidelines for the conduct of its work, which
will take into account the provisions of resolution 2428
(2018).

Secondly, in order to ensure compliance with the

targeted measures in place against the eight individuals
who are currently on the sanctions list under resolution
2206 (2015) and in order to ensure their effectiveness,
the Panel recommended that the Committee issue a press
release reiterating the obligation of all Member States
to enforce the travel ban and the asset-freeze measures
on individuals designated pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) and extended by resolution 2428 (2018). The
Committee agreed in principle to that recommendation
and is currently considering a draft text of the press
release.
The Committee took note of the third and fourth
recommendations of the Panel, which were aimed at
discouraging the misappropriation and diversion of
public resources posing a risk to the peace, security and
stability of South Sudan, and at preventing the illicit
exploitation of or trade in natural resources in ways that
may destabilize South Sudan, as described in paragraph
l4(j) of resolution 2428 (2018).

In its fifth, and final, recommendation, the Panel
encouraged the Committee to urge the immediate release
of all child soldiers and recommended strengthening
coordination among all relevant agencies working on
the demobilization of child soldiers, especially during
the cantonment process described in the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. The Committee agreed to that recommendation
and, in the interest of harmonizing the work and
messaging of the Council's subsidiary organs, intends
to discuss a text upon the adoption of new conclusions
on children and armed conflict in South Sudan by
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which are currently under discussion.

Turning to the third, and final, element of my
statement today, I would like to provide a brief
overview of the Committee's work since my briefing to
the Council in May.

On 25 July, in connection with the establishment
of an arms embargo on the territory of South Sudan
pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018) and in
the absence of an arms expert on the Panel and related
reporting on the situation of arms in South Sudan at the
time, the Committee received a briefing by the United
Nations Mine Action Service.

During informal consultations held on 27 August,
the Committee discussed the report of the Chair's
visit to South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda and Kenya,
which was elaborated on earlier. On 14 September, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution 2428 (2018)
in connection with the Panel's work programme.

On 24 October, the Committee received a briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Again, the chilling
facts presented to the Committee on that occasion,
including the finding that the number of victims of
sexual and gender-based crimes recorded in 2018 at
that time constituted the highest number recorded in
the past three years, underscore the imminent need
for the Government of South Sudan to act now, put an
end to those brutal crimes and hold accountable those
responsible for crimes committed as soon as possible.

On 15 November, the Committee heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of
Experts on the Panel's interim report and discussed the
recommendations contained therein, which was also
earlier elaborated on.

Lastly, I wish to acknowledge and welcome the
increased engagement by countries in the region in
contacting the Committee to seek clarification on the
measures and related exemption procedures. Since
my previous briefing, the Committee received, for
the first time, two exemption requests from Member
States for travel by designated individuals, both of
which were approved. Information supporting one such
request allowed the Committee to update information
in the sanctions list under resolution 2206 (2015) on
21 November, thereby facilitating the implementation
by Member States of the targeted measures on the
sanctioned individual Gabriel Jok Riak Makol.

Looking ahead, apart from the regular Committee
meetings, it is my intention to continue convening
informal informals for interested members of the
Committee at the Permanent Mission of Poland.
Also, other than the usual work of the Committee, I
aim to return to South Sudan in 2019, and possibly
to neighbouring countries, on which occasion I truly
hope to see some progress in the daily lives, safety and
security of South Sudan's people, as a reflection of the
high-level progress made on the political front.

