Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari for his
valuable briefing.

The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of the
most long-standing, dangerous and fragile issues on the
agenda ofthe Security Council. Only two years ago, we
followed with great concern the heightened tensions on
the Korean peninsula and the risk ofa military escalation
in the region following nuclear tests and ballistic
missile launches by North Korea in clear violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. However, the
initiative of the United States and countries of the
region in choosing a path of direct dialogue has borne
out and led to the convening of presidential summits
and subsequent agreements, which were endorsed
by the State of Kuwait and the entire international
community. Those agreements contributed to defusing
the military confrontation and reducing tension on the
Korean peninsula in order to reach the desired goal of
the denuclearization of the region in a verifiable and
irreversible manner and to achieve comprehensive and
lasting peace between the two Koreas.

It is also important to underline that those diplomatic
initiatives coincided with a series of international
resolutions adopted by the Council. The cohesion and
unity of the Council have played a leading role in
condemning all North Korea's illicit programmes, be
they related to nuclear or ballistic missiles. It is of the
utmost importance for the Council to remain united,
firm and resolute towards the full implementation of all
its relevant resolutions, while taking into account the
humanitarian situation and ensuring that humanitarian
aid provided by the relevant international agencies
reaches those who need it.

Despite the optimistic climate over the past
year, such optimism has rapidly started to dissipate,
threatening to overturn any progress on the Korean
peninsula. We have begun to see talks grind to a halt
and a return to ballistic missile launches, accompanied
most recently by inflammatory statements, including
threats of conducting further provocative missile attacks
that would jeopardize regional and international peace
and security. Those threats led us to hold a number of
closed meetings and to convene today's to consider
how to deal with the current situation on the Korean
peninsula.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait believes that
dialogue is the best way to address this issue. We
call on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
return to the negotiating table to resume direct talks
with a view to reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis
surrounding the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea and establishing sustainable
peace on the Korean peninsula. At the same time, we
stress the need for the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to fully comply with all its international
obligations in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It must also dispose of its nuclear
weapons, abandon its illicit programmes and return to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as a non-nuclear-weapon State.

