Mr. Kastrup (Germany): The Swedish
Ambassador has spoken on behalf of the European
Union. My country fully supports that statement, but
we would like to offer some additional remarks.

It is regrettable that the Security Council still has
to discuss the sanctions regime on Iraq more than 10
years after the end of the Gulf War. My country is
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Iraq, and
we are, like many other Member States, determined to
improve that situation. We want to emphasize,
however - and I say this in the presence of the
representative of the Iraqi Government -that it
remains the responsibility of the Government of Iraq
alone to improve the situation of its population. For
Germany, it goes without saying that the best solution
would be the lifting of sanctions, but, of course, only
after full compliance by the Government of Iraq with
all relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
the obligations contained in resolutions 687 (1991) and
1284 (1999). Unfortunately, we are still far away from
this best solution. In this context, we have taken note
of the new Russian draft resolution. We have strong
doubts that it will contribute to the urgently needed
consensus.

The call for the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999)
remains valid. These resolutions define the obligations
of Iraq in the areas of weapons of mass destruction and
describe, at the same time, the way to the suspension
and lifting of the sanctions. The failure of the
Government of Iraq to fulfil its obligations, most
significantly visible through the continued denial of
cooperation with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, prevents until
this day, unfortunately, the lifting of sanctions.

The difficult humanitarian situation in Iraq has
been giving the international community reasons for
concern practically throughout the existing sanctions
regime against Iraq. The Security Council has
repeatedly reacted to this situation, particularly through
the inception of the oil-for-food programme and its
subsequent changes and additions. It should be recalled
that this programme was never intended to meet all the
needs of the Iraqi population, but it is supposed to
provide sufficient basic requirements. We would like to
recall the repeated concern raised by the Secretary-
General that Iraq is not using the already existing
mechanisms to their full potential. As this
responsibility lies solely with the Iraqi Government,
the international community has only limited influence.

Nobody in Germany wants to see the Iraqi
population suffer unnecessarily, but as long as the
Government of Iraq does not comply with its
international obligations, the question will not be
whether to lift sanctions or not. The question will be
how to improve the sanctions regime by making
sanctions more targeted towards achievement of the
objectives, by making them more efficient and by
limiting their negative effects on the population of Iraq.
We therefore welcome the ongoing discussions. We
believe that a more transparent, practicable and
targeted system could be created by improving the flow
of commodities and products to Iraq, and at the same
time, by creating more effective controls to prevent
circumvention. This would lead to an environment that
is conducive to the improvement of the humanitarian
situation of the people.

Such a new approach should allow for potentially
growing civilian trade, including projects for
infrastructure. In this context, the so-called Goods
Review List is of paramount importance. Those goods
and items have to be defined that will prevent the re-
building of the military capabilities and capacities of
Iraq and prevent the import of dual-use goods. In
shaping this list, work should be undertaken in a target-
oriented approach, making the list transparent, concise
and, thus, implementable. Furthermore, we expect that
these new arrangements will, by clearly defining the
goods and items on the Goods Review List, alleviate
the problems that have led to the large number of
applications being put on hold by the sanctions
committee.

The Security Council has a responsibility to
develop a new strategy in a coherent and transparent
manner. We welcome the fact that, after long-standing
debate on civilian passage and cargo flights, the
opportunity for a solution exists. These flights should
be made possible through an easily implementable
system that would allow for practical solutions,
including the necessary inspections.

We encourage the Security Council to work
towards a concrete solution that will benefit the Iraqi
people, while ensuring the compliance and cooperation
of the Iraqi Government. This solution should also take
into account the admittedly extremely difficult
situation of neighbouring States. We recall, in that
context, Security Council resolution 1352 (2001),
which confirmed the agreement among the members of
the Security Council to work on new arrangements for
Iraq, allowing 30 days to conclude these measures. We
all know that the 30 days are about to expire in just a
couple of days, but it seems much work still has to be
done. In the interest of the Iraqi people and in the
interest of the international community, the Security
Council should meet this target.

