Prince Al-Faisal (Saudi Arabia): I wish to thank
the Security Council for granting us this opportunity to
meet and discuss an urgent and significant matter that
is affecting the credibility of the peace process in the
Middle East as well as the universal application of
international law.

All the members of the League of Arab States
have requested this urgent meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the problem of the continued Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, for it is the one issue that threatens to bring
down the whole peace process. Our sincere hope is that
the meeting will further the purposes of the United
Nations with respect to upholding the principles of
international law and that it will help to save from
failure the Annapolis peace process and the ongoing
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.
08-52327
Needless to say, the Arab-Israeli conflict
continues to overshadow and dominate all other issues
in the Middle East. No regional crisis has greater
potential to affect world peace than that conflict. The
absence of good faith and the intransigence on the part
of the Israeli Government compound the problem.
Instead of pursuing an honest quest for peace, Israel
continues to take more and more of the Palestinian
territories, persisting in the daily humiliation of the
population and building illegal settlements and walls so
as to unilaterally create new facts on the ground.

Israeli settlements, which are changing the
geographic and demographic composition of the
occupied Palestinian territories, are clearly in direct
violation of the principles of international law, of all
relevant United Nations resolutions and of obligations
under the Road Map and the Annapolis process.

Israeli settlements surround most of the major
Palestinian population centres in the West Bank and
control more than half of its water resources. In East
Jerusalem, excavation and construction continue
unabated. In short, those Israeli settlements make it
virtually impossible to envision the establishment of a
viable Palestinian State in the future. They make it
extremely difficult for any Palestinian Government to
function effectively, or to convince Palestinians of the
feasibility of peace.

It is immoral to apply sanctions on occupied
people while the occupier continues its settlement
activities with impunity. We are not asking for anything
that was not promised by the Israelis themselves at
Annapolis. Since such illegal Israeli practices pre-empt
the current negotiations and render them meaningless,
Israel should, at a minimum, cease all settlement
activities, including the issuance of permits.

All Arab Governments, including the present
Palestinian Government, have proposed a collective
offer to end the conflict with Israel and enter into a
peace agreement that provides security, recognition and
normal relations for all States of the region. These are
extremely serious powerful pledges by all Arab States
which should not be ignored. They reflect the strategic
choice of peace opted for by the Arab countries.

The only path to true Israeli security is peace. We
have to question Israel's refusal to offer meaningful
peace initiatives. Its obfuscation and reliance on
unilateral measures will never lead to peace. It is time
for Israel to understand that it cannot continue to
08-52327
exempt itself from complying with international
standards of behaviour based on international law.

What we are requesting here is very simple, yet
very important. Most of us gathered here, including the
permanent members of the Security Council, have
made unilateral declarations against continued Israeli
settlement activities. What is needed is to take a united
stand that clearly reflects this existing consensus.

Time is of the essence. The moment for serious
action is upon us. Stagnation in the peace process has
increased the appeal of extremist ideologies. Feelings
of despair and frustration have reached a dangerously
high level. The growing perception in the Arab and
Muslim world that there is a lack of seriousness on the
part of the international community on this matter must
be addressed.

In this meeting we have not asked for any action
such as a resolution or statement. However, we request
that this meeting remains open until an appropriate
conclusion is reached during the remainder of this
United Nations session. If not, we shall come back to
this Council and ask it to shoulder its responsibility.

