Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to express my
delegation's sincere thanks to Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing.

In the context of its consideration of the tragic
plight of civilians trapped in armed conflict, the
Security Council has worked assiduously to counter
such gross violations as genocide, war crimes and
ethnic cleansing, as well as sexual exploitation and
abuse. Indeed, the adoption of resolutions 1265 (1999),
1296 (2000) and 1674 (2006) demonstrates the
Council's determination to take appropriate measures
to combat this menace.

It has generally been recognized, and rightly so,
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict rests with their
Governments. According to the tenets of international
humanitarian law and to the resolutions of the Security
Council, that responsibility has also been extended to
non-State actors, especially belligerent groups involved
in conflicts.

Despite the Security Council's commitment to
this cause, the incidence of gross violations of the
fundamental rights of civilians in armed conflict has
not abated, as evidenced by the atrocities they continue
to suffer. Regrettably, the majority of the victims are
women and children, whose contributions to nation-
building are crucial. Invariably, they suffer the worst
consequences of such inhumane actions, particularly
sexual exploitation and abuse, forced recruitment into
armed groups, displacement from their homes and
separation from their families, as has been the case in
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and Somalia.

It is against this background that my delegation
considers this debate as timely and opportune, since, in
our view, it facilitates the Security Council's
formulation of more concrete, realistic and achievable
measures aimed at realizing the underlying objectives
that informed the adoption of its various resolutions on
this issue. We need hardly remind ourselves that the
Security Council's efforts should be measured not by
eloquent statements and declarations, but by the extent
to which its actions address effectively Violations of
international humanitarian law and of the human rights
of victims in armed conflict.

The fundamental question, therefore, is how to
ensure that both Governments and armed groups
uphold the provisions enshrined in international
humanitarian law in respect of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Based on my Government's
firm conviction of the importance of human rights, we
hold the View that, in the event of failure by
Governments and armed groups to abide by their
commitments under international humanitarian law,
conventions and agreements, it behoves the United
Nations to intervene and protect innocent populations
against such crimes as genocide, ethnic cleansing and
other gross human rights Violations.

In that connection, we welcome the recent
measures taken by the Security Council to strengthen
the role of the United Nations to that end, as witnessed
during the operation of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. Such robust measures clearly demonstrate to
other belligerents the resolve of the United Nations to
prevent them from engaging in nefarious activities and
undoubtedly deter infringement of civilian rights in
conflict areas.
12

With the support of the international community,
the International Criminal Court could contribute
immensely towards containing and combating crimes
against innocent populations in conflict areas. Indicted
persons seeking sanctuary in various countries must be
apprehended and handed over to the International
Criminal Court for prosecution. The arrest and handing
over of the former Liberian leader, Charles Taylor, to
the Special Court of Sierra Leone is worthy of
emulation.

Given the pivotal role of the United Nations in
the provision of humanitarian assistance to internally
displaced persons and other victims of war whose
predicament is intolerable and dehumanizing, the
Security Council should consider strengthening the
role of United Nations peacekeepers to enable them to
discharge their cardinal and onerous responsibility to
ensure that humanitarian agencies provide the requisite
assistance and services in a safe and secure
environment.

Our common objective to combat such
reprehensible acts by callous and unprincipled persons
will remain elusive unless we strive to attain the
universality of all relevant international legal
instruments relating to humanitarian law, particularly
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their protocols.
Undoubtedly, the United Nations has, since its
establishment almost 61 years ago, been regarded as a
beacon of hope for the unfortunate victims of war, and
it should be seen to be discharging, in a consistent
manner, its duties in this regard if we are to abide by
our commitments under the Charter.

