Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding. We hope that the discussions
today will help to further strengthen the United Nations
support to countries emerging from conflict. We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/746)
and for his briefing this morning. We also express
appreciation to the Peacebuilding Support Office for its
able work. Brazil is grateful to Ambassador Abulkalam
Abdul Momen for his statement and for his leadership as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Brazil has been an early and active supporter ofthe
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. As Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration
and member of the organizational committee of the
PBC, we have striven to advance the notion that post-
conflict settings require a comprehensive approach that
takes into account the linkages between security and
development as fundamental elements for achieving
sustainable peace. It is our firm beliefthat peacebuilding
is an essential tool with which to bridge the existing
gaps between those two dimensions and to effectively
address the root causes of conflict.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General
that national ownership must be a cornerstone of
peacebuilding processes. Peacebuilding activities should
be designed in accordance with national strategies and
priorities and should strengthen local institutions. In
this regard, the nurturing of national capacities and the
restoration of core Government functions, including in
the field ofbasic services, should be a key component of
our efforts. As the report highlights, it is essential that
the United Nations entities develop a comprehensive
approach to institution-building and that missions and
country teams establish effective partnerships in this
area.

The contribution of women to peacebuilding efforts
must also be continuously emphasized. Women are often
the leading actors in shaping reconciliation, preventing
conflicts and bolstering economic revitalization.
We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
additional efforts to increase their role in the fields of
governance and economic recovery are needed.

We commend the emphasis placed in the report on
the need to deepen the interaction between the PBC
and other United Nations bodies, such as the Security
Council. It is our hope that the Council will build on
the discussions held during the interactive dialogue last
July. Enhancing the relationship between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission is essential. A
dialogue between the Council and the country-specific
configurations - on a regular basis and in the context
of mandate renewals - could be a useful tool for that
purpose.
Furthermore, the United Nations peacebuilding
actors must continue to reach out to other institutions
outside the United Nations system and work to ensure
that the support of all actors is coordinated, coherent
and aligned behind national priorities. Brazil is
particularly pleased to note the growing interaction
with the international financial institutions and the
efforts being made by the PBC to foster dialogue with
regional and subregional organizations.

The idea of mutual accountability, as outlined in
the report, should be seen as the joint identification
of strategic objectives and priority actions by post-
conflict countries and the international community.
Besides, it is crucial that the international community
understand the realities of the affected countries and
therefore develop, as recommended by the report, a
more risk-tolerant perspective.

May I once more reiterate that the Brazil will
continue to engage in providing assistance to countries
emerging from conflict and work with other Member
States to make the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture ever more effective.

