Slovakia aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union and of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. We thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on the impact of armed conflict on children (S/2020/525) and for providing clear recommendations. We appreciate the briefings by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, as well as their tireless work for children. Slovakia ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, endorsed the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration as well as the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and we call on others to join us in this regard. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict this year, there is no better time to reiterate the call for its universal ratification, and we encourage those States that have not yet signed or ratified the Protocol to do so without delay. This year we also celebrate fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict, establishing the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict. The monitoring and reporting mechanism, together with the Secretary-General's annual report and the annex thereto, has been useful in deterring grave violations against children. Regrettably, numbers of grave violations committed against children are still not decreasing, and the Secretary-General's latest report highlights that they tripled in the last decade. There is still a huge lack of compliance with international humanitarian law, international human rights law and international refugee law. Criminalization and accountability are key elements to eliminate these grave violations, and Member States have to ensure them proactively at the national level as well as by deeper cooperation at the international level. Therefore, it is important that the naming of perpetrators - an important step, but only the first one - be followed by the more important step of accountability. Another worrisome trend is the growing number of children in detention, often as the result of allegations of those children being associated with armed forces or groups. These children need to be treated first and foremost as victims. All Member States should support the release and reintegration of child soldiers through demobilization, disarmament and reintegration programmes. We urge the United Nations and its Member States to develop, in collaboration with host communities, reintegration programmes that emphasize psychosocial support, education and training opportunities. In this regard, we welcome the efforts of the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Child Soldiers as well as the "Act to Protect children affected by conflict" campaign.
