Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany thanks Egypt
for convening today's important and timely debate
and fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU). The concept of sustaining peace presents
a tremendous opportunity, and we are encouraged
that it is gaining traction. Much more needs to be
done, however: we need to focus on the entire peace
continuum and adapt our instruments, including
United Nations peacekeeping, accordingly. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's preventive approach
and concur with his demand for a strategic shift. As a
complement to the EU statement, I would like to focus
on two main points.

First, the Security Council must find better ways
to promote sustainable political solutions to crises from
the outset. Drivers of conflict are multidimensional, and
so are the solutions. That implies that peace missions
alone cannot bring about peace; they can, however,
play their part in the broader context. Lessons drawn
from the past have shown that sound conflict analysis is
critically important for developing a political strategy
and for conflict resolution. While addressing structural
causes and underlying grievances we must also look
at the true drivers of entire conflict cycles, not only
at fragmented snapshots. In that context, Germany
would very much like to see the Council draw on
existing information from within the United Nations
system, namely, its field presences, its mechanisms and
procedures. Such integrated analysis would enable the
Council to better define strategic objectives for conflict
resolution and to design smart mandates in order to
more effectively use the different instruments.

Secondly, well-coordinated and sequenced
international engagement is crucial for sustaining

peace. Countries have relapsed into conflict due to
the premature withdrawal of international attention.
We have failed to recognize that the withdrawal of
peacekeeping troops cannot mark the end of engagement
by the United Nations and the international community.
Therefore, United Nations engagement, of which
peace operations are an organic part, requires detailed
planning, benchmarks and monitoring mechanisms.
What it needs is a truly integrated approach - in
thinking and structure - and adequate and flexible
resources. That has to be recognized from the outset.

Let us take the example of Mali, where the United
Nations is present with a peacekeeping force, supports
mediation, advances stabilization, promotes human
rightsandfacilitatespeacebuilding,inclosecollaboration
with regional organizations and Member States. The
peacekeeping mission in the country - the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) - is charged with
activities contributing towards longer-term sustaining
peace objectives, not just fulfilling necessary and
immediate security needs. Germany supports such
an integrated, holistic approach and has aligned its
engagement in Mali accordingly: German troops and
police serve in MINUSMA and German police are
active in the European Union Training Mission, laying
the groundwork for Malian troops to be able to reassume
full responsibility for security. Our national stabilization
measures, including civilian measures, amount to a
€32 million commitment and fund a wide variety of
projects. Effective United Nations coordination in all
areas that promote sustaining peace - not just with
regard to peacekeeping - including with donors and
regional and subregional organizations, such as the EU
and the Group of Five for the Sahel, remains crucial to
achieving our political objectives.

Making the transition from a military to a police
presence, from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
from crisis to stability requires careful attention from
the Council and the international community. After the
conclusion of peacekeeping missions in Liberia and
Haiti, for example, effective peacebuilding is now key
to a successful transition phase.

Let me note briefly that Germany is the largest
contributor to the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
and the Department of Political Affairs trust fund, and
we have made significant contributions to a host of
United Nations Development Programme stabilization
facilities in conflict settings - for example, in Iraq.

With regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
we would like to see its advisory function to the
Security Council strengthened. For the United Nations
system, coordination between the field, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, the head of
the development team and the relevant Headquarters
entities is important for ensuring that the strategic
objectives and the instruments deployed are fully
aligned. The future position and role of Resident
Coordinators should also be designed to fully support
the sustaining peace agenda.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Germany's support
for the Secretary-General's reform agenda, which
is paving the way to make the United Nations fit for
sustaining peace. As States Members of the United
Nations, we must support him in that endeavour and
play our own part in contributing to sustaining peace.
Germany certainly stands ready to do so.

