Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his comprehensive
briefing. His dynamic leadership and the presence
and effective role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) contribute to the
stabilization in Afghanistan. As we look ahead, the
United Nations is likely to play an even greater role
in consolidating the gains made in the past decade in
Afghanistan and assisting it in negotiating political and
security transitions.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/535) outlines the way forward. Earlier, Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson's visit to Afghanistan
was extremely important in assessing the overall
situation and extending United Nations help to the
people of Afghanistan in fulfiling their aspirations
towards peace, justice and development.

We are also pleased to hear Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, who has shared with us the Government of
Afghanistan's perspective and the challenges it is
facing. His remarks today are inspiring and forward-
looking. We congratulate the people of Afghanistan on
winning the South Asian Football Federation match.
We appreciate Ambassador Tanin's message to the
Council. Afghanistan and Pakistan will work towards
enhanced cooperation.

Recently, there has been renewed momentum in
Pakistan-Afghanistan relations. Shortly after assuming
office, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif sent his Adviser
on National Security and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sartaj
Aziz, to Kabul on 21 July to convey our sincere hope
of further deepening and broadening our bilateral
relations. He underscored that a peaceful, stable and
united Afghanistan was in the vital interests ofPakistan.
We also said clearly and emphatically that we had no
favourites and we would not interfere in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. President Karzai warmly
reciprocated the Prime Minister's sentiments and said
that his Government's engagement with Pakistan would
help consolidate the ties between our two countries.

President Karzai visited Pakistan in late August. On
that occasion, while sharing his vision for a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood, Prime Minister Sharif said
that the people of Pakistan and Afghanistan were bound
by unbreakable ties of kinship, faith and history. That
vision is a legacy of Prime Minister Sharif's sincere
attempts to promote peace in Afghanistan during his
first term in office, which contributed to the formation
of a broad-based Government in Afghanistan in 1992.

We are also thankful to the Secretary-General for
his positive evaluation of the discussion between Prime
Minister Sharif and President Karzai last month and his
own supportive statements during his visit to Pakistan
in mid-August.

Strong bilateral ties, especially trade and
economic partnerships, are important for our two
countries. Productive engagement between Pakistan
and Afghanistan would reinforce connectivity and
regional economic cooperation. We will continue
to work on trade, energy and communication links
through transnational initiatives. In that context,
communication, power and rail projects are extremely
important.

There is movement on other fronts, too. At the
request of the Afghan Government and the Afghan High
Peace Council, we have released another batch of seven
Taliban detainees and announced the release of Mullah
Abdul Ghani Baradar, in addition to the earlier release
of 26 other detainees. We are doing this to facilitate the
Afghan reconciliation process.

Progress in the peace process can be attained only
if all stakeholders share the goal of reconciliation. We
need to pursue that goal together, with unity of purpose.
Pakistan's military and civilian personnel have made
unprecedented sacrifices to foster peace in the region.
Those sacrifices must not go to waste. It will mean
success for all of us, when the people of Afghanistan
succeed.

It is regrettable that the initiative for dialogue
through the Taliban Office in Doha sputtered, but
we must not lose hope. Dialogue is indispensable.
The Afghan Government, Taliban and other Afghan
political forces must continue to explore ways to find a
formula for Afghan reconciliation.

We are glad to hear from the Secretary-General
that Afghan security forces have demonstrated
increased capabilities and determination in assuming
security responsibilities. Filling gaps and addressing
deficiencies, we understand, are priorities for
the Afghan Government. It is also important that
organized crime, narcotics trafficking and illicit arms
proliferation be stopped. We need more aggressive
policing surveillance ofthe border. That would help stop
the shelling across the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.
Terrorists and militants from both sides are pushing
Pakistan and Afghanistan towards escalation. We must
not allow them to manipulate the two countries.

The Secretary-General, in his visit to Pakistan last
month, called attention to the adverse consequences of
the use of armed drones. Drone strikes infringe upon
our sovereignty, violate international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law, cause
civilian casualties and are detrimental to the combined
efforts to fight terrorism. We call for the cessation of
drone strikes. Urgent and intense dialogue can help
resolve this issue.

We agree with the Secretary-General's observation
that representative institutions are the foundation of
stable transition processes. In that context, the 2014
elections will guarantee internal and international
legitimacy. While we wish the Afghan people success
in their security and political transitions, Afghanistan's
economy should not be emaciated. The international
community must not abandon Afghanistan once
again. Pledges and commitments of assistance to
Afghanistan must be honoured even as progress is
being reviewed under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Pakistan for its part, notwithstanding its
limited resources, has been extending support through
contributions, primarily to education, health and
infrastructure projects, worth $330 million. During
the visit of President Karzai, we also reiterated our
commitment to helping Afghanistan on energy and
infrastructure projects.

Our decision to extend the legal authorization of
Afghan refugees in Pakistan until 31 December 2015 is
another manifestation of our continued to commitment
to supporting our Afghan brothers and sisters in distress.
Early, honourable and voluntary return of refugees must
continue. The continued support of the United Nations
system and the international community is crucial in
that regard.

Drug money plays a major role in financing
extremism and terrorism. The Secretary-General's
report states that Afghanistan accounted for 74 per
cent of the world's illicit opium production in 2012. We
are trying to develop a regional approach to tackle that
problem. We participated in meetings of the Triangular
Initiative in Kabul last month. Pakistan organized a
regional ministerial conference on counter-narcotics
last year, attended by high-level representatives of
13 countries. We are working to establish a regional
contact group on counter-narcotics. We believe that
UNAMA should support the activities of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to counter the
menace of narcotics production and trafficking.

Pakistan's own stability and prosperity depend
on peace and security in Afghanistan. This shared
destiny drives our relationship with Kabul. We are
endeavouring to strengthen bilateral cooperation in
all spheres, including the economic, political, military
and intelligence fields. We assure the Government and
people of Afghanistan of our continued commitment to
a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. As our Afghan
brothers and sisters move towards a bright future, they
will always find us to be steadfast partners by their
side. Keeping faith in each other and a common future
remains our best hope.

