Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate Uruguay on the excellent
manner in which it has conducted the work of the
Security Council this month. Uruguay began its
mandate as a non-permanent member by presiding
over the Council and overseeing complex issues.
Now Uruguay is presiding over a meeting that is of
tremendous importance for Colombia.

On behalf of my Government, I wish to thank you,
Sir, and each of the members of the Security Council
for the unanimous adoption of resolution 2261 (2016),
which establishes a special political mission in my
country, with the specific mandate to participate, for
a period of 12 months, in the international component
of a tripartite mechanism to monitor and verify the
ceasefire and bilateral and definitive cessation of
hostilities and abandonment of arms. This decision of
the Council is a demonstration of its commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It is an opportunity for
the United Nations and the international community to
enjoy success as they are being asked for their support
in the implementation of an agreement in a conflict
that is being resolved by national stakeholders through
negotiation and dialogue.

We are facing a situation in which we have sought
and reached our own solutions. We have come to the
Security Council to ask for its support in implementing
the agreement for the abandonment of weapons and in
monitoring and verifying the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities. I would like to convey to the members of the
Council that their willingness to work with Colombia
on this matter will be essential to the success of the
process. We know that by remaining focused on our
mandate we will achieve conclusive and definitive
results for peace in Colombia.

Ever since he took office, President Juan Manuel
Santos has been convinced that, after half a century of
violence, it was possible to end the conflict in Colombia.
He therefore outlined a peace policy that would make it
possible to build a prosperous, modern and safe society
that values and benefits from the dividends of peace.
The negotiations enjoyed the valuable support of the
Governments of Cuba and Norway as guarantors, and
of Chile and Venezuela as accompanying countries.
Colombia will always be deeply grateful to them,
and exceedingly appreciative of their dedication and
commitment.

We have also had the very valuable and considerable
ongoing support of the countries of our hemisphere.
European countries have been greatly supportive
of our peace efforts and eager to assist in the post-
conflict phase. We have received a constant outpouring
of support from countries in Asia in our quest for
peace. Africa has also joined in this demonstration of
solidarity with Colombia. The Secretary-General has
supported our peace negotiations from the beginning,
sending positive messages to our country and rallying
the closest members of his team around the issue.
His Special Envoy for this stage of the negotiations
was tasked with explaining how the system works in
anticipation of a request for the creation of the special
political mission for the monitoring and verification of
the ceasefire agreement. We sincerely thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, a truly great friend of Colombia.

With regard to the work and preparation required
to bring resolution 2261 (2016) before us today, I wish
to thank the Government of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft and the diplomats
of his Mission for their willingness and their role as
penholders of the resolution. Its adoption was made
possible by the cooperation and contribution of all
the members of the Security Council. We are deeply
grateful to the members for helping us to draft a clear
and detailed resolution with a specific mandate. Such a
resolution will help to build peace in Colombia.

This specific mandate of the Security Council
will benefit all Colombians and help to build trust in
a country determined to overcome the aftermath of a
decades-long conflict that caused too much suffering
for generations. We see our future with hope and faith
in our capacity for the reconciliation that is essential to
restoring our society. The international community will
see a Colombia that will fully embrace its enormous
potential, its human capacity and its natural resources
not only to build a more just and prosperous society, but
to make an even greater contribution to development in
our America and the rest of the world.

Today, thanks to the Council, we are providing that
which the Buendia family in One Hundred Years of
Solitude - the greatest literary work of Gabriel Garcia
Marquez, the most renowned Colombian of all - never
had, that is, a second chance for Colombians here on
Earth. We will rewrite our entire history as one of life,
hope and peace.

The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.
