Mr. Ag Oumar (Mali) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT), for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General. My delegation deeply appreciates the way in
which he guided the mandate of UNMOT.

The Security Council will recall that, last 21 March,
when it considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Tajikistan contained in document
S/2000/2l4, it believed that the holding of the first
pluralist parliamentary elections would mark a major step
forward in the process of democratization and national
reconciliation. The expiration of the mandate of UNMOT
had then been announced for 15 May - that is, three
days from now.

The report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2000/387 - which is the last of the series and which
has been submitted for our consideration - reports on the
completion of the electoral process which paved the way
for peace in Tajikistan. Thus the two chambers of the
newly elected parliament held their first joint session on
27 April. The election of candidates to the 33 seats of the
National Assembly, the upper house, was held as
scheduled on 23 March, and, in accordance with the
Constitution, 25 deputies were elected by local assemblies
and 8 were appointed by the President. The Commission
on National Reconciliation was formally dissolved by
presidential decree as from 1 April.

To reach this stage, the United Nations has travelled
a long road, but, as it is said, "all's well that ends well".
However, the international community should not rest on
its laurels; the way ahead is still long and full of
obstacles. The reintegration of the opposition into the
political life of the country is a major achievement;
however, parliamentary elections, in the View of
international observers, were marred by serious
irregularities, and armed elements are continuing to
operate beyond the control of the Government, thus
contributing to a climate of insecurity. The country has
been experiencing enormous economic and social
problems. A resurgence of instability cannot be ruled out
on account of both domestic factors and the unstable
situation throughout the region.
Tajikistan is entering a new phase of its history and
needs the support of the international community more
than ever to pursue and complete the peace process and
to secure the outcome.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to establish a United Nations office which would
be entrusted with peace-building and would facilitate an
ongoing search for solutions to the problems of

 

institutional, social and economic development in a
consistent fashion, in order to strengthen peace and promote
democracy in Tajikistan.

My delegation would like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Tajikistan, who is here today,
and we would like to express our satisfaction with the
unstinting cooperation that the Tajik people and
Government provided. It allowed UNMOT to achieve its
mandate. I also note the Contact Group's support of these
efforts.

My delegation also thanks the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan, the military observers and the
men and women who participated in this Mission often
under difficult conditions.

Finally, my delegation would like to pay tribute to
those who fell in the service of peace for mankind, and we
present our condolences to their families. My delegation
will support the Russian Federation's proposed statement,
which will authorize the expiration of UNMOT's mandate.
We thank that delegation for this work.

