Mr. Lucas (Angola): By adopting resolution
1422 (2002) the Security Council addressed a very
relevant issue: the relationship between the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the
effectiveness of United Nations operations for the
maintenance and restoration of peace and security.

We praise the efforts and commitment of Member
States that contribute personnel to these operations. We
are concerned over the existence of different views
within the international community regarding the Rome
Statute and its consequences for United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

We understand the apprehension expressed by
many countries that resolution 1422 (2002) undermines
the credibility of and weakens the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, we are convinced that
serious crimes that concern the international
community should not be left unpunished and that
effective prosecution of those crimes must be ensured
by taking measures at the national level and by
enhancing international cooperation when required.

The Angolan delegation maintains that in its
scope resolution 1422 (2002) does not affect the
present and future development of international
criminal law or the ability of the United Nations to
conduct operations to restore international peace and
security. We believe that the resolution does not create
a precedent for interference by the Security Council in
the sovereign right and capacity of Member States to
prosecute repugnant crimes against humanity that are
referred to in the Rome Statute.

It is our view that the international community
must ensure that the International Criminal Court is not
undermined or weakened, that it fulfils the mandate for
which it was established, that Member States keep their
commitments to provide the needed personnel and
support to peacekeeping operations established or
authorized by the Security Council and that the review
of the resolution that the Council adopted today does
not lead to automaticity in its renewal.

By holding this open debate, the Security Council
is promoting transparency in its proceedings and
showing the importance of issues associated with
international justice for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

