President Bizimungu: I would like to express my
country's appreciation for the initiative taken by the
current presidency of the Security Council to devote some
time to and to focus on Africa's problems. Our personal
participation in this meeting is out of the conviction that
we can move away from the rhetoric to concrete actions
in our search for solutions to Africa's problems.

Exactly six years ago, in this very Chamber, and
indeed in the United Nations Secretariat, there were
numerous debates on the events that were engulfing my
country, Rwanda. Sitting in the United Nations Security
Council as a Rwandese, I cannot help but reflect on what
led to the establishment of this important body. When the
United Nations Charter was adopted in San Francisco in
1945, and when the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide was adopted in
Geneva in 1948, the spirit was, "Never again shall we let
it happen".

I will not delve into what went wrong in the United
Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, or what
went wrong in Rwanda itself. I believe the story is well
known. Indeed, there have been many versions, which led
the Secretary-General to appoint an Independent Inquiry
into the actions of the United Nations during the 1994
genocide in Rwanda. That commission of inquiry, led by
Mr. Ingvar Carlsson, recently produced its report. It is a
very important report, and it should be given special
attention for two reasons; first, its relevance to the
problem of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
second, its specifics on Rwanda and United Nations
operations since 1993.

There should be no mere mea culpa attitude to this
report, but rather a practical approach that addresses the
consequences of our inaction. I took note of the words
pronounced by our Secretary-General upon receiving the
Carlsson report. He stated,

"of all my aims as the Secretary-General, there
is none to which I feel more deeply committed
than that of enabling the United Nations never
again to fail in protecting a civilian population
from genocide or mass slaughter".

 

This is what today's debate is all about. A debate on the
situation in what has become known as the Great Lakes
region, and more particularly in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, is a debate on how we can get our act together to
prevent and punish the crime of genocide, mass murder,
war crimes and international terrorism.

When we failed to stop genocide in Rwanda, those
who committed it got away into what was then Zaire, now
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Two subsequent
United Nations investigations established that these criminal
elements were utilizing Congo territory to launch attacks
through Rwanda and the neighbours, utilizing refugee
camps and enjoying protection under international law. The
decision to end that scandal failed to raise our collective
enthusiasm. It was later established that these forces -
Ex-FARS and Interahamwe - linked up with other
negative forces, mainly from Uganda and Burundi, set up
a crime-driven network of arms supply and wrecked havoc
in our countries. Once again, there was no action on the
part of the United Nations. Two wars linked to an attempt
by our countries to protect our citizens - indeed to prevent
genocide, terrorism and war crimes - ensued.

Today we want to appeal to the United Nations to take
over that responsibility, through the mandate given to it by
our region in the terms of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
There have been numerous efforts in the past to look for
solutions at the regional and international levels. We all
recall a number of Security Council resolutions on the
matter. We also recall the summit meetings of Victoria
Falls I and II, Pretoria, Durban, Port Louis, Nairobi,
Windhoek and Dodoma. These efforts culminated in the
signing of the Lusaka Agreement for a ceasefire in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

However, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is not an
end in itself. It is meant to facilitate a process of bringing
a durable peace to the region. It is an expression on the part
of all signatories that they have the goodwill to attend to
the root causes of the present situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.

I wish to declare once more my country's commitment
to the principles of the Lusaka Agreement, as enunciated in
its article III. I wish also to state that my country has
faithfully respected the ceasefire and regrets the many
violations that have so far been committed by some of the
signatories. Fundamental to us is article II of the
Agreement, which addresses the security of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and her neighbouring countries.

We must always recognize and deliberately work for
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement in its
totality. There can be no achievement of peace and
security in the region if some of the provisions of that
Agreement are taken lightly. While it is true that the main
burden of its implementation lies with the signatories, the
role of the United Nations is equally significant. That is,
indeed, why we are here today.

What does the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement ask the
United Nations to do for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region? Here, I need to remind the
Security Council that throughout the negotiations on the
Lusaka Agreement, we engaged the United Nations in
terms of what role it could play in the implementation
process. Indeed, the United Nations representative signed
the Agreement as a witness who participated fully in the
negotiations. Our understanding is therefore that the
organs of the United Nations are in full support of the
Agreement. Article III, paragraph 11 (a), of the
Agreement states,

"The United Nations Security Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the UN Charter and in
collaboration with the OAU, shall be requested to
constitute, facilitate and deploy an appropriate
peacekeeping force in the DRC to ensure
implementation of this Agreement; and taking into
account the peculiar situation of the DRC, mandate
the peacekeeping force to track down all armed
groups in the DRC. In this respect, the UN Security
Council shall provide the requisite mandate for the
peacekeeping force."

On the security of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours, the United Nations, in
collaboration with the Organization of African Unity and
the signatories, is expected to neutralize and remove from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo all criminal forces;
neutralize and disarm armed Congolese who are
non-signatory forces and civilians; organize a national
army, as agreed by the Congolese parties to the
Agreement; and organize an orderly withdrawal of foreign
forces.

With regard to the Congolese national political
agenda, the Lusaka Agreement calls on the Congolese to
engage in negotiations which would culminate in a new
dispensation or new institutions comprising all political
forces of the country. My delegation is here to urge the
Security Council to favourably consider these requests
contained in the Lusaka Agreement. The Council has the

 

capacity, and it is the Council's responsibility to do so. All
the Council needs to do is to muster the moral authority
and courage to do it.

The very first step is obviously to ensure that the
ceasefire holds, while other mechanisms are being put in
place. We have already had many predictable ceasefire
violations. The proper deployment of the United Nations
monitors, although of paramount importance, is not a
sufficient deterrent. The commitment to this Agreement can
be tested, or, better still, reinforced, only through its
implementation. That is why we believe that plans to
deploy a peacekeeping force in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be elaborated now, and not tomorrow.

Those who closely follow military activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are also aware of air
drops of arms, munitions and other war materiel, which are
being distributed to the negative forces. The Security
Council has full responsibility to halt such activities.

The Joint Military Commission (JMC), which is a very
important organ in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, has started its work. I want to place on record
our appreciation to those countries that have contributed
financially or made pledges to the JMC budget. May I also
appeal for these pledges to be quickly made available. We,
the members of the JMC, also have the duty to ensure that
the JMC is more dynamic in fulfilling its task. Our
representatives on the Joint Military Commission have
already made recommendations on a number of issues,
including the determination of humanitarian corridors,
exchange of prisoners of war and working relations with
the International Committee of the Red Cross; mechanisms
and procedures for disengagement; mechanisms for
disarming and tracking down the perpetrators of crimes
against humanity; and a plan for the withdrawal of foreign
forces.

But these will remain a dead letter if the Security
Council's commitment and mandate remain vague. We are
pleased that, finally, all the Congolese parties have agreed
on a facilitator; former President Masire has all our
blessings.

I therefore call upon the Security Council to adopt an
enabling resolution for a comprehensive implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement. Rwanda is prepared to adopt any
measure which can expedite that implementation.

Let me conclude by reiterating the responsibility of the
United Nations to the Rwandese people. We must find a
forum in which the Carlsson report can be fully debated
and its recommendations implemented. In this regard, the
report suggests that

"The international community should support
efforts in Rwanda to rebuild the society after the
genocide, paying particular attention to the need for
reconstruction, reconciliation and respect for human
rights, and bearing in mind the different needs of
survivors, returning refugees and other groups
affected by the genocide." (S/1999/I257, annex, pp. 53-54)

It is in this spirit that my country wishes to engage
the United Nations fraternity to ensure that this report
does not gather dust on United Nations shelves like so
many others before it. I sincerely hope that our
deliberations today will inspire the Security Council to
move forward more resolutely and give our region
reasons for hope and confidence for the future.

