Mr. Matenje (Malawi): Let me begin by
commending you, Sir, for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict and thanking you for
allowing my delegation to address the Security
Council.
At the World Summit in 2005, world leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to promoting and
protecting the rights and welfare of children in armed
conflicts. They also called upon States to take effective
measures, as appropriate, to prevent the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict, contrary to
international law, by armed forces and groups, and to
prohibit and criminalize such practices.

Despite that noble call, children continue to be
kidnapped and forcibly conscripted or recruited into
service around the world as armed fighters, guards,
helpers or sex slaves. In the process, their rights are
violated with impunity. Many die and others are
displaced from their homes and communities, maimed
or disabled and let to suffer untold physical,
developmental, emotional, psychological, mental and
spiritual harm. Because armed conflict destroys State
structures that provide social services, children in
armed conflict suffer from the loss of access to basic
social services such as health care, education, water,
sanitation and nutritious food, thereby deepening
poverty. Those are issues of key importance to national
and international peace and security, requiring the
immediate, as well as long-term, collective attention of
the international community.

In that regard, my delegation observes that some
progress has been made at the international level in the
development of norms, standards and guidelines aimed
at combating the recruitment or use of children in
armed conflict and at securing the release of children
in armed conflict, supporting their reintegration into
society and affording them the greatest possible
protection from armed forces or groups. Those norms,
standards and guidelines are incorporated into a
number of instruments, for example the Paris
Principles and commitments to protect children from
recruitment or use by armed forces and armed groups,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Security
Council resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008), the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
African Child, the Cape Town Principles on child
soldiers in Africa and other international instruments.
However, more needs to be done to protect children
from the menace of armed conflicts.

In that regard, we agree with the call made by the
President of the Security Council on 12 February to
adopt a broad strategy of conflict prevention that
would address the root causes of armed conflict in a
comprehensive manner in order to enhance the
protection of children on a long-term basis, including
by promoting sustainable development, poverty
eradication, national reconciliation, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law and respect for and
protection of human rights, in particular the rights of
the child. However, that can be achieved only if the
Security Council works in full cooperation with
relevant organs of the United Nations, such as the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, that are mandated to deal with development
issues.

With regard to the rule of law, we note with
concern that most countries affected by armed conflict
lack the capacity to bring the perpetrators of armed
conflict to justice due to a lack of resources. While
national Governments have the primary responsibility
to provide effective protection and relief to children
affected by armed conflict, they need to be assisted in
strengthening their law enforcement and legal and
judicial systems in order to be responsive to the
security needs of their people. The United Nations and,
in particular, the Security Council have an important
role to play in that regard.

In addition, States that have not done so yet
should be encouraged to sign and ratify the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, and
ensure that their national legislation is aligned to the
Convention. Most importantly, the Convention and its
Optional Protocol must be fully implemented in order
to render them meaningful in the fight against the use
of children in armed conflict. That is because the
obligation to protect and assist children, both in times
of peace and in armed conflict, is a basic principle of
human rights and humanitarian law. In that regard, in
addition to engaging official State agencies, it is
critical for the international community to find
innovative ways of involving non-State armed groups
in ways that do not undermine the rule of law in
seeking lasting solutions to armed conflict around the
world.

In conclusion, Malawi appreciates the work of the
International Criminal Court, UNICEF, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to
address the use of children in armed conflict in all its
dimensions. Malawi also takes this opportunity to
encourage the Security Council to ensure that political
considerations do not override the need to protect
children from armed conflict. Malawi condemns the
use of children in armed conflict.
