Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In view of time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement. The full version will be available on Twitter.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
First of all, I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings, and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

I will make three points: the first, on security
challenges; the second, on development and governance;
and the third, on the functioning of the United Nations
in Afghanistan.

In terms of security challenges and regional
cooperation, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) (S/2015/684) describes a worrisome
increase in civilian casualties and a worsening overall
security situation. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
offers its condolences to the Afghan Government and
its people for the lives lost in the many recent attacks by
insurgent groups. We welcome the positive step of the
direct talks between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban held in Pakistan this past summer. In the long
run, lasting stability and peace is possible only through
reconciliation. We hope that the Afghan-led peace talks
can resume quickly and continue to have the required
support of the region.

The recent Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan in Kabul was an example
of fruitful regional cooperation, as is the Heart of Asia
Process. We express our appreciation for the initiative
of the Governments of Afghanistan, the United States
of America and China to organize a high-level side
event on Afghanistan's peaceful reconstruction and
regional cooperation during the upcoming week of
high-level meetings.

Secondly, with respect to development assistance
and good governance, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
is satisfied with the outcome of the recent senior
officials meeting in Kabul, in particular with the more
concrete deliverables in the self-reliance through mutual
accountability framework, such as the establishment
of prosecution units for dealing with violence against
women in all provinces, as well as the implementation
of the Afghan national action plan pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000).

Furthermore, as the report of the Secretary-General
on UNAMA highlights, the National Unity Government
has made some significant progress in furthering good
governance by improving accountability and reducing
corruption. Also, the Special Electoral Reform
Commission managed to achieve impressive results in a
short time. However, a lot still needs to be done in order

to ensure that future elections are fair, transparent and
inclusive. The Netherlands will remain Afghanistan's
partner in supporting that effort.

Thirdly, with regard to to the functioning of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, we are happy to have
received the report ofthe Tripartite Review Commission
(S/2015/713, annex), which examines the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations entities
in Afghanistan. It is an important accomplishment that
the report was compiled through good coordination
among the entities in Afghanistan, the donor countries
and, most important, the Afghan Government. The
Netherlands supports the recommendations formulated
in the report. We welcome the emphasis on having the
United Nations continue its work to strengthen its good
offices and the request to increase joint programming
among United Nations entities. That is a responsibility
that extends beyond UNAMA alone.

I would like to underline the Kingdom of the
Netherlands' continued support for the coordinating
role played by UNAMA to that effect. In particular, I
would like to compliment UNAMA on the high quality
of its work in Afghanistan in the field of human rights,
which is recognized globally as an example of best
practices for its robust methodology and constructive
engagement with all parties to the conflict, as is also
mentioned in the review. We also strongly support the
recommendation to further emphasize the normative
mandate of the United Nations in improving human
rights and the rule of law in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a long-time partner of Afghanistan. We have
contributed significantly in the fields of security,
justice and development, and we will stand by the
Afghan people in the years to come. We are currently
examining our appropriate involvement after 2017.
We will take into account the progress made by the
Government of Afghanistan, and we underline, just as
our Japanese colleague did earlier, the importance of
self-reliance. We indeed hope that self-reliance will be
achieved in this new era ofincreased Afghan ownership
and leadership. It is in that spirit of partnership focusing
on supporting peace, justice and development that we
will continue to support Afghanistan and its people.

IfI may, I would like to end on a personal note and
pay tribute to the work of Ambassador Tanin, both for
his efforts in his national capacity and in his efforts

aimed at reforming the Security Council. I wish him all
the best and have to say that I will miss him as a friend.

