Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Blanchett and Mr. Gettu for their briefings on the
situation in Myanmar.

For our part, we consistently advocate a balanced
and non-confrontational approach when discussing the
situation in this country and when looking for ways
to normalize the situation in Rakhine state, including
when dealing with the issue of refugees. We note the
orderly work being done by the country's authorities
to implement the recommendations of the Kofi Annan-
led Advisory Commission's on Rakhine state to find a
comprehensive solution to the crisis. To date, 81 of the
88 recommendations have been fulfilled.

We welcome Myanmar's repeatedly confirmed
official readiness to ensure the phased return of
all refugees and displaced persons, including from
Bangladesh. We greatly appreciate the measures
carried out in Rakhine state to establish the necessary
infrastructure to receive and accommodate future
migrants. We note the establishment, on 30 July, of an
independent commission of inquiry, which is headed by
and includes authoritative foreign representatives, such
as Rosario Manalo and Kenzo Oshima. That decision
was adopted in Naypyidaw as part of a national
initiative to guarantee reconciliation, peace, stability
and development in Rakhine state.

We are convinced that the key to resolving the issue
of refugees is bilateral cooperation between Myanmar
and Bangladesh. A legal agreement struck between both
parties and existing coordination mechanisms that will
allow them to move to practical steps to that end. We
believe that it would be counterproductive to decide to
extend the deadlines for the repatriation process, which
is being used by some external forces to put additional
pressure on Myanmar.

At this stage, we think that the priority is to
establish international assistance in order to overcome
the most serious humanitarian elements of the crisis.
In that regard, we believe that it is necessary to assist
both Bangladesh and Myanmar. Our efforts underline
the need to assist both sides equally. In 2018 and 2019,
the Russian Federation will allocate $1 million to the
two countries through the World Food Programme.

We believe that the role of the international
community should also include helping Naypyidaw
and Dhaka to implement the agreements that they have
already made. In that regard, a positive example is the
close cooperation of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme with the Government
of Myanmar on implementing the 6 June tripartite
memorandum of understanding on cooperation, as well
as the activities of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, who visited
the country in June and July this year to participate in
the Union Peace Conference. We also note the decision
of the Myanmar authorities to agree to her opening an
office in Naypyidaw.

We believe the issues in Rakhine state to be among a
number of serious challenges facing the democratically
elected authorities in Myanmar. Attempts to assign
responsibility to Naypyidaw for resolving the crisis
disregard the terrorist attacks that have exacerbated
the crisis Rakhine state and made it more difficult
to establish sustainable inter-ethnic peace in the
country and to ensure effective cooperation with the
international community.

We believe that the key to resolving the problem
in Rakhine state is to establish bilateral dialogue and
restore trust between Bangladesh and Myanmar. We
therefore welcome any contact between the two sides,
including the ministerial-level meeting in Naypyidaw
on 10 August, at which agreements were reached on
the modalities for the eventual return of refugees to
Rakhine state and for strengthening cooperation on
combating terrorism and drug trafficking.

As we have already said, we believe that the crisis
should be resolved primarily on a bilateral basis through
negotiations between Myanmar and Bangladesh. The
deep-seated problems in Rakhine are multifaceted and
complex and can be resolved only through peaceful
diplomatic and political means and by establishing
dialogue between the authorities of Naypyidaw and
Dhaka, including representatives of all ethnicities
and religions. We believe that assistance to the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving
the issues around Rakhine state should be provided in
a spirit of equality and mutual respect. We hope that all
parties will act responsibly and with restraint in order
to prevent the situation from escalating once again.

