The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

At the outset, I would like very much to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Mr. David Beasley for their respective briefings, as
well as to emphasize our full support for their efforts.
I shall focus my statement on two main topics, namely,
the political and security developments and the
humanitarian developments.

The Security Council took action to promote a
political solution based on dialogue sponsored by the
United Nations by unanimously adopting resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019), which endorsed the
Stockholm Agreement in its three dimensions - the
Hudaydah agreement, the agreement on an exchange of
prisoners and detainees, and the Taiz understandings.
However, anyone who follows the political developments
in the Yemeni crisis will realize that the process reached
a point of stalemate over the past six months, with slow
and spotty implementation of the commitments and
pledges made.

Despite the time that has elapsed, there have
not been any constructive efforts towards achieving
the objectives of the Stockholm Agreement. Taiz
continues to suffer from an imposed blockade, which
has now lasted for four years and daily illustrates for
the international community the increased suffering
of civilians in Taiz, including women and children,
while no tangible processes have been put in place
for the implementation - or even the beginning of
the implementation - of the Taiz understandings.
And, notwithstanding the agreement on an exchange
of prisoners and detainees, and despite the series of
meetings of the committee tasked with supervising the
agreement, the committee faced many challenges that
led to the slow pace in convening its meetings and the
release of all detainees, prisoners, kidnapped persons
and those who have been forcibly disappeared.

The Hudaydah agreement, which covers
humanitarian aspects based on understandings and
agreements endorsed by the Redeployment Coordination
Committee (RCC) during its many meetings, has led to
a phased implementation of the redeployment of forces
outside Hudaydah city in a manner that guarantees
the supervision and monitoring of the tripartite RCC.
We would like to emphasize that what was achieved
between 11 and 13 May with regard to the unilateral
withdrawal from the ports of Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa, as part of the first phase of implementation, must
take into consideration the pivotal role of the RCC in
a way that allows the Yemeni Government to perform
its sovereign function of overseeing the redeployment
from the city of Hudaydah.

We reiterate our belief and conviction that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
We underscore that all three aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement must be fully implemented. That is the
best way towards the resumption of another round of
negotiations focused on a comprehensive solution to
the crisis.

With regard to security developments, the State of
Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms the continued
attacks against civilian and vital facilities in the
sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the most recent
being the Houthi's targeting of the passenger lounge
at Abha International Airport, which left 26 injured,
including women and children. We extend our sincere
sympathy to the victims and to the Government of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and wish the injured a
speedy recovery. We stress our full support to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and support all measures
taken to maintain its security, stability and territorial
integrity. The continued attacks by the Houthis against
Saudi territory constitute a blatant and direct threat to
security and regional stability, as well as a reason to
operationalize the arms embargo set out in the relevant
Council resolutions. In that regard, we will work with
the members of the Council to issue a statement that
condemns that attack.
On the humanitarian situation, we stress once
again the humanitarian dimension of the Stockholm
Agreement to alleviate the suffering of the brotherly
Yemeni people, such as the opening of safe corridors
for humanitarian assistance in order to reach all those
affected and the areas most in need. The United Nations
and its relevant agencies must be allowed to reach the
Red Sea Mills, whose silos hold enough grain to feed
3.7 million people for 30 days. Since the inception of
the Stockholm Agreement, the Yemeni Government
has expressed its willingness to facilitate access to
the Red Sea Mills and open roads for humanitarian
assistance, despite the major security challenges faced
by the Government.

With respect to the dire humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which has deteriorated following the coup
against the legitimate Government, and despite the
considerable reaction from the international community
to support the humanitarian response plan - to which
the State of Kuwait pledged $250 million - we are
deeply concerned about the content of Mr. Beasley's
briefing, which pointed to serious challenges in areas
under Houthi control, leading to the hampering of
his operations on the ground, including the possible
suspension of operations in those areas. We underscore
that the Security Council must take action to put an
end to the chronic violations that impede access to
humanitarian assistance.

We commend the efforts of all humanitarian
workers and the positive role of the Government of
Yemen, which continues to pay salaries to public-
sector workers and retirees, in addition to the continued
efforts of its economic committee to facilitate the flow
of fuel into the country.

In conclusion, we call once again upon all Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on Hudaydah and its three ports, the exchange of
prisoners' agreement and the Taiz understandings.
That would allow the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to continue efforts towards reaching a political
solution, based on the three agreed terms of reference,
that is, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216
(2015). That is the means to end the crisis and safeguard
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Yemen, free from interference in its internal affairs.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

