Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore for
her briefing today and for her work in Haiti. Under her
leadership, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) continues to make a valuable
contribution to ensuring stability and progress in Haiti.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/617) and agree that Haiti has reached an
important stage in solidifying the gains made so far
towards stability and democracy. But against that
background, it is disappointing to read in the Secretary-
General's report that, once again, the political impasse
and failure to adopt the necessary amendments to the
electoral law mean that essential elections are unlikely
to happen this year. Failure to hold transparent and
inclusive elections will have serious consequences for
the provision of democracy, the rule of law and the
future of the country.

The United Kingdom therefore joins the Secretary-
General in calling for all leaders in Haiti to rise above
their differences, to consider the future stability and
security of their country above all else, and to work
together to ensure that the long-overdue elections,
which are so necessary for progress in Haiti, are held
without further unnecessary delay.

We are pleased that the security situation has
remained relatively stable, including in those parts
of the country in which MINUSTAH is no longer
present. We note the encouraging statistics cited in
her briefing today by Special Representative Honore
about the overall downward trend of most criminality.
In addition, we welcome the Special Representative's
positive assessment of the increasing professionalism of
the Haitian National Police. It is vital that the National
Police win the trust and confidence of the people. A
fully functioning, effective and well-paid National
Police force is essential to the future stability of Haiti,
and we are pleased to see that efforts to make advances
in recruitment, training and operational responsibility
continue. It is, however, of real concern that the police

are still reliant on MINUSTAH for logistical and

operational support, and that they lack the capacity and

equipment to contribute to operational patrols.

I echo the comments of the Special Representative
also in emphasizing the importance of continuing
to build up the justice sector, regionally and at the
institutional level, to complement the work of the police
and ensure that the rule of law is properly applied. In
particular, improvement in the administration of the
corrections institutions should be a priority.

The United Kingdom agrees with the Secretary-
General's assessment that, while a supportive
presence of MINUSTAH continues to be required,
the improvements in the security situation in Haiti
over the past year demonstrate that a reduction and
restructuring of troops and the handing-over oftasks to
more appropriate authorities would be a sensible step.
This assessment is based on a detailed strategic review
involving consultation with relevant stakeholders. We
share the Special Representative's confidence that
such a reconfiguration would result in an adequate
stabilization presence in Haiti.

As the Secretary-General says in his report, this
transition requires a comprehensive strategy to ensure
a joined-up approach between MINUSTAH, the United
Nations partners and, crucially, the Government of
Haiti. The Government continues to have primary
responsibility for ensuring stability and development.
The engagement of Haiti's political leaders and
stakeholders is, as the Secretary-General reports, vital
to setting the country on a path towards lasting stability
and economic development.

As the United Kingdom highlighted in its
explanation of vote following the renewal of
MINUSTAH's mandate last year (see S/PV.7040),
we remain concerned at the high number of tasks, in
particular quick-impact projects, being carried out by
the Mission, which we believe would be better managed
by other elements of the United Nations system and its
partners. We remain of the opinion that such projects
should be carried out during the initial stages of a
mission to build up public confidence and support, but
10 years into the life of a peacekeeping mission they
should not be used to mitigate the effects of a lack of
long-term development programming.

Meeting the benchmarks of MINUSTAH's
consolidation plan is crucial to enabling the Government
and people of Haiti to take over responsibility for their
own peace and security. MINUSTAH has an important
role, but it should not remain foreever, and it is incumbent
on all Haiti's political leaders and stakeholders to work
towards a future without MINUSTAH by establishing
the rule of law and preparing for elections. That is the
right way to safeguard the country's future.

