Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his presentation
and Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his remarks. We wish
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Staffan de Mistura, every success.

Since our latest debate on Afghanistan (see S/PV.6255), important steps have been taken to review
and enhance the relationship between Afghanistan and
the international community. The Istanbul and London
conferences helped translate the word "Afghanization"
into clear commitments. The months ahead of us, with
the Peace Jirga, the Kabul conference and the
September parliamentary elections, will provide an
occasion for all stakeholders to implement such
commitments.

Today, I would like to address three aspects of the
situation concerning Afghanistan and the role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA): the security situation, the political process,
including elections and reconciliation, and aid
coordination.

The fact that 2009 was the most violent year in
Afghanistan since 2001 is a matter of serious concern.
The current international military surge is taking place
in a very volatile environment, where clearing areas of
militants is not the hardest task when compared to the
daunting job of laying the foundations for long-term
stability.

Afghan civilians continue to bear the brunt of the
conflict. The vast majority of them are victims of
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and armed opposition groups.
We welcome the efforts of pro-Government forces in
2009 that led to a reduction in the number of civilian
deaths caused by such forces. We are confident that
more will be done to further reduce such casualties.

As is widely recognized, the ultimate solution to
the Afghan conflict will not be found on the battlefield,
but through a political process. The London
communique showed strong international support for
the reconciliation and reintegration policy announced
by President Karzai in his inauguration address. Such a
process must surely be led by Afghanistan. UNAMA
can play a role, if and as requested by Kabul.

Progress in national reconciliation should go
hand in hand with progress in consolidating
democracy. To that end, it is necessary to create
conditions to ensure that the difficulties during last
year's elections do not recur in the upcoming
parliamentary elections and beyond. It is natural and
desirable that the Afghan authorities progressively
should regain full leadership of the electoral and
democratic process. In so doing, they must ensure free,
fair and credible elections.

Stability also depends on the ability of the
Afghan Government, with the support of the
international community, to deliver socio-economic
development. The strategy to enhance governance and
provide development aid to liberated areas is therefore
Wise. All efforts must be made to fully implement that
strategy.

The importance of coordinating international
assistance to Afghanistan and UNAMA's role in such
coordination has been stressed time and again. Some
progress has been made in this area, but much more
remains to be done. A strong political will is needed in
donor countries to allow for their collective assistance
to be coordinated by the United Nations and the
Afghan Government. It may not be easy, but it is
indispensable, including to ensuring their effectiveness.

Just as importantly, UNAMA's mandate as the
primary coordinator of international civilian efforts in
Afghanistan should be discharged in a way that builds
the capacity of Afghan institutions and promotes social
and economic development. It is worrying in this
regard that a significant portion of the international aid
to Afghanistan has not even been brought to the
attention of the Afghan Government, let alone aligned
with the Afghan National Development Strategy. It is
also troubling that the aid remains geographically
imbalanced. If this situation persists, it may undermine
the recent progress made by the Afghan authorities to

refocus the Afghan National Development Strategy and
to improve revenue collection and economic growth.

The second half of 2009 highlighted the
outstanding challenges to building a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan. At the end of last year and the
beginning of 2010, the focus was on reorienting
strategies and expressing commitments to address
those challenges. Let us hope that the months ahead
will bring such efforts to fruition.

