Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We voted in favour of today's
resolution on Yemen (resolution 2451 (2018)), and we
strongly welcome its adoption for all the reasons that
my colleague from the United Kingdomjust mentioned.
I want to thank her and her team and all other Council
members for having worked hard in favour of
this resolution.

As stated by Foreign Minister Margot Wallstrom,
the Stockholm agreement can be the breakthrough
for peace and a turning point for the crisis in Yemen.
Today's resolution endorses the agreement, calls on the
parties to implement it, authorizes the United Nations
to support its implementation and sets out next steps
in the process. The resolution does not address all the
issues of the multifaceted crisis that Yemen faces, but
the implementation of the concrete measures in the
Stockroom agreement will provide much-needed steps
in that direction, with a direct and positive humanitarian
impact for the people of Yemen.

We commend the Yemeni parties for engaging
constructively at the United Nations-led consultations.
We welcome the tireless efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths, and we also reiterate our deep appreciation
for the personal engagement of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres.

Implementation of the key provisions of the
resolution is urgently needed and must be our primary
focus. The ceasefire announced in Hudaydah as from
18 December is the most pressing of several important
steps. As tensions remain on the ground, following
years of conflict and lack of trust between the parties,
it is important that the Security Council insists on the
full respect of the ceasefire by all parties and that the
United Nations is authorized to monitor it.

We now look forward to the swift establishment
and deployment of the advanced team to begin the
monitoring and facilitation of the implementation
of the Stockholm agreement, and we appreciate that
the Secretary-General has moved very swiftly to
ensure that the United Nations fulfils its part in this
implementation. The United Nations does have a key
role in working with the parties to ensure that the
ceasefire is upheld and that ports and roads can remain
open so that provisions can enter the country. We stand
ready to participate in the United Nations presence that
will be established in Hudaydah.

We remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian crisis and the looming threat of famine.
The measures in the Stockholm agreement will serve to
alleviate humanitarian suffering, but further measures
are urgently needed, as outlined several times to
the Security Council by Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock.

Looking ahead, we welcome the Special Envoy's
intention to convene the two sides again in January
for continued discussions on the many issues at hand,
including further confidence-building measures and the
framework for a forward-looking political process. The
parties should show the same level of commitment as
there was in Stockholm to move forward on those issues.

Swedish engagement on Yemen will continue
beyond our tenure on the Council. During our term,
we have made continued efforts to keep Yemen high
on the Council's agenda, including addressing the
humanitarian disaster. We will, for the third time,
co-host, together with Switzerland, the pledging event
for the United Nations humanitarian response plan for
Yemen, on 26 February 2019, as a further response to
the humanitarian disaster. We have also continuously
emphasized the importance of an inclusive political
process with the meaningful participation of women
and young people.

As we stated in this Chamber last Friday, the
breakthrough made by the parties in Sweden is truly
significant and it brings hope but it will be meaningful
only once it produces results for the Yemeni people (see S/PV.8424). Today's resolution is a strong manifestation
of the international community's unity and commitment
to fully back it up.

