Mr. Al-Nasser: The United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations is honoured to be a member ofthe Steering
Committee for the progress study on youth, peace and
security (see S/2018/86) mandated by resolution 2250
(2015). I commend the work of Mr. Graeme Simpson
and the Advisory Group of Experts, including the
Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth. In
preparation for that study, they turned words into deeds
through inclusive and informed consultations with
more than four thousand young people from a diverse
set of countries and regions.

Empowering youth lies at the heart of international
peace and security. The United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations has long recognized the important
and positive contribution of youth and youth-led
organizations to conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts. Allow me to use this opportunity to speak
very briefly about three of our initiatives that feed into
this vein.

First, our Young Peacebuilders programme is
a peace education programme that supports youth
leaders and their organizations in gaining skills that
enhance their positive role in peace and security issues.
It also brings visibility to projects initiated by young
people for peace and the promotion of human rights
and cultural diversity. Last year, it took place in West
Africa. This year, we implemented the programme in
the Middle East and North Africa region.

Secondly, our Youth Solidarity Fund (YSF) is
a programme that provides youth-led organizations
with seed funding and capacity-building to implement
innovative and effective projects in the context of
intercultural and interfaith dialogue. We have funded
projects in Asia, Africa and the Middle East in areas
affected by inter-ethnic tensions, conflict and violent
extremism. More than 700 applications from 79
countries were received in the 2018 application period
for the YSF.

Thirdly, through our fellowship programme, we
provide a platform for young civil society leaders from
the Middle East, Europe and North Africa to experience
immersive visits in each other's regions. The theme of
this year's programme is the role of young people in
peacebuilding and in preventing violent extremism. We
have received applications from hundreds of motivated
young people and, as in previous years, their experience
and expertise are remarkable.

Recognizing the role of new technology and digital
platforms for the dissemination of information, and as
part of our media and information literacy initiatives,
the Alliance of Civilizations has developed PEACEapp,
a series of workshops aimed at the strategic use of
applications and videogaming platforms to build
peaceful understanding among individuals from
different cultural and religious backgrounds.

The Alliance remains committed to working with
Member States, members of the Steering Committee
and all other partners and stakeholders to provide young
people with platforms and opportunities to achieve
sustainable peace and security.

