Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I feel compelled to pause on
various assertions that my Ukrainian colleague just
made in his statement. I cannot analyse his entire
statement, particularly since it is impossible to figure
out which parts of his speech are his own and which
parts are borrowed from some mystery source, the
when and where of whose proclamations are unknown.
In any case, of course, he is responsible for everything
that was said.

We will not discuss the situation in Crimea in the
Security Council, or at least not under the rubric of
the situation in Ukraine. But he made one assertion
that is simply crude provocation that I cannot ignore,
which is that the Tatar population of Crimea believes
there will be a third act in the history of genocide
against them, and so forth. That is simply nonsense,
and a crude provocation. The new Constitution that has
already been adopted in Crimea, for instance, actually
strengthens Tatar as a third official language in Crimea,
which it never was before, alongside Russian and
Ukrainian. High-level positions in Crimea's ministerial
departments have been reserved for representatives of
the Tatars, which was also not the case previously.

Moreover, the Crimean Tatars will be able to take
advantage of the fact that not only will their social,
economic and other issues be dealt with by the Russian
authorities, who are giving them the attention they need,
but that this will be done with the help of Tatarstan, one
of the strongest, most powerful and successful subjects
of the Russian Federation. An agreement between the
Russian and Tatarstan authorities to work together on
this issue is already in place. The Council therefore has
no need to worry about the fate of the Crimean Tatars.
Over the past two and a half decades since Ukraine
became independent, the Crimean Tatars have struggled
with what we in Russian call a wretched existence. That
condition will now come to an end, although it will
probably take some time.
Turning now to another topic that is not appropriate
for the Security Council, but my Ukrainian colleague
wrongly characterized what I said about the Russian
language in Ukraine. What I said was that the Russian
language is gradually being pushed out of circulation.
And that is exactly the case. The first step that
Mr. Sergeyev's new leadership took was to shut down
the Russian-language versions of all its ministerial
department websites. He cited a great many figures;
I have one. According to my information, of the 195
Russian schools that existed in Kyiv in the 19905, five
remain. In order to enter any Ukrainian university, a
candidate has to do an interview in Ukrainian. While
Ukrainian is close to Russian, it is still a language that
has to be studied separately, so Russians have to struggle
with Ukrainian in order to get through the university
entrance interview. However, this is a major subject
that deserves separate discussion and consideration,
which would include the rights of Ukrainians in Russia.
Of course, Ukrainians in Russia do not all live in a
compact area, unlike the Russians living in Ukraine.

I would now like to say a few words about the
statements made by some of my other colleagues in
the Security Council. Needless to say, many aspects of
our discussion are reminiscent of a broken record, and
indeed we have already gone over this subject a dozen
times, but some things said by my colleagues today were
genuinely startling. For example, our British colleague
said that Russia should explain its concerns. We have
made numerous statements at the highest levels. We
have explained our concerns at the level of our Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. Our United Nations delegation has
repeatedly gone into great detail in spelling out our
vision of how we - together with the Ukrainians and
those members of the international community who
are ready to do so - propose to work to help Ukraine
extricate itself from this crisis. But some people are still
sitting there, waiting for us to explain our concerns.
Maybe they are simply not listening; or perhaps they do
not want to listen. That is quite another issue.

Turning to the second aspect of this issue, it is
of course good that our concerns are listened to and
understood, but the important thing is to understand the
concerns of the people of Ukraine, and in this case to
understand the concerns of the people of south-eastern
and southern Ukraine. What has the Kyiv leadership of
Ukraine done to listen to their concerns? Mr. Yatsenyuk
visited the Donbas region. He did not even meet with
any of the protesters. He met with his friends, with
oligarchs - people whom the Kyiv leadership has
appointed to various positions. It is true that he did say
some of the right things, which later were essentially
contradicted by his colleague Mr. Turchynov, who on
the following day said that military force should be
used against the south-eastern region.

I now turn to the statement made by my respected
colleague from the United States. She said something
quite true, which is that it is not good when an opposition
takes up arms and seizes administrative buildings. It is
annoying, however, that this understanding on the part
of the United States representative has come too late.
For instance, why was it not expressed in January, when
Kyiv was in turmoil that was several degrees more
intense than what we are seeing in the cities of eastern
Ukraine. Why did the representative of the United States
not say the same things here in the United Nations, in
Washington, DC, or in its numerous talks with the
Kyiv authorities? Perhaps then this crisis would not
have occurred. Of course it is not good when citizens
take up arms, but in Kyiv, when the issue of illegal
units came up, one statistic emerged to the effect that
there were 3 million illegal firearms in Ukraine. But
when people are worried about their well-being and are
trying to defend themselves somehow, how can they not
arm themselves? That is undoubtedly understandable,
although from the point of View of lawfulness, in the
normal sense of the word, it naturally raises questions.

My French colleague brought up an excellent phrase,
"virtual reality". Indeed, I found myself thinking about
just that phrase when I was listening to the statements
of some of our colleagues. People have come to power
in Kyiv by military means. Many of them have the sort
of reputation that would make you think twice about
shaking their hands. In 2012, the European Parliament
resolved that there was no way any coalition could be
struck with them. They seem to make promises of some
sort, but they do not keep any of them. For instance,
they undertook to disarm people in Kyiv. They did not
do so. Were any objective investigations conducted
into the violence that took place in Kyiv in February,
and perhaps in the crisis that was ongoing before
that? A Prosecutor General appeared who was also
a representative of a political party and said that the
former authorities were to blame for everything. And
some of them are making promises to the outside world,
and they believe them. Are they so naive?

It is interesting that this is not the first time we
have seen this in the past few years. For some reason,
some of our Western colleagues believe that if an
armed coup - preferably an armed one - takes place,
democrats will always come to power - that Thomas
Jefferson will always take charge of the whole thing.
But where do we see anybody in Kyiv in power who
might have a serious reputation in democratic politics?
There are no such people there. Have these pseudo-
democrats done anything to ensure that something
resembling democracy will emerge even in Kyiv? In
the Verkhovna Rada there are nothing but fistfights.
Anyone who protests is forcibly ejected. Just as there
were before, there are military camps on the Maidan;
none of the far right-wingers have been disarmed. And
these democrats, having failed to establish any kind of
democracy in their stronghold in Kyiv, are now seeking
to establish democracy - or law and order, as some of
our colleagues have said - by sending armed forces
into south-eastern Ukraine. There is your virtual
reality.

A number of my colleagues have approvingly
mentioned the elections of 25 May. They are being
prepared for, and we do not know how it will all get
done, but who is worrying about that here? I have to
agree with my Ukrainian colleague - I do not recall
exactly what he said - that there must be a radical
break with the accursed past, a radical change. But now
the Ukrainian people are being asked to buy a pig in a
poke. They are being told to go and elect a president on
25 May, but the kind of power that president will wield
is completely unclear. What sort of Government will
he preside over? Will he have the greater authority or
will the Prime Minister? That was clearly the logical
path for the intended agreement of 21 February - start
out with constitutional reforms, then follow those with
presidential elections. But no, that has all been turned
on its head and some elections for deputies are being
pushed forward. Is this really democracy? Is this really
the way to a break with the past and the building of a
new democratic Ukraine?

Last of all, regarding the negotiations in
Geneva - which we hope will take place - we are
preparing diligently for them, if they are not torpedoed
by these reckless activities of forces in south-eastern
Ukraine. But how will Ukraine prepare for the
negotiations? How will our Western partners prepare for
it? That is an important question for us. It may not be a
big secret, but as some of our colleagues know, we have
tried through various formats to find a way to involve
representatives of the region. Since the authorities
themselves are incapable of launching a dialogue, we
thought it might be done through this format. But the
response to our proposal was negative. Let us see what
will come of the Geneva meeting. Of course, we would
hope that it would genuinely put Ukraine on a path
to normal development whereby every region, every
ethnic and religious group would know what to expect
tomorrow. And then at that point we will be able to
address Ukraine's economic problems. We have invited
our partners to participate in a dialogue on that subject,
including through the letter that, as we know, President
Putin sent to a number of Heads of European States.

