Mr. Mladenov: Let me begin by extending my
warmest wishes to all of our Muslim colleagues and
their families on the occasion of Bid Al-Fitr and the end
of the Holy Month of Ramadan.
In a region currently torn by religious radicalism,
age-old sectarianrivalries andgeopoliticalrealignments,
one conflict has endured for over 65 years. Some see it
as the core problem in the region; others dismiss it as
unrelated to the current turmoil. Either way, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is increasingly entangled in the
tectonic shifts of the Middle East. Given the region's
massive transformation, it is imperative - perhaps
more than ever before - that a permanent settlement
be found, based on the concept of two States, Israel
and a sovereign, contiguous and viable Palestine, living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.

Despite continuing security coordination in the
West Bank, today the two sides are further apart from
that goal than ever. Support for the two-State solution
among both Palestinians and Israelis is fading away.
The current situation on the ground is not sustainable,
as the two-State solution continues to be under threat,
including from settlement construction, security
incidents, occupation-related violence and the lack of
Palestinian unity. In the absence of a political process,
the rise of violent extremism and terrorism in the region
presents a danger as much to the legitimate aspirations
of Palestinians for statehood as to the security of Israel.

In the current environment of mistrust, we in
the international community must work with Israelis
and Palestinians alike to create the conditions on
the ground, regionally and internationally, that will
facilitate a return to meaningful negotiations on the
basis of an agreed framework and within a reasonable
time frame. Both parties must undertake steps on the
ground that demonstrate their continued commitment
to a two-State solution, including through the
implementation of existing agreements and by avoiding
unilateral actions. Advancing the two-State solution
requires a fundamental change in policy with regard to
the occupied Palestinian territory. I welcome the recent
decision by Israel to add 8,000 new work permits for
Palestinians from the West Bank, bringing the number
of permits issued for employment in Israel to a new
high of approximately 60,000. That and other similar
initiatives should be sustained and expanded, while
much more needs to be done for improving the quality
of life for Palestinians.

Unilateral actions in the West Bank - including
settlement construction, so-called legalization of
outposts, demolitions and evictions - must stop. While
settlement expansion has slowed of late, planning for
related infrastructure has not ceased. I am concerned
by recent reports about the imminent approval of new
residential units in the occupied West Bank. Such a
decision would inevitably damage the prospects for
peace and increase the risk for political escalation. Iurge
the authorities to reconsider that action. Settlements are
illegal under international law and undermine the very
essence of the viability of a future Palestinian State.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian people rightly expect
their leaders to act to advance unity and empower their
Government to take control of the border crossings
in Gaza, implement civil service integration, pay
public-sector salaries and ensure that the governance
framework between the West Bank and Gaza is
integrated under a single authority. Those efforts will
pave the way for much-delayed elections to take place.

I call on all Palestinian groups to avoid in-fighting
and find common ground on the basis of nonviolence
and reconciliation in order to achieve national unity,
which is critical for the two-State solution. The
Secretary-General stands ready to work with the
Security Council and with our partners in the Middle
East Quartet on a reinvigorated effort to create the
conditions for the return to meaningful negotiations.
In that context, I note the proposed establishment of
an international support group that could contribute
to such efforts. In the past month, as part of an active
outreach effort, Quartet envoys engaged constructively
with Egypt, Jordan and the League ofArab States. Itake
this opportunity to encourage the leadership of Israel
to endorse the Arab Peace Initiative as an important
contribution to a resolution of the conflict.

The date of 8 July marked the one-year anniversary
of the outbreak of conflict between Israel and Hamas.
Gaza's painstaking emergence from last summer's
conflict is undermining belief among the population
that genuine progress can be achieved. The activities of
Salafi jihadists and other extremist groups are a cause
for concern, not only in Gaza but also in neighbouring
Sinai, where there are reports of their active support of
militants on the Egyptian side of the border.

On 18 July, six cars were blown up in Gaza City.
Palestinian Salafist militants launched a rocket at
Israel on 16 July, which exploded in an open area near
Ashkelon. In response, Israel conducted four airstrikes
against militant infrastructure targets in Gaza.
Militants also fired a rocket from the Sinai on 3 July,
which landed in Israel close to the Egyptian border. All
of that highlights the potential for violence to expand
beyond the borders of the Sinai.
The Secretary-General calls upon all actors in Gaza
to provide information as to the possible whereabouts
and conditions oftwo Israeli civilians who entered Gaza
sometime over the past year and remain unaccounted
for, as well as to take prompt action to facilitate their
safe return to their families.

Those, and other incidents, underscore the fragile
dynamics within Gaza that, without positive change,
will continue to provide fertile ground for extremism
to flourish.

Last month, the Palestinian Authority and Israel
reached a welcome agreement on a new mechanism to
allow Palestinians in Gaza access to needed construction
material for the reconstruction of fully destroyed
homes and for new construction. Close to 700 families
have already been cleared, and over 120 of them have
purchased the required construction materials. Given
that development, I take this opportunity to once again
urge donors to fulfil their pledges, in particular those
allocated to housing construction and to addressing
Gaza's urgent energy and water needs.

I also welcome the recent agreement to install an
additional scanner for containers at the Kerem Shalom
crossing. Thiat should enable a substantial increase in
exports from, and imports into, Gaza.

The lifting of the Gaza closures within the
framework of resolution 1860 (2009) remains an
important objective for the United Nations. Absent that,
the United Nations continues to work with Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to support vital efforts to rebuild
the lives of people in Gaza.

Turning to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
while the frequency of security incidents decreased as
compared with last month, the situation remained tense.
Israeli security forces conducted some 186 search-and-
arrest operations, resulting in the arrest of some 300
Palestinians. Meanwhile, Palestinian security forces
also arrested more than 100 people in the West Bank. I
continue to be concerned by the situation of Palestinian
prisoners held in Israel, including those on hunger
strike. All those held in administrative detention should
be promptly charged and tried in a court of law, or
released without delay.

In total, during the reporting period 50 Palestinians
were injured and four were shot and killed by Israeli
security forces, including two at checkpoints near
Nablus and Ramallah. Two members of the Israeli
security forces were stabbed and injured, one seriously.
Clashes between Palestinians and Israeli civilians in the
West Bank also continued, resulting in the death of one
Israeli and injury to eight Israelis and nine Palestinians,
including one child.

Just as such incidents contribute to the lack of hope
and anger, which feed a continuing cycle of violence
and highlight the imperative to seek a resolution to the
conflict, so too do the demolitions and displacement
in the West Bank. On 12 July, Israel announced that it
would seek to execute demolition orders of structures in
the Palestinian village of Susiya, in Area C. That comes
ahead of a hearing scheduled for 3 August on a directly
related planning-approval process. The Secretary-
General joins the United States and the European
Union in expressing deep concern about the demolition
and displacement plans for Susiya. My Deputy Special
Coordinator visited the community earlier today. We
hope that the ongoing dialogue between the authorities
and the herding community will protect the rights of
the persons affected.

Against that backdrop, intra-Palestinian talks
to form a national unity Government have faltered. I
note the efforts of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Hamdallah to reshuffle the current Government, and
call on them to proceed without delay to appointing the
new ministers. The reshuffling comes at a particularly
sensitive time, as the Palestinian Authority faces
significant financial challenges - including a 2015
budget deficit of approximately $500 million in 2015.
That gap cannot be closed through fiscal measures
alone, and I urge donors to rapidly scale up their direct
budget support. In that respect, it is also important to
revive the functioning of the Israeli-Palestinian joint
economic committee.

While it is first and foremost up to the Palestinian
authorities to take the lead, the United Nations stands
ready to support the President, the Government and all
factions in their efforts to reunite the West Bank and
Gaza, in line with the intra-Palestinian unity agreement
on3 April 2014. Palestine is one, and the United Nations
will work determinedly to advance unity through its
legitimate institutions.

Allow me to briefly turn to the rest of the region
and to note that the United Nations broad engagement
continued during the reporting period. Following
consultations with Syrian, regional and international
parties, next week the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura will brief the
Security Council on their recommendations for moving
the political track forward.

In Yemen, Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed is extending his good offices to all parties to
restart negotiations on a political transition.

In Libya, the United Nations remains engaged
in facilitating talks aimed at ending the current
political and security crisis through the formation of a
Government of national accord.

In Iraq, the United Nations is working to promote
political dialogue in the hopes of encouraging national
reconciliation.

In Lebanon, concerns are growing that political
differences are preventing the effective functioning
of State institutions, despite Prime Minister Salam's
commendable efforts to run the Government. There
has been no progress in efforts to end the presidential
vacuum. The Secretary-General's Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, Sigrid Kaag, continues to urge Lebanon's
leaders to put the country's stability and national
interests ahead ofpartisan politics and elect a President
without further delay.

Meanwhile, the situation along the Lebanese border
with Syria has remained stable, with the Lebanese
Armed Forces continuing their operations to prevent
the infiltration of armed extremist groups from Syria.
In the south, the situation along the Blue Line has
remained generally calm, despite almost daily Israeli
overflights over Lebanese territory. We encourage both
parties to continue to make effective use of the liaison
and coordination mechanisms of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.

I am deeply concerned about the current
unprecedented financial crisis at the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). If the current $100 million gap is
not closed in the next weeks, there is a serious risk that
UNRWA schools - which educate 500,000 children
throughout the Middle East - will not open. That will
have grave implications for Palestinian refugee children
in Gaza, the West Bank, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria,
and for the stability and security of a region already in
turmoil. I urge donors to step up support for UNRWA
at this critical time.

Let me return to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and to reiterate our collective resolve to prevent a
further deterioration of the situation, to uphold the two-
State solution and to create the conditions for a return
to meaningful negotiations. Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas recently spoke and reaffirmed
their desire for peace. That is a welcome sign, but
words need to be translated into concrete and sustained
actions on the ground.
Let me also be abundantly clear: measures
undertaken to improve the situation must not be
considered an end unto themselves, but part of a
broader political framework with the goal of achieving
a final-status agreement. Now is the time to act
decisively to reverse the growing perception that the
two-State solution is on life support and that it is slowly
dying a death by a thousand cuts.

A comprehensive agreement will require committed
engagement with key Arab States, including through
the Arab Peace Initiative. The Secretary- General stands
ready to support both sides in order to overcome their
divisions and to rise to the challenge of forging a path
forward towards a peaceful future.

In conclusion, let me place on record my deep
appreciation for the support that the Security Council
and the Secretariat have given on the ground to the
excellent team of the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Robert Piper of Australia as the new Deputy
Special Coordinator, who will also serve as the Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Occupied Palestinian Territory.

