Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
would like to express its gratitude to the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for organizing this important open debate
of the Security Council on the theme of collective
action to improve United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We thank the delegation of the State of
Kuwait, your predecessor in the presidency, Sir, for its
many successful initiatives during its tenure. We would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for the concept
note (S/2018/184, annex) prepared for today's meeting,
which helps to frame the issues and sharpen our focus
on the key achievements that have been made as well
as the serious deficiencies that must be remedied.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
and Ms. Fatimata Toure, Director of the Groupe de
recherche, d'etude et de formation femme-action, for
their valuable briefings and contributions.

(spoke in French)

While peacekeeping operations were born of
improvisation, they have continued to develop and
adapt to the numerous challenges posed by realities
on the ground. And while assessments of their
performance are sometimes severely criticized and
lead to frustration, their usefulness as an essential
mechanism for managing and resolving conflicts has
never been questioned - indeed, the reverse is true.
That is how we understand the essence of the reform
proposed by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres that
is the framework for this open debate. We support
the various measures proposed this morning by the
Secretary-General to galvanize the collective action of
Member States.

We should continually review our approach
to peacekeeping operations and their methods by
considering some key criteria. Of those, we emphasize
that we must have clear, realistic and implementable
mandates that are developed by taking into account
the specific the context and realities on the ground.
The political consensus that must prevail among all
the national, regional and international stakeholders
involved, especially the members of the Security
Council, should be founded on the provision of adequate
resources tailored to their mandates, including mobile
and air capabilities such as helicopters, and, needless to
say, adequate and well-trained military staff. A lack of
those prerequisites is frequently a reason for failure in
peacekeeping operations.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, Africa
has unfortunately been a giant laboratory rat in recent
years, making our continent an invaluable contributor
to the ongoing collective reflection on decisive action.
Africa's more active involvement where the Council"s
authority is concerned will be all the more timely,
as Mr. Sma'il Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, remarked during his
statement at the initiation session for the newest
members of the African Union's Peace and Security
Council, held in Djibouti on 27 and 28 March, since this
is a time when African leaders have shown renewed
commitment to taking up the task of implementing the
peace and security agenda for Africa.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council has an integral role to play
in defining and helping us fill the current and future
capability gaps in our missions, including through
training and capacity-building assistance. The mission
concepts for operations should be continually reassessed
and their force composition and operational plans
adjusted. Troop- and police-contributing countries
must remain flexible and adaptable with regard to
the capabilities they provide and the time periods for
which they provide them. Deploying forces that meet
operational performance and conduct standards are
critical elements in filling capability gaps.
(spoke in French)

We must share our risks and responsibilities
together and shoulder our burdens together. Let us
invest in peace together and let us mobilize to make our
peacekeeping operations more effective, together.

