Mr. Somavia (Chile)(interpretation from Spanish):
One of the greatest tragedies of our time is the fact that
in most of the conflicts that appear on the Security
Council agenda the victims are civilians - innocent,
defenceless civilians. Very often military troops of the
factions or groups in conflict kill civilians of the opposing
side and define their success in terms of civilian deaths.
Frankly, it would be better for the purposes of world
peace for those who give orders - the armed sectors of
these factions - to have the courage to confront each
other. But no, they are considered heroes because they
kill civilians.

Why am I beginning my statement with this
comment? It is precisely because anti-personnel land-
mines are among the deadliest instruments, and
experience demonstrates that they particularly affect
civilian populations. A land-mine is an anonymous
weapon, secretly placed in the hope that someone will
inadvertently step on it. As stated by the Secretary-
General in his statement before the International Meeting
on Mine Clearance, held in Geneva in July 1995, of
concern here are real weapons of mass destruction and of
perverse and insidious method, ravaging civilian
populations indiscriminately, frequently long after the
conflicts have concluded, as we have heard in many
statements this morning. The conflict ends; the mines
remain.

We are discussing this issue on the understanding
that, generally, it is a part of the disarmament agenda and
that promotion of and agreement on necessary measures
at the international level fall within the purview of the
General Assembly. We are discussing today the
implications for the Security Council.

We are pleased that for some time the international
community has increasingly been showing its concern
over anti-personnel land-mines. The figures that we have
heard this morning are truly astounding: almost 70
countries throughout the world are afflicted by this
scourge; 110 million mines lie planted in various parts of
the world; available stocks number 100 million; 2 million
to 5 million mines are laid annually, and only 100,000 are
removed. There are 360 different types of anti-personnel
mines in use, and 100 companies in the world produce
these weapons in 55 countries. It is truly a massive,
global phenomenon that falls within the purview of
collective responsibility. N 0 one country in particular can
be singled out, as this is occurring in all parts of the
world in many companies in a large number of countries.

 

That is why it is important that the United Nations, and in
this case the Security Council, deal with these issues.

The international community's concern and its wish to
address this problem are reflected in many proposals
inspired by the Secretary-General's "An Agenda for Peace"
and in the important initiatives of a number of countries as
noted earlier by the representative of the United States.

The first proposal is a moratorium on the export of
these weapons; many countries have unilaterally declared
such moratoriums. In this connection, I recall that Chile has
maintained a unilateral moratorium on the manufacture and
export of anti-personnel mines for more than a decade, long
predating the moratorium endorsed by the General
Assembly.

The second was the convening of the Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
Failing the complete and permanent elimination of anti-
personnel mines, the Conference sought at least to restrict
and monitor the use of such weapons with a view to
reducing their indiscriminate effects. My country generally
supports instruments of humanitarian law, and, as we know,
the Conference, the first of its kind, was intended to bolster
the humanitarian aims of Protocol II on the use of anti-
personnel mines. That intention, unfortunately, was not
fully realized owing to deep-seated differences on the
scope, application and other aspects of the Convention.

Chile has participated in the ongoing consideration of
this subject in the United Nations, and has supported
relevant proposals in the General Assembly. We have
participated in demining operations in Nicaragua and El
Salvador and have been invited to participate in similar
operations in other Central American countries. We broadly
support demining programmes adopted in the regional
framework of the Organization of American States (OAS),
most recently the OAS resolution on support for demining
in Central America, adopted at the recent OAS General
Assembly session in Panama. We have also been invited to
participate in demining activities in Angola.

The third proposal by which the international
community has expressed its growing concern at the
scourge of land-mines was the International Meeting on
Mine Clearance convened by the Secretary-General in
compliance with General Assembly resolution 49/215 of 23
December 1994. It was aimed at bringing together experts
and possible donors with a view to promoting United
Nations endeavours and international cooperation in this
area. Chile participated in that important international
meeting and is pleased that it achieved success and
constituted a historic landmark in the international
community's activities to address the land-mine crisis.

I mentioned these three elements, which were
discussed outside the Security Council, because they have
a direct impact on the Council's work. I do not want to
repeat the other practical proposals made in the course of
our debate this morning by other representatives, relating
to such areas as the return of refugees, the restoration of
agriculture, the rebuilding of roads, the sharing of
demining technology and the development of national
capabilities. I would suggest that following this debate,
which has attracted broad participation and during which
we shall hear many non-members of the Security Council,
the President could summarize the proposals; this would
enable the Council to improve its consideration of the
item, which is the point of this meeting.

I wish in conclusion to thank you, Mr. President, and
the German delegation for having convened a formal
meeting to consider this item; this enables us to give great
political impetus to the process of demining, particularly
in the context of peace-keeping operations, which fall
within the mandate of the Security Council.

The elements requiring further effort, study,
coordination and political will are many. With this
meeting the Council sends a clear signal about the
relevance of the item, an item to which my country
attaches the greatest importance, both within the Security
Council and in the General Assembly.

