Ms. Adamson: I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
Executive Director Fedotov, Special Rapporteur
Giammarinaro and Ambassador Chergui for
their briefings.

We would like to commend Italy for convening this
debate and for its keen commitment to addressing the
issue of trafficking in human beings during conflict.
Today's debate and the adoption of resolution 2388
(2017) are an important contribution to the fight against
trafficking in conflict situations, building on the
momentum created by resolution 2331 (2016). The EU
is strongly committed to the implementation of both
resolution 2331 (2016) and the resolution adopted today.

Trafficking in human beings is a threat to human
and national security alike - a threat to peace, human
rights, democratic governance and the rule of law.
Trafficking in the context of conflict takes many forms.
We know that vulnerability to trafficking is heightened
in the context of conflict and that victims are all too
often subjected to horrific crimes of sexual violence.
Special attention should be paid to the protection of
children, who are particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
especially in conflict situations.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
trafficking in persons in armed conflict (S/2017/939)
pursuant to resolution 2331 (2016). The report highlights
the prevalence of the problem in a number of specific
conflict situations, but also sets out many positive steps
that have been taken by Member States and by United
Nations agencies. The EU welcomes those efforts and
the recommendations set out in the report. We reiterate
our support for the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2017/249), issued in April 2017, including on the need
to continue to address the nexus between trafficking in
persons and conflict-related sexual violence, including
by terrorist groups.

By upholding and promoting international
standards, as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocols and other international legal instruments,
we contribute to ensuring strong foundations for the
rule of law. We must renew and invigorate our efforts
to implement the existing legal architecture. The EU
has built an ambitious and comprehensive legal and
policy framework to combat trafficking in persons. The
EU approach is human rights-based, victim-centred,
gender-specific and child-sensitive. Anti-trafficking
actions also form a key part of our external policies and
funding, and we are committed to the comprehensive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including targets 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2. of the
Sustainable Development Goals.

In September, the EU and the United Nations
launched a new partnership, the Spotlight Initiative, to
eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls,
backed by an initial dedicated financial envelope of
€500 million. That initiative will focus on all forms of
violence against women and girls, including trafficking
in human beings and sexual and economic exploitation.

We work closely with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the International Organization
for Migration and many other United Nations agencies
via joint programmes across the globe, and we will
continue our cooperation. We call for greater coherence
across the United Nations and stress the role of the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons.
There is a market for trafficked human
"merchandise," including those trafficked in the
context of conflict. We need to investigate, prosecute
and convict the perpetrators of those crimes, and we
need to put an end their impunity. Prevention must
remain central to all actions against trafficking in
human beings. Effectively preventing this heinous
crime necessitates reducing demand.

The European Commission will shortly publish its
priority actions to address trafficking in human beings.
They will build on the ongoing work, taking stock ofthe
achievements of the EU Strategy towards the Eradication
of Trafficking in Human Beings 2012-2016 on ensuring
the continuation of efforts, including coordination with
stakeholders, on increasing the knowledge base, and on
victim protection. Strengthening cooperation among
countries of origin, transit and destination is paramount
to preventing, detecting and addressing this scourge.
Our members work with the private sector and on our
own public procurement to ensure that supply chains
are free of trafficking.

Finally, just as the Security Council has recognized
that trafficking can drive conflict, we should also
recognize that our efforts to combat trafficking can
contribute to peacebuilding and to sustaining peace.
As we continue the fight against trafficking in human
beings inside the European Union, we will maintain
and enhance our cooperation with our international
partners with the goal of eradicating trafficking in all
countries, including those experiencing conflict.

