Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing
today.

The United States remains deeply concerned
about the mounting violence in Darfur and reports
of deliberate targeting of civilian areas, including
increased incidents of aerial bombardments, sexual and
gender-based violence and other crimes. The shelling
in late September of Hashaba, which killed at least 60
civilians, and the razing of the town of Sigili in early
November by the Government of the Sudan-aligned
Popular Defence Forces, are stark cases in point. Should
the violence spread beyond North Darfur, threats to
civilians will only multiply.

Growing attacks on civilians have gone hand
in hand with more frequent and serious attempts
to deny the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) freedom of access.
In both Hashaba and Sigili the Government of the
Sudan denied UNAMID access to the affected areas
immediately after the attacks. Since UNAMID's initial
deploymen,t in December 2007, 43 peacekeepers have
lost their lives, including six since the Prosecutor's last
report, in June. Attacks on UNAMID peacekeepers
can be prosecuted as war crimes. The Government of
the Sudan's deliberate obstruction of UNAMID, and
failure to investigate unwarranted attacks on it, fosters
a continued culture of impunity and is unacceptable.
The Council should condemn any and all attacks on
UNAMID personnel in the strongest possible terms.

Reversing the cycle of violence and impunity
requires accountability for the perpetrators. The ICC's
prosecution of the architects of the atrocities in Darfur
is crucial in that regard. We note the Prosecutor's report
about proceedings in the case against Abdallah Banda
and Saleh Jerbo, as well as her Office's investigation and
monitoring of ongoing crimes in Darfur. However, we
are dismayed that the Government of the Sudan is still
not cooperating with the ICC to execute the outstanding
arrest warrants in the Darfur cases, despite its obligation
under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with the
Court. The subjects of the warrants remain at large and
continue to cross international borders. We continue
to urge all States to refrain from providing political or
financial support to those individuals, and we will work
to prevent any such support.

Continued impunity for crimes committed in Darfur
foments instability there and sends a dangerous message
to the Government that there are no consequences for
attacking civilians elsewhere. Attacks have increased in
the two areas in recent months, particularly in the form
of indiscriminate aerial bombardments. We strongly
condemn those attacks.

We urge the Government of the Sudan to uphold
its commitments to establish credible local justice
and accountability mechanisms. The Government of
the Sudan and the Darfur Regional Authority have
repeatedly announced the establishment of investigative
committees to determine responsibility for civilian
deaths but have not followed through. So far, their
announcements have been empty talk. Moreover, the
Government-appointed Special Prosecutor for Darfur
has not made one significant arrest or prosecution.
The Government's refusal to take serious action in
the matter is an abrogation of its commitments to the
people of Darfur under the justice and reconciliation
chapter of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

We welcome the willingness of States to consider
creative approaches and new tools to enable the ICC's
work in Darfur, execute outstanding arrest warrants and
ensure compliance by States with relevant international
obligations. We would welcome further discussions
focused on ensuring the full implementation of Council
resolutions with ICC referrals.

The United States appreciates Prosecutor
Bensouda's report and looks forward to continuing a
constructive dialogue with the ICC and the Security
Council as we work together to end impunity for crimes
in Darfur, bring perpetrators to justice and prevent
future atrocities.

