Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February, as well
as to thank you for convening this thematic debate on
the interdependence between security and development
and for circulating the document that serves as the
basis for the discussion of this matter (S/2OIl/50).

I also convey my thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for being here today and for his
statement, as well as to the Chairperson of the Peace
Building Commission and Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
representative from the World Bank, for their reports
on their respective areas of responsibility.

We take note of the thematic continuation with
regard to the recent debate on institution building (see S/PV.6472) held at the initiative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Recent United Nations reports give
accounts of the transformations that are being seen in
the activities of peacekeeping operations on the
ground. Police forces and civilian experts are
participating ever more frequently and in greater
numbers. This trend shows that activities of a strictly
military nature are not enough in themselves to take on
the task of achieving sustainable peace.

In making the Peacebuilding Commission
operational, the Security Council recognized that
development, peace and security were interrelated and
mutually reinforcing. Likewise, it agreed on the need
to take a coordinated, coherent and integrated approach
to peacebuilding.

Today's debate on the interdependence between
security and development in the context of the
responsibilities and situations under the purview of the
Security Council is important for establishing the need
to consider ways to mainstream or give greater weight
to the development dimension in peacekeeping
operations.

We must not lose sight of the fact that
peacebuilding, as a long-term objective, is a cross-
cutting task that must start in the early phases of
peacekeeping. This is supported by the need to provide
long-term solutions, ensure the sustainability and
strengthening of democratic institutions, promote the
well-being of the population and prevent cycles of
dependence that discourage development.

In that regard, when drafting mandates, the
Council could place greater emphasis on the
strengthening of coordination activities and structures
that have a high impact on the development of national
capacities. Such activities are not new in the context of
peacekeeping operations. Activities aimed at the
strengthening of security institutions, the judicial
system and the rule of law, institutional provisions for
the protection of civilians and those aimed at
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration already
play a substantive role in laying the foundations for
development. For example, promoting working
methods for local employment recovery or adopting
business programmes that build on social organization,
with an immediate emphasis on women and youth, can
be seen as options that do not conflict with
peacekeeping goals.

Adequate coordination on development activities
among United Nations agencies present on the ground
is essential. The Council could adjust peacekeeping
operation mandates to address issues in this area and
avoid valuable long-term development going to waste.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General could, in each case, act as a coordinator
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding tasks. As part
of such a coordination effort, the President of the
Security Council could establish a strategic dialogue on
specific areas of concern with the Peacebuilding
Commission, and through it with the World Bank and
other actors.

It is clear that the Council is not the body to make
decisions regarding development. Nevertheless, we
must not ignore that its decisions have an impact on the
long-term development of countries and that this is a
fundamental component of any sustainable peace,
which is the preeminent purpose set out in the Charter
of the United Nations: to protect future generations
from the scourge of war.

The Council could therefore benefit, in its
activities related to peacekeeping, from the practice
and doctrine of the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly, as well as from the lessons
learned from the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The presence of seven members of the
Commission in the Security Council could serve as a
bridge for establishing greater communication and
consultation on development best practices.

We understand that not all members of the
Council have the same financial means. This should
not become an obstacle to finding mechanisms that
offer long-term solutions. After 65 years of existence,
the United Nations must be able to provide for the
configuration of comprehensive mechanisms to
promote peacebuilding.

The United Nations of the twenty-first century
will be relevant as long it responds to the development
needs of great sections of the world population. In this
regard, it is imperative that the activities of its main
organs effect real change, make a meaningful
contribution to the well-being of populations and have
a genuine impact on situations that have been on their
agendas for decades.

