Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having convened this open debate on the protection
of the civilians in armed conflicts. This topic is of
particular importance since it is one of the main

elements of Argentina's foreign policy, consisting of
the defence of human rights and international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity in all
areas.

As it is known, the civilian population is most
affected by armed conflicts, whether they be
international or domestic. No national security
considerations can prevail over the primary obligation
of the States and parties to a conflict to protect the
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleaning
and crimes against humanity.

We share the views of previous speakers in this
regard who underlined, inter alia, the importance of
ensuring that the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations include
provisions for the protection of civilians, the
prevention of sexual violence, and guaranteeing
security in and around camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons and the full, unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel to assist civilians
affected by armed conflicts.

However, for the sake of conciseness, I would
like to focus on a specific topic that we consider
essential and a priority in order to be able not only to
better protect civilians in armed conflicts but also to
promote a more efficient collective security system. I
am referring to the fight against impunity.

We consider that the best incentive to dissuade
potential perpetrators of war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity from committing such
atrocities is the fear that there exists a real possibility
that they will have to appear before justice to answer
for their crimes. On the other hand, from the
perspective of peacekeeping and international security,
we consider that it is increasingly obvious that the best
way to consolidate peace and national reconciliation
after a conflict is to avoid impunity.

The Security Council has substantially
contributed to the international regime for protection of
civilians through its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000), 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006). At the same
time, the Council has been given a clear mandate by
the General Assembly to take collective action should
peaceful means be inadequate and should national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their civilian
population. In that regard, during Argentina's term on
the Security Council in 2005 and 2006, our country not
only propelled the adoption of resolutions 1674 (2006)

08-3528]
and 1738 (2006), it was also among those that voted in
favour of resolution 1593 (2005), by which for the first
time the Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, decided to refer the
situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

In cases where we cannot prevent abuse of
civilians, at least we should ensure that their
perpetrators and those who bear political responsibility
for violence against civilians are held accountable for
their actions. We therefore believe that cooperation of
States with the International Criminal Court and other
international mechanisms that are fighting genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity is essential,
and it is also indispensable for the Council to take
steps it considers appropriate to encourage and
facilitate such cooperation when it is not otherwise
forthcoming.

