Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me to commend
you, Mr. Minister, for convening this important open
meeting on the situation in East Timor. We are pleased
to see you presiding over the meeting. I should also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2001/983) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
extremely useful briefing. We are also pleased to see
the Chief Minister of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor, Mr. Mari Alkatiri, in the
Council today and were pleased to listen to his
briefing. His views are most pertinent to the
deliberations of the Council. We are grateful for the
briefings given by the representatives of the World
Bank and of the United Nations Development
Programme.

Like other countries in the region, Malaysia
warmly applauded the manner in which the people of
East Timor conducted themselves in the Constituent
Assembly elections on 30 August 2001 and their full
acceptance of the outcome. We welcomed the outcome
of the elections and the formation of the 88-member
Constituent Assembly. We also welcomed the
appointment of Mr. Mari Alkatiri as the first Chief
Minister of East Timor and the appointment of the
members of his Cabinet. We are particularly pleased to
see that a rather high proportion - some 20 per
cent - of the Cabinet is made up of women ministers.
That is indeed an impressive record for any country.
We hope it will be maintained, or even improved, in the
post-independence Cabinet as an exemplary model for
all countries. We look forward to early and, it is hoped,
equally impressive appointments in respect of the
remaining two vacant portfolios.

The United Nations too has come a long way
since 30 August 1999. The United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) deserves the
plaudits of the international community for the way the
elections were planned, organized and conducted. East
Timor is now entering the last stage of the process of
transition towards independence. Hence the importance
of the current report that is being considered by the
Council. The decisions that the Council will make on
the basis of the report will to a large extent determine
the kind of independent nation that emerges in East
Timor.

As described by the Secretary-General in his
message to the people of East Timor on the first
anniversary of the popular consultation, the
involvement of the United Nations with the East Timor
independence process was one of the greatest
challenges and responsibilities ever entrusted to the
Organization. Having invested heavily in East Timor, it
is only natural for the United Nations to wish to ensure
that its investment will not be squandered, as the
Secretary-General put it. For that purpose, it is
essential to ensure that an independent East Timor will
be a viable member of the community of nations.

In that regard, the friends of East Timor would
wish to ensure that, following independence, the
United Nations does not leave East Timor prematurely
or in a precipitous fashion. We are assured, and we are
gratified, that that will not be the case and that there
will be a substantial United Nations presence in the
country. The continued presence of the United Nations
beyond the completion of the political transition is
important to ensure the smooth implementation of the
arduous process of nation-building. For that purpose, it
is essential for the international community to continue
to support UNTAET through adequate and assured
funding by the United Nations so that progress
achieved so far will be sustained and further
strengthened. In that regard, Malaysia looks forward to
Council approval of the Secretary-General's
recommendations contained in section IV of his report.

The envisaged integrated successor mission to
UNTAET, to be developed in consultation with the
people of East Timor, would enable the United Nations
to complete the mandate of Council resolution 1272
(1999). This would provide the institutions that are
being built in East Timor, especially the civil service,
with sufficient time to be further consolidated and
strengthened. This intervening period is essential for
the East Timorese people to acquire the necessary skills
and experience, especially in the core functions in
which local expertise is lacking, to ensure a
functioning and effective governmental machinery in
the post-United-Nations period. The international
community should be pleased with the Timorization
process that is taking place under UNTAET, which
demonstrates the eagerness and determination of the
people of East Timor to assume responsibility for their
affairs and their preparedness to take charge of their
own destiny. The action of the Council today and in the
future should reflect the desires of the people of East
Timor and the reality on the ground, and should take
into account the view of the Secretary-General that
operational responsibilities must be devolved to the
East Timorese authorities as soon as that is feasible.

The process of nation-building and reconciliation
is a highly complex and sensitive matter. This is
particularly true for East Timor in the context of its
traumatic past. As a country that has stressed the
importance of reconciliation among the people of East
Timor as an indispensable ingredient of peace and
stability, we welcome most warmly the establishment
of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation. We particularly welcome the fact that
the Commission will seek to establish the truth about
all relevant events that occurred in East Timor as far
back as 25 April 1974. That decision is a clear
demonstration of the non-selective approach that will
guide the work of the Commission; it will go a long
way in the reconciliation process. We hope that the
even-handed approach of the Commission will
contribute constructively to the promotion of tolerance,
unity and harmony among the people of East Timor so
that they will be able, at long last, to put history behind
them, look forward to the future and, together, forge a
strong, cohesive and united nation. We believe that the
return of refugees, in particular the return of members
of pro-integration groups and separated children, is an
important element in the nation-building process.

At the same time, the formation of a sustainable
democratic State will require a higher level of maturity
by the people of East Timor than they have shown so
far during the election process. The sophistication and
wisdom with which they handle difficult and sensitive
issues will reflect the kind of nation that will evolve in
East Timor in the post-independence period. Something
that will put the East Timorese leaders to the test in
that regard is the manner in which the issue of the
rights of minority populations, including the minority
Muslim population, is handled by the Constituent
Assembly.

On the issue of East Timor's economy, the
Secretary-General has highlighted in his report the
heavy reliance of that economy on external factors. The
dramatic decrease in international personnel and
expertise, and the possible decrease in resources, at
least in the initial period, will have to be appropriately
factored into the planning for the post-independence
period. Particular attention should be paid to the
building up of expertise in those areas where local
expertise is most lacking, especially in the financial
sector, as highlighted by the Secretary-General. Since
this is a long-term issue, this question will have to be
seriously addressed by both UNTAET and the United
Nations successor mission.

Malaysia welcomes the decision of the
Constituent Assembly to recommend to UNTAET the
date of 20 May 2002 for the handing over of
sovereignty to the people of East Timor. Of course, this
is a matter for the Council to decide in consultation
with the people of East Timor. As a regional neighbour,
Malaysia will play its part in assisting the people of
East Timor to prepare for nationhood, within its
capacity to do so. In the security area, Malaysia has
seconded two senior military personnel to the East
Timor Defence Force. In the area of diplomacy, a
senior official of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has
also been made available, under UNDP's sponsorship,
as an adviser to the newly established Department of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of East Timor.

Training has also been given in various areas of
human resources development, including archiving,
fire-fighting, policing and diplomacy, to 74 East
Timorese, through the Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme. Currently, under the same
Programme, 11 East Timorese are undergoing training
courses in nursing and archiving in Malaysia. In
addition, we have contributed $60,000 for the
reconstruction of the Bacau mosque.

Additional areas of assistance and cooperation
between Malaysia and East Timor are also being
explored. To expedite this process, a Malaysian liaison
office was established in Dili in April 2001. Clearly, in
the post-independence period, the people of East Timor
will face many challenges of nation-building, in which
their many friends in the region and beyond can play a
constructive role.

In conclusion, Malaysia believes that the
invaluable experience gained by UNTAET in East
Timor should be properly documented, and valuable
lessons drawn from it as a model of a successful
peacekeeping mission. In our view, one of the most
important lessons to be drawn is the need for the active
involvement of the countries in the region, as is the
case with UNTAET. The importance of regional
involvement is premised on the following
considerations: knowledge of the country; shared
cultural values, customs and language; and an abiding
interest in ensuring regional stability. The success of
UNTAET can be attributed to, inter alia, these factors,
and I am sure that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General would be among the first to
acknowledge that.

It is hoped that the United Nations successor
mission will be able to strengthen the regional
dimension, perhaps in a more pronounced way, as East
Timor begins to be more and more integrated into the
region. In this regard, we warmly welcome the cordial
and constructive contacts between the leaders of East
Timor and its immediate and important neighbour,
Indonesia, which augur well for the regional
integration process.

