Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We appreciate your organization of today's meeting,
Mr. President. The briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and by the representatives of Bangladesh and Canada
on behalf of the troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
were helpful.

We believe firmly that it is essential for United
Nations peacekeeping activities to adapt to current
realities so that the Blue Helmets can effectively
implement their mandates and stand up to new
challenges. That applies equally to the training and
functioning of units involved in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. What is important in that
regard is not only the professional preparation and
competence of personnel but also missions' ability to
deploy in a timely fashion and their mobility on the
ground within the framework of their mandate from
the Security Council. In that context, it is crucially
important to ensure that peacekeepers have all the
resources they need as soon as possible so that they can
provide security and accomplish their mandated tasks.
In that regard, both the Secretariat's Department of
Field Support and to the troop-contributing countries
have an equally responsible part to play. We cannot
emphasize the importance of the TCCs' contribution
enough. It is impossible to carry out the Security
Council's mandated tasks without them.

We firmly believe in the importance of close
cooperation and coordination of efforts between the
Security Council, the host Government, the troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat, not to
mention of direct, good-faith contact between United
Nations field missions and their host countries.
It is that kind of interaction, based above all on
transparency and accountability and thereby on trust,
that helps to improve effectiveness in dealing with
urgent problems. Obtaining host countries' consent
and support would help missions in their operational
activities as well as their political ones, an essential
component of their ability to effectively fulfil their
mandates. It is also important to take into account the
views and concerns of troop-contributing countries in
developing and extending mission mandates. In that
regard, we appreciate the various existing tripartite
cooperation mechanisms, including regular meetings
and the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
We believe that there is potential there for increasing
their effectiveness.

The most important platform for discussion and
decision-making on the full range of peacekeeping
issues is the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. When the Secretariat makes
administrative decisions it should make sure that the
Special Committee's conclusions are strictly observed.
Any arbitrary interpretation, such as occurred with the
issue of the collection and analysis of information, is
completely unacceptable. The same applies to the issue
of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. Any
reports of such dreadful crimes should be thoroughly
investigated and their perpetrators punished. However,
we are also convinced that it is counterproductive to
apply collective punishment to entire contingents for
egregious, yet individual, violations.

Russian peacekeepers - both men and
women - currently take part in 10 United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We also actively provide
aviation services to the United Nations. Both our own
peacekeepers and foreign peacekeepers - individual
and formed police units - undergo training in
Russian training institutions. Furthermore, we assist
in equipping foreign contingents. We have the relevant
experience and have developed a system of training
that ensures both general and specialized training,
which is provided directly before peacekeepers are
deployed to their relevant missions. Linguistic training
is also adapted to the needs of peacekeepers. We are
working on developing additional training centres
for peacekeepers. We are looking into the possibility
of swiftly deploying any peacekeepers requested
by the United Nations. We are ready to continue to
provide support in strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping capacity.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that,
regardless of how United Nations peacekeeping
evolves, what should remain unchanged is our
confidence in peacekeeping, which depends upon clear
adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic principles of peacekeeping - the consent of
the host State, impartiality and the non-use of force,
with the exception of self-defence and the protection of
the mandate.

