Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx and the Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, for their contributions to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/95) on the evolving threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) and on continuing United Nations efforts to counter that threat. I also thank Ms. Frei for sharing her personal story and for briefing us today on her important work preventing violent extremism and recruitment to ISIS. Last year, our collective efforts resulted in ISIS losing its territory and its leader. Those victories in the battle against ISIS are a testament to the work of the global coalition to defeat ISIS, the Government of Iraq and other key partners on the ground. The coalition continues to pursue four main non-military lines of effort - counter-financing, counter-messaging, detention, repatriation and accountability for crimesand abuses by foreign terrorist fighters and the stabilization of areas liberated from ISIS. It is critical that the coalition continue each of those lines of effort. The Secretary-General's report confirms that ISIS affiliates still pose a serious threat to the world, from West Africa to South-East Asia. The scale of that threat is vast - a fact we wish to call attention to by identifying, sanctioning and targeting each ISIS affiliate. Recently, the United States nominated ISIS in the Greater Sahara and ISIS West Africa in the 1267 Sanctions Committee. We are grateful to the many countries that have co-sponsored those listings, most recently the Niger, and encourage other Member States to join us in countering those groups and their spread around the world. In addition, we ask all Council members to support those listings without further delay, as well as those we will be proposing soon for additional affiliates. Even though ISIS and its so-called caliphate have been defeated on the battlefield, we must work together to ensure that detention facilities and camps do not become incubators in which ISIS can reconstitute. We share the Secretary-General's deep concerns about the thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and their families still being held in camps and detention facilities in Iraq and Syria. ISIS foreign terrorist fighters should be repatriated and face prosecution and accountability for their crimes. And we must also rehabilitate and reintegrate their children to prevent the emergence of a new generation of fighters. Where it is appropriate to rehabilitate and reintegrate terrorist offenders back into society, it is essential to continue engaging with offenders after their release to avoid recidivism. That is why the United States intends to bring back every American from Syria and hold them legally accountable for their actions. In Iraq, the world witnessed ISIS target thousands of innocent Iraqis in barbaric attacks. As the body dedicated to maintaining international peace and security, it is our moral responsibility to acknowledge the atrocities ISIS committed, document those atrocities, pursue justice and hold those responsible for them to account. That is why the United States is a strong supporter of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Before concluding, I would like to underscore that the guise of counter-terrorism operations can never be used to justify the arbitrary incarceration of dissidents, journalists or members of religious and ethnic minority groups. Effective counter-terrorism must be rooted firmly in full and complete respect for human rights. In fact, they are mutually reinforcing. Individual rights must not be made subservient to collective security. As such, the Secretary-General and United Nations counter-terrorism bodies need to work more closely with High Commissioner Bachelet, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the broader community of non-governmental organizations to closely monitor, report on and address violations of human rights in the conduct of counter- terrorism activities, through relevant mechanisms. We continue to be deeply concerned about the situation in Xinjiang, where more than | million Uyghurs and other Muslims have been detained in internment camps, under the guise of counter-terrorism. Confinement that is imposed on the basis of ethnicity and religion and, moreover, without any credible basis of individual wrongdoing is highly inconsistent with international law. Furthermore, the refoulement of Uyghur defectors under the false pretence of repatriating terrorists is unacceptable. In addition to violating individual rights, such actions can be counterproductive, leaving deep and lasting grievances. Countering terrorism and violent extremism should never be used as a pretext to silence political views those in power find objectionable, violate religious freedom or repress minority groups. The United States is fully prepared to work with our partners to prevent violent extremism and to counter terrorism, while protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
