Mr. Sandoval Cojull'ln (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes the comprehensive
briefing provided by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and acknowledges the presence in this debate of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, Mr. Rodolfo
Nin Novoa, and that of other Ministers and Deputy
Ministers who are here with us at this very important
debate.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The dangerous escalation of violence between
Israelis and Palestinians we are currently witnessing
and the tragic loss of human life are truly unacceptable.
Recent events, such as the two attacks on women in
Jerusalem and in the West Bank, must not happen
again. We call on the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice.
Those incidents only highlight the urgent need to
work together in order to reduce the spiral of violence
and attacks against the civilian population. We View
accountability for those who commit crimes on both
sides as important. We welcome the fact that the Israeli
police and Shin Bet have confirmed the arrest of
several young Jewish radicals who had been accused
of burning alive a Palestinian family while asleep in
their home in the northern part of the West Bank. We
call on the parties to promote peace and refrain from
making statements that could incite additional violence
and reprisals.

As we have reiterated on previous occasions, the
building of settlements is illegal, constitutes a violation
of international law and must not continue. We are
concerned about Israeli plans to expand settlements.
We believe that such an act clearly stands in the way
of achieving a two-State solution, with those two
States living peacefully side-by-side. It is important
to underscore the fact that, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, Israel is responsible
for meeting the needs of the Palestinians living under
occupation and must facilitate humanitarian assistance,
not obstruct it.

In that regard, we are concerned about the Israeli
initiative that could restrict the activities of human rights
organizations. Such is the case with the transparency
law, which would require non-governmental
organizations that receive over half of their funds from
foreign Governments to expressly declare such funding.

As we have said on previous occasions before the
Council, the walls, the checkpoints, the violent responses
by the security forces, the demolition of houses, the
restrictions on non-governmental organizations, violent
attacks on individuals or groups and rocket fire will not
promote a solution to this conflict.

Turning to the current situation in Syria, we have
noted that negotiations are to begin between the Syrian
Government and opposition groups. In that regard, we
call on all parties to engage in constructive, good faith
negotiations in order to bring an end to this conflict,
which has had devastating consequences for the Syrian
population. Furthermore, we remain concerned about
the tensions engendered by the situation between Iran
and Saudi Arabia. We must not forget that, should those
tensions continue, the entire region would find itself
involved in even more conflicts.

In conclusion, Guatemala invites the parties to
pursue the dialogue in order to seek stability in the
region and respect for human rights and, in particular,
to reduce the level of violence inflicted against civilians
in the Middle East.

