Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable briefing, his comprehensive
and excellent report (S/20l7/869) and the various
and ambitious options he has put forward. I would
also like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mali in his capacity as Chair of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the European
Union Special Representative for the Sahel for their
informative briefings. And I thank France, presiding
over the Security Council for the month of October,
for convening today's meeting and organizing the
Council's recent visit to a number of countries of the
Sahel, which has helped to shed light on the challenges
they are facing and the assistance they need from the
international community at this critical juncture.

The Sahel is dealing with a number of security and
development challenges with regional and international
repercussions. The inadequate border controls of the
countries of the region have enabled illegal trafficking
to flourish, including trafficking in drugs and persons,
and the area has become a safe haven for terrorist groups.
In the absence of State development initiatives, disputes
over resources have led to a further deterioration of
the security situation. A number of extremist groups
have begun to organize, propagating their extremist
ideologies and imposing them on citizens, and as a
result many young people have resorted to fleeing as
migrants or refugees.

The Security Council has a legal and moral
obligation to provide support and assistance to the
countries of the Sahel in order to restore stability and
security. Many of the Challenges they are dealing with
are new, the direct result of the changing regional

environment, especially in Libya. The crisis in the
Sahel and its reverberations will not remain confined
to the region, or even to the African continent, but are
an immediate and clear threat to international peace
and security. The initiative of the countries of the G-5
Sahel to create the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel is the best possible way of dealing with
regional security challenges, being in the long term the
most sustainable and least costly option financially,
militarily and in terms of human resources. In that
regard, I would like to stress that regional ownership
does not obviate the importance of providing financial
and logistical support, whether through the United
Nations or bilaterally. A security-focused approach
alone will not guarantee sustainable peace in the Sahel.
That is why the G-5 Sahel countries need development
support, as a first step towards a balanced partnership
among the States of the region based on mutual respect,
transparency and open dialogue, which would enable us
to listen to the concerns of the countries involved and
understand their needs, with a view to improving their
technical capacity, supporting sustainable development
and promoting good governance and the rule of law.

During the Council's recent visit to the Sahel,
we acknowledged the importance of addressing the
root causes of the crisis, whether social, economic,
development or climate-related, by demonstrating the
political will needed to implement - as quickly and
urgently as possible - the programmes and activities
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, adopted by the Council in 2013. The Integrated
Strategy is a comprehensive framework for preventing
further crises in the region, as well as contributing to
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and, through that, to durable and lasting
peace. In that regard, Egypt looks forward to the results
of the Secretariat's mapping exercise on the support
to be provided for implementing the Strategy in the
near future.

In conclusion, Egypt will spare no effort in
supporting our brothers in the G-5 Sahel, whether
through our contribution to dialogue in the Council
on the situation in Mali and the Sahel, or through
our bilateral and regional cooperation programmes,
which we always develop in consultation with the G-5
Sahel countries.

