Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Sir, let me congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May and on your initiative to convene
an open debate on a complex item that is of ever-
increasing importance to the United Nations. I also
want to thank you for preparing your non-paper, which
has provided a very good basis for today's discussion.
My thanks go also to Secretary-General Kofi Annan
for having commenced the debate this morning, and to
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
presence at today's meeting.

Like every other State committed to international
peace and security, and having been a major troop-
contributing country since 1958, my country,
Argentina, has particular interest in improving and
making more effective a tool that is truly vital to the
work of the Organization: peacekeeping operations.

Obviously, the past 12 years have seen a
significant increase in peacekeeping operations.
Although they are not specifically described in the San
Francisco Charter, they have provided the
Organization- and the Security Council in
particular - with an effective response to new kinds of
conflict. Moreover, these operations continue to be
created in response to growing demand, precisely
because the new mechanism is becoming increasingly
effective.

In that context, I wish to offer a few specific
comments on matters that, in our view, should be taken
into account if we truly want peacekeeping operations
to continue to be successful over the long term.

First of all, we believe that a clearly defined
mandate is necessary. It is essential to reiterate once
again that peacekeeping operations need to have
clearly defined mandates. In that connection, we
believe that the Security Council must reduce the use
of Chapter VII of the Charter to what is strictly
essential in defining the mandates of the forces it
authorizes. We agree with the Brahimi report that
mandates must be appropriate, realistic and adequately
financed and that they must be implemented in a
timely, effective and impartial manner. To that end, it is
essential that we obtain information that enables us to
assess the risks and challenges to be faced in various
situations and develop appropriate deployment,
adjustment and exit strategies.

Secondly - although it may seem superfluous to
say this - we believe that eliminating the root causes
of conflict is paramount. No peacekeeping operation
can be completely successful unless the conflict's root
causes are eliminated. In that connection, working to
eradicate poverty, to promote development, to protect
human rights and to ensure the rule of law is essential
to prevent worsening of conflicts and to lay the
groundwork for recovery and normalization of the
conflict situation being addressed.

Thirdly, we believe that efforts must be
coordinated. As new peacekeeping operations have
been established, a certain fear has arisen that some
aspect may have been neglected that should have been
addressed. Hence, the mandates for such operations are
increasingly complex. Because of the nature of
peacekeeping operations, we tend increasingly to
require more of them than they can deliver. Although it
is important to maintain a multidimensional approach
when we are trying to settle a conflict, the task of
coordination is fundamental when tasks are being
assigned. We have no doubt that closer cooperation and
coordination of efforts among the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Secretariat would be very beneficial in that
regard.

Financial resources and political will - those
two elements are essential if a peacekeeping operation
is to be successful. It is financial resources and
political will that can sustain the effort over the long
term.

I cannot fail to mention two aspects of
peacekeeping operations that are of great importance to
Argentina: the safety and training of personnel.
Argentina has always been concerned about personnel
safety, because we are convinced that that the men and
women who work for the United Nations in
peacekeeping should not be exposed to risks
unnecessarily. Our country has raised the issue
whenever it has had an opportunity to do so. Indeed, it
was at Argentina's initiative that the Security Council
adopted the presidential statement of 9 February 2000
(S/PRST/2000/4), which expressed concern over
attacks against those personnel and considers such
attacks to be grave violations of international law,
including international humanitarian law.

Furthermore, as the functions and objectives of
peacekeeping operations become more complicated
and sensitive, appropriate training of personnel for
specific tasks becomes increasingly important. For that
reason, our country has established two special training
centres: the Argentine joint training centre for
peacekeeping operations (CAECOPAZ) and the
training centre for foreign missions (CENCAMEX), for
civilian police training.
One practice that was begun recently and that has
proved to be positive is the inclusion of foreign staff in
national contingents of peacekeeping operations. In the
case of the Argentine contingent of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, it has included,
successively, officials from Brazil, Bolivia, Chile,
Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay. Argentine officials, for
their part, have participated in the outstanding
Brazilian contingent in Timor-Leste since 2001. Such
joint participation encourages further participation by
our countries in these missions.

The United Nations must be able to fully meet the
new trends on the international agenda and respond to
threats to international peace and security. That is a
long-term effort, and it will require of the international
community sustained and long-term action, adequate
resources, a common will and a coordinated policy.

In conclusion, I should like to say that in the
interests of brevity, I have referred to only some of the
issues before us for consideration.

