Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): First of all, I should like to
pay tribute to Ambassador Butagira for his five years
with the United Nations and, in particular, for his time
working with us here in the Council.

I would like to commend the French presidency
of the Security Council and the United Kingdom
delegation for the initiative to convene of this
important and timely meeting regarding an issue of
great importance, not only for the States members of
the Council, but also for the entire membership of the
United Nations. Although the issue of peacekeeping
operations has, understandably, been a focus of this
body for many years - and with noteworthy results -
we find it appropriate, particularly at this moment, to
engage in a thorough discussion of some of its key
elements on the basis of the non-paper prepared by
France and the United Kingdom. I wish also to express
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra and Special
Representative Annabi for their valuable briefings
today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.

The world landscape has changed markedly in
recent years. The nature of contemporary conflicts has
been increasingly shifted from the inter-State to the
intra-State level. As a result, we are witnessing new
challenges and threats to international peace and
security. In reacting to those challenges, the Security
Council has, since the beginning of the 1990s,
increasingly resorted to peacekeeping operations as a
basic instrument at the disposal of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Today, it seems that those efforts have reached
their peak, with more than 112,000 personnel engaged
in current peacekeeping operations, while the annual
budget for those missions is three times the size of the
annualized regular budget of the United Nations. It is
fair to say that that enormous jump in the size of the
peacekeeping budget was a consequence not only of
the rising number of peacekeeping operations, but also
of the considerable change in their nature from simple
military operations to multidimensional, integrated
military-civilian projects.

In our opinion, the basic precondition for
reaching a well-founded decision on establishing
apeacekeeping operation and sending it to a certain
area - and, equally, on any changes to its mandate and
on the final closure of a mission - is to have timely
and current information regarding the situation on the
ground, as well as accompanying military and political
analysis of the conflict. In that context, we are of the
view that the information available to the Council
through various mechanisms is adequate, although
more needs to be done with regard to the quality of the
information received.

Similarly, we deem it appropriate that the
Council, in an adequate manner and at an appropriate
time, include other States - especially troop-
contributing countries or States that offer other
significant contributions to a peacekeeping operation -
in the process of information exchange and decision-
making. In addition, we think that the potential of
preventive measures and diplomacy within the United
Nations system should be further explored and
strengthened.

Moreover, it is important to stress that the United
Nations, unlike some military alliances, does not strive
to resolve a conflict first and foremost by military
means, but rather seeks to address its root causes,
measuring, inter alia, the level of security by the level
of improvement in everyday life for the affected
population. Croatia fully supports the standpoint of the
United Nations according to which lasting peace and
security can be solidly built only through three
interlinked and firmly grounded basic pillars: security,
development and the protection of human rights.

It is obvious that, when we address peacekeeping
operations in their new, three-pillar context, the
civilian and police components of such operations are
becoming increasingly important. We are of the
opinion that it is extremely important that States
provide qualified civilian and police personnel to
engage in those tasks. We reaffirm our readiness to
contribute to the establishment of permanent rosters of
civilian experts experienced in post-conflict
stabilization, who can be deployed to a conflict area on
short notice immediately after the establishment of a
ceasefire. At the same time, it is important to keep in
mind that peacekeeping operations are not intended
primarily to engage in reconstruction or to rebuild a
country in which they are deployed, as other
specialized organizations and institutions can carry out
such activities more efficiently and less expensively.

It is becoming self-evident that the capability of
many traditional troop-contributing countries to
contribute troops to peacekeeping operations has been
significantly diminished. On the other hand, new
contributors often lack the infrastructure, equipment
and training necessary for the effective integration of
their troops into more complex missions. In order to
share the burden imposed by peacekeeping operations,
the United Nations should strengthen its cooperation
with regional organizations, as well as improve
cooperation between its agencies and other
international agencies active on the ground.

Since the majority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations take place in Africa, we
believe that cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States is particularly important. However, one
should not lose sight of the fact that those
organizations lack precisely what peacekeeping
operations need: qualified personnel and resources for
peacekeeping activities. Nonetheless, active
cooperation and support in building the capacity of
regional organizations would have enormous long-term
benefits.

Finally, in further discussions of the challenges
confronting peacekeeping operations, the Security
Council needs to carefully examine the question of
whether resources are being properly allocated or
whether room exists for reallocating resources by
downsizing some old missions or closing them
altogether. The answer to that question will have
significant influence on the future of United Nations
peacekeeping.

All of that said, it is impossible not to refer
briefly to the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and some of
its main recommendations. Although it does not answer
all of our questions, the report clearly contains
guidelines that, even almost 10 years after they were
developed, need to be taken into consideration. As a
representative of a country that, within a short period
of time, hosted a number of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and consequently had the
opportunity to experience the performance of each of
them first-hand, I would like to draw the attention of
members to the following recommendations.

First, we need to ensure a clear and achievable
mandate. Secondly, we need to provide, before the
establishment of the mission, the resources necessary
for the full execution of the mission's mandate.
Thirdly, forces must be appropriately equipped and
have the capacity, if mandated, to confront violence.
Lastly, we need to ensure political and resource
backing from Member States, as well as adequate
staffing.

From our individual perspective, we would also
add to the aforementioned recommendations that it is
important to involve domestic resources whenever
possible, but without exacerbating existing political
tensions. This can help to improve the effectiveness of
an operation at minimal expense and help to secure a
unique perspective towards the conflict not otherwise
available to outsiders. The value of this approach lies
in the possibility to develop the capacities necessary
for reconstruction and the establishment of a national
administration to govern the country after the departure
of the international community. It can also have the
added benefit of having the local population better
accept the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and its forces.

Croatia would like to stress that, while the United
Nations has clearly defined criteria for monitoring the
implementation of DPKO mandates, it is important that
these criteria not be open to political interpretation, and
that, once adopted, they be strictly upheld. It is our
belief that this last issue, especially the question of
assessing benchmarks, opens the possibility for closer
cooperation and additional information exchange
between the Secretariat and the Member States.

It is precisely the strict implementation of the
aforementioned criteria that led us to different
evaluations of the success or lack of success of the
missions that were active in our own country. Our
experience with the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium is a telling example of how a
peacekeeping operation, when acting in full
compliance with all the aforementioned criteria, can
achieve excellent results.

In conclusion, let me add that Croatia now
contributes to 13 United Nations peacekeeping
operations and intends to continue to add its specific
experiences and expertise to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the years to come.

