Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): Ijoin others in thanking
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
an issue of vital importance for the United Nations. Our
appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive overview of the current situation and
to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Director of the non-governmental organization
Groupe de recherche, d'etude et de formation
femme-action for their informative briefings.

The first issue that I would like to address today
is the increasingly life-threatening environments in
which some of our current peacekeeping missions
are currently deployed. The intensification and
sophistication of the asymmetric threats posed by
terrorist and extremist groups is a serious challenge to
United Nations peacekeeping, both in terms of force
protection and the implementation of its mandates.
We condemn in the strongest terms all attacks on
peacekeepers, who unfortunately have suffered the
highest number of fatalities we have seen in more than
two decades during the past year. Turkey supports the
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, not least in terms of improved
training for peacekeepers.

Peacekeeping operations, as the flagship activity
of the United Nations, continue to be one of the most
effective tools created by the international community
to address conflict and post-conflict environments. We
believe that an integrated, coherent and well-coordinated
political and strategic framework is necessary for their
effectiveness. Through that framework, the United
Nations system can develop clear, realistic, credible
and achievable mandates matched with appropriate

resources and provide sound political directives to the
troops and police on the ground.

We are confident that the ongoing reform process of
the United Nations peace and security architecture will
have positive ramifications for the way that the United
Nations addresses the challenges it faces in that regard.
At the same time, the mandates given to United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be commensurate with
the resources allocated to them. We must also have in
place predictable, professional and flexible logistical
support systems, as well as the tools and means for
increasing the performance of our troops and police.

There is no doubt that multidimensional
peacekeeping operations require a variety of expertise,
which cannot be met solely by military personnel.
Therefore, it is vital to enhance the policing aspect
of our missions, in order to ensure that they perform
mandated tasks more effectively. Moreover, we should
all adopt a zero-tolerance policy towards sexual
violence incidents and make sure that the perpetrators
are brought to justice.

As a dedicated troop- and police-contributing
country, not only to United Nations operations but also
to other missions conducted by regional organizations,
such as NATO, the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Turkey is fully
engaged in global peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. We will also continue to make contributions
to the discussions within the United Nations on those
matters with a view to developing a viable road map
to peace in conflict situations, based on the primacy
of conflict prevention, including through effective
mediation, as well as addressing the root causes of
conflicts, with the appropriate understanding of local
circumstances.

Given the magnitude and complexity of current
global challenges, we believe that the United
Nations should further enhance its cooperation with
regional organizations and establish more effective
arrangements in support of its peace operations. We
welcome the steps taken so far, as evidenced by today"s
interaction, in furthering cooperation with the African
Union. Further regionalizing peacekeeping would not
only increase efficiency by tailoring our efforts to local
needs, but also ensure their sustainability even after
international attention fades away.

Before I conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
the men and women serving in peacekeeping missions
and putting their lives at risk every day to provide
peace, security and stability in various parts of the
world. They fulfil a sacred duty on behalf of the entire
international community. We pay tribute in particular
to those who have sacrificed their lives in the pursuit of
a more peaceful world.

