Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I sincerely thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for their
illuminating briefings. My delegation also takes this
opportunity to commend all the humanitarian agencies,
whether of the United Nations or its partners, for the
measures they have already taken to help the afflicted
people in Rakhine state.

Since last summer, the situation in Rakhine state
in Myanmar has been one of the worst displacement
crises the world has witnessed in recent decades. As
the Under-Secretary-General said, 626,000 people have
crossed the border into Bangladesh to seek refuge. The
humanitarian challenge is therefore significant both
in Myanmar, where the Rohingya in Rakhine state
need emergency assistance, and in Bangladesh, where
living conditions, in particular in refugee camps, are
especially alarming, unhygienic and vulnerable to
outbreaks of disease, such as cholera.

Despite the efforts made, the road ahead remains
long. Out of all of the displaced people, only 120,000
have received food assistance. We also note that
neither the High Commissioner for Human Rights
nor the fact-finding mission have been able to gain
access to Rakhine state, making any assessment of
the situation and needs on the ground impossible. My
delegation therefore recalls the obligation of parties
under international humanitarian law and human
rights law to ensure immediate and safe access of the
populations to swift humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance, without restrictions or conditions.
We further underscore the need to ensure the access of
investigation teams to alleged cases of rights violations
in an effort to ensure that justice prevails.

Obviously, we welcome the dialogue undertaken
between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh,
which resulted in the signing of the 23 November
agreement on the return of refugees. However, we must
say that after carefully listening to the very poignant
statement delivered by Ms. Patten, it is imperative to
protect civilians, especially women and children, from
physical violence, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Council.

Moreover, while we welcome the decision made
by the Government of Myanmar to implement the
recommendations in the report of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, we urge it to ensure,
as quickly as possible and in close cooperation with
the Office of the High Commissioner on Refugees,
the safe and sustainable return of refugees. We also
urge the Government of Burma to firmly address the
underlying causes of the conflict, combat incitement to
hatred and violence against the Rohingyas, resolve the
painful issue of citizenship, and promote development
and economic and social inclusion in Rakhine state.

In sum and by way of conclusion, my delegation
wishes once again to emphasize the need for an
immediate cessation of violence and discrimination
against the Rohingya people; accountability to ensure
that refugees will not be persecuted or discriminated
against upon their return; the timely provision of
humanitarian access to Rakhine state and Bangladesh;
and sustained commitment on the part of the United
Nations, the Security Council in particular, with a
view to finding a speedy and viable solution. Such
commitment must support the laudable efforts made by
organizations and the countries of the region, including
Bangladesh, which we thank for its hospitality, and
China, for its diplomatic efforts.

