Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia,
and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
align themselves with this declaration.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, such as ballistic missiles,
is a growing threat to international peace and security.
While international treaty regimes and export-control
arrangements have slowed the spread of such weapons
and their delivery systems, a number of States have
sought or are seeking to develop such weapons. The
risk of terrorists' acquiring chemical, biological,
radiological or fissile materials and their means of
delivery adds a critical new dimension to that threat.

Meeting this challenge, therefore, is a central
element of the EU's external action. Our objective is to
prevent, deter, halt and, where possible, eliminate
proliferation programmes of concern worldwide. Non-
proliferation, disarmament and arms control can make
an essential contribution to the global fight against
terrorism by reducing the risk of non-State actors
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction,
radioactive materials and means of delivery.

It is against this backdrop in particular that the
European Union fully acknowledges the relevance of
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) as an
important international instrument. It is the first to be
adopted by the Council to deal with such weapons,
their means of delivery and related materials in an
integrated and comprehensive manner.

The EU is determined to give full support to the
Security Council and to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) in their endeavour to achieve the broadest
possible implementation of the resolution's
requirements.

The European Union fully recognizes the tireless
efforts of the Committee established under this
resolution to provide guidance to States on preparing
and submitting national reports and fully implementing
their obligations under resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006). Let me indicate that the Committee, in
doing so, should also bear in mind its particular
responsibility to States in need of assistance.

We are fully aware that the Committee's
capacities are not unlimited and that additional
guidance and assistance is necessary. It can be
provided by States but also by international
organizations. The EU greatly appreciates the
important work in support of national implementation
that has been undertaken by a number of international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. The EU also acknowledges the
commitment of other international organizations to
supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) through appropriate activities within their
respective areas of responsibility. Furthermore, the
support and the useful contributions made by non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) to the
implementation of the resolution are appreciated.

Nor does the European Union ignore the danger
posed by weapons of mass destruction, their means of
delivery and related materials. That is why, as early as
December 2003, it endorsed the EU Strategy against
the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction. That
non-proliferation strategy creates a comprehensive and
cogent basis for joint action by the EU member States.
It constitutes a central element of the EU's external
action. It is first and foremost within that framework
and on the basis of that Strategy that the EU engages in
the effective and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which is one of the focal points
of its non-proliferation policy. The EU Strategy against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery rests on three pillars: rendering
multilateralism and its instruments more effective;
promoting a stable international and regional
environment; and cooperating closely with key
partners.

The Strategy aims at strengthening identification,
control and interception of illegal trafficking in
weapons of mass destruction. It also suggests a
programme of assistance to States in need of technical
knowledge in the field of export control. Both are core
issues addressed by resolution 1540 (2004).

Every year the European Union adopts a list of
priorities for the implementation of its non-
proliferation Strategy. Support for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) figures prominently among
the EU's policy priorities. That is why in 2005 the
resolution was added to the list. But even before that
time the EU had undertaken a number of activities,
which it is still engaged in, aimed at strengthening
national export control systems where assistance is
required. The EU substantial legislative corpus in the
area of export controls and the lessons learned and best
practices identified during a peer review give the
European Union a solid background that enables it to
support third countries in the development of effective
export controls.

In 2006, the European Union and member States
held numerous seminars and meetings providing export
control training and assistance to States in need of
technical knowledge, similar to the one recently held in
San Francisco within the framework of the Regional
Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
In addition, cooperation and assistance programmes
under the 2005 Pilot Project Programme of the
European Commission, implemented by Germany's
export control agency with the assistance of national
experts from EU member States, were advanced in
several countries. All these measures, as well as many
others I shall not mention here, contribute to assisting
in the effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Finally, in 2006, the EU co-sponsored and,
together with United Nations Department of
Disarmament Affairs, co-frnanced three regional
seminars through a joint action by all European Union
member States to support the regional implementation
of the resolution. The seminars took place in regions
where countries had the greatest difficulties
implementing the resolution. The seminars were aimed
at raising awareness of its requirements, in particular
the obligation to submit national reports on
implementation and to adopt relevant legislation and
other measures.

The seminars yielded very concrete and
comprehensive recommendations with regard to
follow-up and pinpointed the real need for assistance.
We consider the seminars to have been of particular
help in identifying further assistance needs, because
the countries actually in need participated in the
workshops. The recommendations are a result of their
discussion and of their input. The European Union will
listen to their voices.

In assisting with the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in third countries, the EU will continue to
cooperate and coordinate closely with the stakeholder
Governments involved. Their involvement and
participation in identifying the assistance needed is an
important precondition for the success and
sustainability of any measure taken. But the European
Union will also cooperate closely with the 1540
Committee. It is the focal point for the implementation
of the resolution. Any action taken should, therefore,
be closely coordinated with the Committee in order to
avoid redundancies.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the European
Union remains committed to the full implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006). However,
our work on resolution 1540 (2004)is far from finished.
We have a vision of how the world should look once
that resolution is fully implemented. But that is still a
long way off.

