Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on Guatemala's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

My delegation wishes your delegation every success
in carrying out its functions.

I would next like to thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui, not only for the briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2012/678), but
also for the praiseworthy work that the Mission has
accomplished in Haiti.

My delegation will address the issue before us from
three angles 4 the political, security and humanitarian.

Last March, during the consideration of the
previous report on the sociopolitical situation in Haiti
(S/2012/l28), my country expressed its concern with
regard to the current political, security and humanitarian
problems in the country. Today, six months later, the
report presented to us allows us to assess the progress
made by policymakers and the Haitian people in
continuing the process of stabilization in their country
and in establishing the rule of law.

Following the resignation of the former Prime
Minister, Mr. Garry Conille, Haiti once again was
dragged into a political crisis that delayed political and
economic reforms that the country was to undertake. In
May, therefore, Togo gladly welcomed the confirmation
by the Parliament of the appointment of Prime Minister
Laurent Salvador Lamothe and his statement of general
policy, which was an important message regarding
the collective political commitment of policymakers
in Haiti to continue necessary reforms in order to
re-establish the rule of law and create and solidify
public institutions, as well as improve the well-being of
people. That message was followed by the publication
of a revised version of constitutional amendments,
which had been ready for adoption since June 2011. My
country welcomes the publication of those amendments,
which allow for, inter alia, the creation of a Permanent
Electoral Council and a Constitutional Council, a
30 per cent quota of women in the Government and the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
to strengthen the independence of that branch of
Government.

Nevertheless, it is unfortunate that the establishment
of the first Permanent Electoral Council in the country,
responsible for the organization of elections, is still
taking time owing to controversies surrounding the
moral fibre of its members and its ability to conduct
credible elections that are acceptable to everyone. That
is why my country calls upon all Haitian political actors
to continue along the path of consensus, which has
allowed for the significant progress just noted, in order
to ensure that legislative, local and partial elections,
set for the end of the year, will take place in proper
conditions. Those elections were supposed to happen in
November 2011 and, among other things, will allow for
a real assessment of the progress of democracy in Haiti
that has been made to date.

The security sector has always been one of the
largest challenges in Haiti. While the situation has
improved since the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH launched operations that allowed for the
disbanding of many criminal gangs, rates of homicide,
kidnapping and other violent crimes continue to be high
in the country. That situation has an adverse impact on
the well-being of people, economic activities and the
completion of donor projects.

In that regard, Togo would call upon the Haitian
authorities to continue to bolster the operational
capacity and modernization of the Haitian National
Police and fight criminal gangs, which are the main
source of insecurity in the country. We commend the
courageous decision made last June by the Haitian
authorities to put a stop to the illegal activities of
members of the former armed forces.

However, managing crime and violence cannot
be undertaken outside the bounds of the rule of law.
It is therefore important to strengthen the rule of law
by modernizing the legal and institutional framework
linked to the security sector, expanding the police forces
and the judiciary in the country as a whole, and making
the protection of human rights a cardinal principle.

My country continues to be concerned by the human
rights violations noted in the report, in particular of the
rights of children who are victims of rape, abduction,
trafficking and homicide. The Government must also
take a firm stance against cases of excessively long
preventive detention, inter alia, as well as prison living
conditions.

One of the priorities announced by the Haitian
Government is the recovery and reconstruction of
the country. In that respect, Togo is pleased with
achievements made in the last quarter in cleaning
up the wreckage from the 2010 earthquake and in
implementing return and relocation programmes,
which have led to the closing of more than 22 camps
and the rehousing of 5,000 families.

Nevertheless, we are concerned about the living
conditions in the camps, where a high number of
displaced persons live. Those conditions continue to
worsen with the progressive withdrawal of humanitarian
institutions due, inter alia, to the lack of funding. A full
withdrawal of those organizations before a definitive
solution is found for that humanitarian issue could
create more health problems, such as those experienced
by the country in the recent past. My country would
therefore call upon the international community to
help the Haitian authorities to resolve that issue by
continuing its aid.

It is crucial for the Government and the people of
Haiti themselves to tackle the challenges they are faced
with. We are pleased to note the progress Haiti has made
towards stabilization and development by bolstering its
political institutions and the entities that guarantee the
rule of law. We welcome those major advances, which
are clearly noted in the report of the Secretary-General.

Nevertheless, in spite of those steps forward, Haiti
continues to face significant challenges in its efforts to
improve governance, stimulate growth, reduce poverty,
manage crime and violence and address ever-growing
prices of products for basic survival. All those matters
are closely interlinked. It is clear that the current gaps
in governance and the inability of the State to provide
goods and services slow down economic development
and impede poverty reduction, while poverty itself

fuels crime. In that context, interventions must be made
on many fronts in parallel. In addition, it is clear that,
to tackle the those challenges, Haiti needs sustainable
international aid, and the people and Government of the
country will have to do their utmost to tackle them. My
delegation would like to call upon the Government to
unremittingly continue what it has undertaken along
those lines.

Finally, given the many steps forward that have
been taken, Togo understands and supports the plan
to restructure and reorganize MINUSTAH's activities
and its gradual withdrawal from the country.

