Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand too
expresses its condolences for the recent loss of life in
Paris and Beirut, as well as in attacks in Ankara, Egypt,
Iraq and beyond.

We must do all we can to counter the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). That includes finding a
political resolution to the Syrian conflict, which is a
major driver of ISIL. The recent attacks show that the
human cost of the conflict reaches well beyond Syria.
Within Syria, however, it also continues to escalate.
Twenty-one months ago, the Council adopted resolution
2139 (2014) on Syria, which demanded that all parties
immediately cease and desist from all violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
abuses. That call has not been heeded. A brutal and
lawless conflict continues.

Human rights violations and abuses can lead to
and fuel conflict. They underpin many of the conflicts
that come before the Council. That is especially
evident in Syria. A common feature of conflict is the
disproportional impact that it has on the most vulnerable.
That is true in Syria for women and for children. As we
have heard today, 2.7 million Syrian children have been
deprived of their right to education - some for four
years or more. The fact that more than half of all attacks
on schools worldwide over the past four years have
taken place in Syria says it all. As we have heard today
from other colleagues, children continue to be recruited
and indoctrinated by ISIL and non-State armed groups.

Women and girls inside Syria and those who have
fled the conflict are subjected to sexual and gender-
based violence, sexual exploitation and harassment. The
desperate economic situation of families is exploited,
with young girls being coerced into early marriages.
ISIL must be singled out for its brutal campaign of
sexual Violence. Sexual violence is not a women's issue.
It is a weapon of war. It terrorizes individuals, and it
destabilizes families and communities. We need to
move beyond the narrative of women being victims of
conflict. They must be provided with the opportunity
to be powerful agents of change in transforming their
societies.

Syrian women have shown immense resilience and
strength. At the political level, Syrian women must
be included in policy dialogues about Syria's future,
as called for by Special Envoy De Mistura last week
and echoed in the Chamber today. At the community
level, the views of women must be included in needs
assessments, programme design and the implementation
and evaluations of humanitarian and development
programmes. Accountability for international
humanitarian law violations and human rights abuses
in Syria is not optional. It is essential for justice; it is
essential for healing.

New Zealand is working with Jordan and Spain to
renew resolution 2191 (2014), which has enabled cross-
border access for humanitarian assistance seeking to
enter Syria. Resolution 2191 (2014) has enabled the
delivery of food assistance, non-food humanitarian
items and medical supplies for millions of people.
However, millions more remain hard to reach, including
those in besieged areas, who are intentionally denied
basic necessities as a cruel tactic of war.

New Zealand is concerned that cross-line access
continues to be obstructed, particularly by the Syrian
Government. Humanitarian access into ISIL-controlled
areas remains almost nonexistent. New Zealand
supports the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura, but
he needs the support of the international community.
In that regard, New Zealand welcomes the ongoing
talks in Vienna. They are an important step towards a
political solution, affirming the benefits of pragmatism
and diplomacy.

We also welcome the agreement reached by the
International Syria Support Group to encourage
confidence-building measures by parties on the
ground, including better implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), increased
humanitarian access and an end to the use of
indiscriminate weapons. Such measures will advance
the political process, which is the only real answer to
the humanitarian crisis. They will also protect civilians
in the short term. Their implementation is long overdue.

Finally, we welcome the strong role envisaged for
the Security Council by the Vienna process. We look
forward to working closely with Council members to
reinforce the progress made in Vienna and to engage on
questions emerging from the process. New Zealand is
encouraged to see momentum building towards finding
a political solution. It is shameful that it has taken
nearly five years, with well over a quarter of a million
people dead, and with 4.2 million people - almost the
exact population of New Zealand- fleeing Syria, to
get to where we are today.

We must commit to ensuring that now is the
beginning of the end of the conflict in Syria. In that
regard, we welcome the announcement by the United
Kingdom of a global Syria crisis conference early next
year.

