Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I should like to join
in the condolences that have been expressed by other
members of the Council to the delegation of Tunisia on
the death of President Bourguiba, and also in the
congratulations that have been expressed to the President,
and others around the Council table today. It is a great
pleasure to see you here, Mr. President. Your
commitment to the United Nations, and to the Security
Council in particular, is much appreciated and welcomed
by the United Kingdom.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Listre for the
cooperation that he has extended to us as Chairman of the
Afghan sanctions Committee over the various troubling
experiences that we have had to trouble the Committee
with over the last few weeks.

I should like straightaway to say how much the
United Kingdom deplored the recent forced entry by
Taliban armed groups into United Nations premises in

 

Kandahar on 26, 27 and 29 March, and the consequent
intimidation of United Nations personnel. The Taliban must
recognize that their actions fall well short of internationally
accepted norms of behaviour. We call on them to stop such
practices and urge them to guarantee the safety of United
Nations and other international personnel in Afghanistan.
Such actions completely undermine their arguments for
recognition by the international community.

It was clear from Personal Representative Vendrell's
briefing to the Council on 28 March, and from what
Mr. Renninger has said today, that the long-suffering
people of Afghanistan are in for another summer of misery.
Fighting has already resumed. Both protagonists are
preparing for new offensives, but a military victory is not
possible. An obvious contribution to improving the
humanitarian and human rights situation would be the
advent of peace. A ceasefire, followed by a negotiated
settlement leading to a broad-based Government, is the best
solution. The United Nations has a crucial role in brokering
this; hence our dismay at the violation of United Nations
immunity in Kandahar and our concern at what
Mr. Renninger has said today about external interference.
We call again for an end to the outside interference, which
lessens considerably the chances of peace in Afghanistan.

We continue to support United Nations efforts to
facilitate a solution in Afghanistan, and we urge a
redoubling of the efforts by the "six plus two" group.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
human rights situation in Afghanistan, and particularly as
it affects women and girls. As Mr. Renninger has said, the
litany of discrimination against them is all too familiar:
restrictions on access to health care, education and
employment outside the home, restrictions on freedom of
movement, restrictions on their freedom from intimidation,
harassment and violence. The report of the Special
Rapporteur on human rights in Afghanistan highlights
further, yet more disturbing, violations of the human rights
of Afghan women and children last year. We have also
noted an emerging trend of deliberate targeting of civilians
by the various combatants. This violates any number of
international norms. It is simply unacceptable, and it cannot
and should not be tolerated.

We urge all factions - in particular the Taliban, who
must bear primary responsibility - to end immediately all
human rights violations against women and children, to
repeal all discriminatory legislation and measures and to
ensure the full and equal participation of women and girls
in civil society, as well as their full access to health care
and education. We have pointed out to the Taliban - and
this I think is a particularly telling point - that other
Islamic societies accord more rights to women.

We have noted reports of some improvement in the
access for women and girls to health care and education.
We welcome any positive developments, but these moves
are nowhere near enough. Their continues to be a
yawning gap between the promises and actions,
particularly by the Taliban. We need as a Council to
consider how we can close that gap.

The United Kingdom will continue to make these
points in our contacts with the factions. We support the

United Nations fully in its humanitarian efforts.

In pursuing its own programme of humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people, the United Kingdom
actively participates in the principled programming
approach under the United Nations-led strategic
framework for Afghanistan. This approach is designed to
ensure that assistance works towards the eradication of
any form of discrimination, including gender
discrimination.

As the Council will know, the United Kingdom
provides funding for the Islamabad-based United Nations
gender adviser post. We would be interested in an
assessment of the activities of the Adviser and how they
might be developed further.

