I will start with the most recent development, the Russian air strikes in Idlib yesterday, which is the gravest breach of the ceasefire since March. The New York Times reported today on the civilian victims of that attack. If this proves true, it is unacceptable and another violation of international humanitarian law. Mr. Lowcock mentioned the attacks that the brave humanitarian aid workers faced. I want to highlight and praise what they are doing under very difficult circumstances and condemn those unacceptable attacks. On the humanitarian situation, I would like to add to this morning's headlines from the United Nations spokesman. Doctors say that the coronavirus disease is rampant in the refugee camps of Idlib and the north-west of Syria. As we predicted, it is aggravating the humanitarian crisis. Mark Lowcock described the dire situation. Russia and China bear a huge responsibility for the humanitarian situation after they vetoed the additional crossing points, which would have greatly facilitated humanitarian aid. How inhumane can one get? On the political track, we thank the Special Envoy for his briefing and for calling a spade a spade. It is clear who is blocking the Constitutional Committee and the political process: the responsibility clearly lies with the Al-Assad regime. These delaying and obstructionist tactics are simply detestable. Russia should finally use its influence to cut military aid and stop its support so that the Syrian regime finally plays ball. The tactics are clear. They want to waste time until the presidential elections in 2021. The regime should not have any illusions. The elections will not be recognized if they are held under the present circumstances. There is no alternative to a real substantive political process. With regard to the return of refugees, that is not possible under present circumstances. We are still very far from achieving the prerequisites for safe, voluntary and dignified returns, as defined by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Coming back to the sanctions issue, we have not seen a single example where targeted European Union sanctions have prevented humanitarian aid. We will therefore continue those sanctions. We have to target the people who are responsible for the killings and torture in Syrian prisons. We all know the Caesar pictures. We are all obliged to sanction and hold accountable those responsible for dropping chemical bombs on the population. These sanctions do not have economic repercussions. They target specific persons, and that does not block humanitarian aid. We are always inspired by Nelson Mandela, who asked for sanctions to remain in place until the end of apartheid. Without accountability, there will be no reconciliation or moral or physical reconstruction. I would encourage the Special Envoy to engage more on that issue. We are deeply concerned by the latest report from Human Rights Watch, which investigated dozens of air and ground strikes on civilian targets in Idlib between April 2019 and March 2020. The report concluded that those attacks by the Syrian regime and Russia were apparent war crimes and may amount to crimes against humanity. There has to be a follow-up to the findings of the report and those of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry, the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Board of Inquiry, which all came to similar conclusions with regard to violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law in Syria. The evidence for these crimes is overwhelming and should be heard in the proper venue - at the International Criminal Court. We must not tolerate impunity for the most serious crimes in Syria. Whoever commits crimes against humanity or war crimes should not feel safe anywhere and will be held accountable. As long as the referral of these crimes to the International Criminal Court is vetoed, we will use all available means to make sure that those responsible are ultimately prosecuted and are preserving evidence and referring cases to national jurisdictions where possible. We therefore call on the Security Council to finally live up to its responsibility to join the fight against impunity in order to ensure that those responsible for torture and killing in Syrian prisons and for other crimes and atrocities are held accountable. National reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria will not be possible unless there is truth, justice and accountability for all crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict.
