Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank Mr. Ghassan Salame for his
excellent briefing on the current state of the security
and humanitarian situation and the political process in
Libya, as well as the activities carried out under the
mandate ofthe United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
I offer him our full support and the encouragement
of my country, Cote d'Ivoire. I also thank Mr. Sma'il
Chergui for the quality of his briefing. Lastly, I thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his
presentation of the thirty-fourth periodic report on the
Committee's work.

Cote d'Ivoire is attentively following developments
in the situation in Libya and notes with deep concern
the impasse that has reigned since the beginning of the
armed clashes over control of Tripoli. After more than
six weeks of fighting and the tragic toll of 450 deaths,
more than 2,000 injured and 63,000 displaced persons,
the prospects for a resumption of the intra-Libyan
political dialogue are becoming dangerously remote.
Equally worrisome is the insidious establishment and
entrenchment of religious groups, in particular the
Islamic State, in areas outside State control. Ifthe crisis
persists, those groups, fuelled by radical ideology and
rhetoric, could exacerbate tribal divisions and pose
another major challenge to the return of lasting peace
and stability in Libya that we are seeking.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore condemns the armed clashes
between the forces of the Government of National
Accord and those of General Haftar, the humanitarian
consequences of which have been particularly
devastating. While expressing its solidarity with the
brotherly Libyan people at this particularly difficult
time, my country once again reiterates its call on the
United Nations and the African Union to pursue their
mediation efforts and good offices to the parties to the
conflict in order to reach an immediate ceasefire and
resume dialogue among all Libyan parties. While C6te
d'Ivoire recalls that the way out of the crisis and the
dawn of lasting peace and stability in Libya depend on
robust, constructive and inclusive dialogue among all
stakeholders, my country remains convinced that the
continuing deterioration of the social, political and
humanitarian situation in Libya requires the prompt
implementation of resolution 2420 (2018), especially its
provisions concerning the arms embargo.

It is also beyond question that the fighting around
Tripoli is affecting the country's oil industry, thereby
further depressing an already devastated economy
and exacerbating the ongoing humanitarian crisis. In
that regard, it is appropriate to recall that the export
of Libyan petroleum is the exclusive responsibility of
the National Oil Corporation. The Council's message
to the Libyan parties must therefore be imbued with
firmness regarding their obligation to respect human
rights and international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians and humanitarian personnel.

Cote d'Ivoire also echoes the call of the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the Libyan parties
to focus on the plight of the thousands of migrants in
detention camps in close proximity to the areas of
fighting. As Commissioner Chergui mentioned earlier,
some Africans are now being used as human shields in
the fighting around Tripoli, which must alarm us and
heighten our attention to the matter. In that regard, C6te
d'Ivoire welcomes the assistance of bilateral partners,
including the Government of Germany, whose recent
donation of €3 million to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Libya will
undoubtedly contribute to the increased protection of
refugees and displaced persons.

The joint communique issued at the end of the third
African Union-United Nations Annual Conference, held
on 6 May, highlights the complementary roles played
by regional organizations and actors in the resolution
of the Libyan conflict. Above all, it recalls the need
for the international community to act urgently to send
an unequivocal message with regard to the need for an
immediate ceasefire and the imperative of a single road
map for Libya.

The current instability in Libya clearly poses a
threat to peace and regional and international security,
particularly for the sub-Saharan African countries
that are struggling to find adequate responses to
the progressive entrenchment and deadly attacks of
jihadist groups. That is why C6te d'Ivoire unreservedly
supports the call on the international community,
launched at the meeting of the Heads of State of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, to fully acknowledge the
regional and international scale of the Libyan crisis and
to harmonize the efforts of all the countries concerned
to achieve a lasting settlement to the conflict in Libya.

