Mr. Abou Moussa (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to present to the Security Council the first
report (S/2011/704) of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA). I would also like to welcome
the presence in the Chamber of Their Excellencies the
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Ambassador
and Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations. That further demonstrates the interest
in cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

The report before the Council presents the
process of setting up the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in Libreville, Gabon, and
underscores the difficulties encountered during the
launching phase. It also notes the practical provisions
made for the effective functioning of the Office. In that
regard, I would like to renew the thanks of the United
Nations to the Gabon Government for the cooperation
given to UNOCA to facilitate its operation. The report
further indicates the vital support given to the Office
by various entities of the United Nations system, in
particular the Secretariat, the logistical base in Brindisi
and the United Nations bodies in the Central African
subregion. Without that support, it would have been
difficult for the Office to achieve the current results.

(spoke in English)

The establishment of UNOCA follows the
willingness of the leaders of Central Africa to find
appropriate solutions to the conflicts that have affected
a number of countries in the subregion in the past. In
that regard, the leaders of the subregion worked closely
with the United Nations to establish the Office on
1 January 2011, and subsequently to inaugurate it on
2 March. On 11 March, the Secretary-General
appointed me as his Special Representative for Central
Africa and Head of UNOCA. I assumed my functions
on 24 May and arrived in Libreville on 15 June.

Since my arrival in Libreville, I have focused on
three key issues: first, the operationalization of the
Office; secondly, courtesy visits to the authorities of
the subregion to familiarize myself with the key
challenges confronting the subregion; and thirdly,
taking initial steps towards enhancing coordination
among the United Nations entities in the subregion.

I am pleased to report that the Office is now fully
operational and that we have started implementing its
mandate. About 87 per cent of the staff have assumed
their duties in Libreville, and the remaining
outstanding recruitment and operational tasks will be
completed soon. Besides those actions, I have engaged
in a process of consultations with the Heads of State
and Government, the representatives of subregional
institutions and of the United Nations system, and
other partners in the subregion.
The objectives of those consultations were
twofold, namely, to obtain a broader awareness of the
nature of the peace and security and other challenges
confronting the subregion, and to better explain the
mandate of UNOCA to the region's leaders and other
stakeholders, as well as to obtain their perspectives on
and their expectations of the implementation of that
mandate. I have visited all ECCAS member States
except one, which I plan to visit in the near future. I
also visited the African Union headquarters in Addis
Ababa and the United Nations Office to the African
Union.

Following those consultations, UNOCA brought
together representatives of the United Nations system
in Central Africa at a regional seminar held in
Libreville in October. The seminar provided an
opportunity for the United Nations system to agree on
how to align its support to countries in Central Africa
in a more coordinated manner, with UNOCA playing a
coordinating role. In that regard, we are working with
the United Nations Subregional Centre for Human
Rights and Democracy in Central Africa, in Yaounde,
and the Central Africa Subregional Office of
UN-Women, in Kigali, which have agreed to
strengthen cooperation with UNOCA.

Following consultations with leaders and other
stakeholders in Central Africa, the following emerged
as the key challenges facing the subregion: cross-
border security and the activities of armed groups such
as the Lord's Resistance Army, the circulation of small
arms and light weapons, drugs and human trafficking,
transnational organized crime, youth unemployment
and stability, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, piracy and maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea, the impact of the conflict in Libya, terrorism,
election-related disputes, and the strengthening of the
institutional capacity of subregional organizations and
their peace and security mechanisms, in particular
those of the Economic Community of Central Africa
States.

Regarding the issue of small arms and light
weapons, it is noteworthy that States members of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa signed the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly - known as the Kinshasa
Convention - in Brazzaville during the Committee's
thirty-first ministerial meeting. UNOCA intends to
work closely with the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, in collaboration
with ECCAS, to promote the ratification of the
Convention with a View to ensuring its early entry into
force and implementation.

The issue of piracy and maritime security remains
of great concern. Apart from seizing vessels, criminals
are carrying out other unlawful activities, including
poaching and the use of the Gulf as a hub for the
trans-shipment of narcotics. Recognizing the
importance of enhanced cross-border security in that
area, the countries of the subregion adopted the
Framework to Secure the Gulf of Guinea and a
protocol creating the Regional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Security in Central Africa in Kinshasa in
2009. The subregion has been subdivided into zones.
The countries of Zone D - Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe - where
significant acts of piracy and terrorism have been
reported, have reached a technical agreement on the
modalities of conducting maritime security operations
and surveillance.

On the same issue, I am in close contact with my
colleague, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Office for
West Africa, in Dakar, to better coordinate our
respective actions, and those of the two subregions, in
response to that growing challenge. As the Council
certainly knows, an assessment mission that was
recently deployed to West and Central Africa by the
Secretary-General is expected to come up with
recommendations for a coordinated strategy to improve
security in the Gulf of Guinea.

Lastly, the Security Council is equally aware of
the seriousness of the persisting threat to peace and
security in Central Africa posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). The report of the Secretary-
General that I have just introduced (S/2011/693)
describes the actions undertaken at various levels to
fight against the LRA.

The fallout in Libya presents new challenges for
countries in the subregion, particularly Chad and the
Central African Republic. The vulnerability of
returnees, the loss of revenue from remittances and the
illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons by
armed groups, including the LRA, are of grave
concern. There are concerns that stolen weapons from
Libya could fuel criminality and undermine the
progress achieved in the subregion.

As most of the issues noted during my
consultations with Heads of State and Government and

other stakeholders are also of concern to the secretariat
of the Economic Community of Central Africa States, I
am working in close collaboration with the Secretary-
General of that institution. Desk-to-desk meetings are
also taking place, bringing together experts of UNOCA
and the ECCAS secretariat to examine specific
questions of common concern. The subregion would
benefit tremendously from United Nations support to
national and subregional actors in their efforts to
address the causes of conflict and to put in place
durable mechanisms for sustainable peace. The report
before the Council emphasizes the need to enhance our
support through existing peace and security
mechanisms in Central Africa and to better coordinate
our collective efforts to ensure coherence and
comprehensiveness in our support to the region.

There are three key factors working in our favour.
The first is the political will shown by subregional
authorities to collectively address the challenges in
Central Africa. We need to continue to reinforce this
political will by, among other things, enhancing our
support in the subregion to address underlying
challenges such as poverty and unemployment. In that
regard, UNOCA will work closely with United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in the subregion.

The second factor is the existence of a regional
architecture for peace and security, comprising a set of
institutions and mechanisms, including ECCAS, which
serve as the basis for our support. In that regard, also,
we are going to maintain close cooperation with
subregional organizations, particularly ECCAS.

Finally, the establishment of UNOCA, tasked
with facilitating the coordination of peace initiatives in
the subregion, is generating new momentum and
creating strong expectations for a more robust
approach to dealing with the challenges that the
subregion is confronting. UNOCA will continue to
work closely with the leaders of the subregion, other
United Nations missions and key partners in the
subregion. Needless to say that UNOCA will, in
addition, continue to actively follow developments on
the two issues that I have already mentioned, namely,
the LRA and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate UNOCA's
gratitude for the support of the United Nations system
as a whole, and to the Security Council for its strong
and continued support of our efforts.
