Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I wish to
join previous speakers in congratulating the Dominican
Republic on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish it every
success in carrying out the work of the Council.

The dynamics in the Middle East continue to
worry the international community, and Kazakhstan
therefore wishes to echo the concerns that the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, has expressed today. We are
alarmed to note the tragic loss of the lives of almost
300 civilians - including more than 50 children - as
well as 29,000 casualties among Palestinian civilians in
2018. The Israeli security forces must calibrate the use
of force and employ lethal force only as a last resort.

Our position on the Middle East peace process
remains unchanged. We fully support the two-State
solution and call for the early resumption of negotiations
in the bilateral format and without preconditions. That
should be done in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, relevant Security Council resolutions
and other mechanisms and initiatives, such as the road
map for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid
principles and the land-for-peace formula.

We fully support the rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and the creation ofa free, sovereign
and independent State within the international borders
of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Jerusalem
is the common homeland of different ethnicities and
religions. Palestine and Israel must respect each other's
right to existence and avoid taking provocative actions
that might further escalate the situation. We condemn
all acts of violence and terrorism, in particular against
innocent civilians.

We would like to underline that the rapidly
expanding construction of new Israeli settlements, in
violation of resolution 2334 (2016), has become a major
obstacle to peace in the region and has brought about
intense suffering and hardship for the Palestinians. The
deliberate policy of demolishing Palestinian buildings,
the expansion of settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and the transfer of land for the exclusive use
of one party undermine the viability of the two-State
solution. The Council must ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016).

Turning to Gaza, the difficult humanitarian
situation there should remain of great concern to all of
us. Kazakhstan reiterates the critical need to support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the light of a
decade of blockades that have deprived the people of
their basic rights and left two-thirds of the population
dependent on humanitarian aid. At risk are education,
health care and emergency and social services that
contribute to the dignity and hope of 5.4 million
Palestinian refugees. More importantly, meeting
human needs leads to social content and subsequently
to the stability of the region. We also express our
concern at Israel's intention to close UNRWA schools
in East Jerusalem. Astana encourages Member States
with influence, in particular the Arab countries, the
United States, Russia and the European Union, to
urge Israel and Palestine to return to the negotiating
table. That should be done with the aim of reaching an
agreement on mutually acceptable principles relating
to the coexistence of two States based on international
law and Security Council resolutions.

Turning to Yemen, Kazakhstan welcomes the
adoption, on 16 January, of resolution 2452 (2019), on
the establishment of the new, political United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement by
implementing the Stockholm Agreement between the
Government of Yemen and the Houthi militia in the city
of Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa. Another important step towards peace in
Yemen that we recognized was the meeting between the
parties to the conflict held in Amman on 18 January to
exchange prisoners. We hope that the recent positive
steps in the right direction will provide an opportunity
to revive the economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis
and restore basic public services in Yemen.

Finally, Kazakhstan reiterates its deep commitment
to the multilateral effort to secure stability in the
Middle East, which, at the same time, will hold great
promise when peace prevails - a goal towards which
we all should work.

