Mr. Serrano: Let me start, Mr. President, by
thanking you for inviting the European Union (EU), in
its capacity as a Quartet member, to participate in this
open debate. The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Montenegro and
Serbia and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.

We have listened carefully to the presentations
and statements just made. The resolution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict remains a central political and strategic
objective for the European Union. On the occasion of
the first Foreign Affairs Council meeting, in December
2009, following the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty, EU Foreign Ministers discussed in depth the
current situation in the Middle East and the way
forward. During this discussion the following points
were emphasized.

A resumption of negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, now absent for more than a year, is of
utmost urgency. These negotiations, however, must be
focussed and result-oriented. The negotiations must
respect international law as well as previous
agreements and understandings. They must include all
final-status issues, including borders, Jerusalem,
refugees, security and water, and must lead, within an
agreed time frame, to a two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security.

The European Union will not recognize any
changes to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties.
The European Union supports the ongoing efforts of
the United States towards a resumption of negotiations,
which are closely coordinated among Quartet partners.

The European Union stands ready to contribute
substantially to post-conflict arrangements aimed at
ensuring the sustainability of peace agreements. We
appeal to others to join in this important task. In the
meantime, the European Union continues its work as a
key contributor to Palestinian State-building, in line
with the Palestinian Authority's government plan. Our
field missions and our work within the Quartet
contribute to this. In this context, I would like to
emphasize the efforts deployed by Quartet Special
Envoy Tony Blair to promote Palestinian economic
development and institutional governance of the future
Palestinian State.

The European Union welcomes Israel's steps to
ease restrictions on movement in the West Bank, which
have made a contribution to economic growth. Further
and sustained improvements of movement and access
have to follow. Many checkpoints and roadblocks
remain in place. The Palestinian Authority, for its part,
must build on its efforts to improve law and order.

The European Union took positive note of the
decision of the Government of Israel on a partial and
temporary settlement freeze. The European Union sees
this as a first step in the right direction and hopes that
it will contribute towards a resumption of meaningful
negotiations. At the same time, the European Union
reiterates that settlements and the separation barrier,
wherever it is built on occupied land, as well as
demolition of homes and evictions, are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible. The
European Union urges the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank and including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.

The European Union is particularly concerned
about the situation in East Jerusalem and calls on the
Israeli Government to stop all discriminatory treatment
of Palestinians there. The European Union recalls that it
has never recognised the annexation of East Jerusalem.
If there is to be genuine peace, a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of two States. The European Union
calls for the reopening of Palestinian institutions in
Jerusalem in accordance with the Road Map.

One year ago, the Gaza hostilities came to an end
and the Security Council adopted resolution 1860
(2009). However, the situation continues to be of grave
concern. Full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009)
is urgent. The EU further emphasises the importance of
appropriate and credible investigations into possible
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by the parties to the
conflict, in accordance with international standards. A
continued policy of closures has deeply affected life in
Gaza, has led to the devastation of its economy and is
politically counterproductive. The European Union
maintains its call for an immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of the crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and
from Gaza. While extremists stand to gain from the
current situation, the civilian population suffers.

The European Union is well aware of and fully
recognizes Israel's legitimate security needs. Gaza
must not be a platform for violence against Israel, and
arms smuggling must stop. The European Union calls
for the release of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, who has
been held captive for more than three and a half years.

The separation of Gaza from the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, remains a matter of serious
concern. The EU therefore calls on all Palestinians to
promote reconciliation behind President Abbas and to
support the mediation efforts by Egypt and the Arab
League, in order to prevent a lasting and detrimental
division.

A comprehensive peace must include a settlement
between Israel and Syria, and Israel and Lebanon.
Concerning the Syrian track, the European Union
sincerely hopes that the 2008 talks can soon be
resumed and brought to a conclusion.
30

A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict requires a regional approach, and the EU
therefore calls on all regional actors to take
confidence-building measures in order to stimulate
mutual trust. An active Arab contribution, building on
the Arab Peace Initiative, is of crucial importance.
These views are shared among all Quartet partners.

Let me close by confirming the determination of
the European Union to work with its partners in a
reinvigorated Quartet to achieve the two-State solution.
I would like to express the hope that this debate, held
at the beginning of a new year and indeed a new
decade, will mark the beginning of a political
development that will finally lead to the solution of
this conflict.

