Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of this important
meeting and thank the briefers for their presentations.
We also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the representative of UNICEF and the other relevant
actors for their work, and reiterate the Dominican
Republic's support for the agenda of children and
armed conflict within the framework of the Council.
The testimonies of Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok
Peter Awan confirm the importance of the agenda and
call on us to promote it through action.

We believe it is critical to increase the capacities of
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions by
granting them the resources and ability needed to protect
children in conflict. That includes equipping them with
child protection advisers, as well as prioritizing actions
with the affected communities in order to promote
early warning and protection mechanisms. We see
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
as a valuable tool for maintaining open channels of
communication with actors on the ground, as well as in
country-specific approaches.

The Dominican Republic is concerned about
the number of children whose lives are threatened
by indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas and
infrastructure. Last year, in Afghanistan alone, the
United Nations verified reports concerning 3,062
child victims, including 927 deaths and 2,135 cases
of mutilation.

The psychological effects on a child victim of
sexual violence have unimaginable consequences. We
must therefore prioritize concrete measures to prevent
and respond to sexual violence in conflict, as well
as to identify those responsible and ensure that the
perpetrators pay for their horrendous acts.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509)
highlights, for example, that in Yemen there were 275
incidents of denial of humanitarian access in 2018,
including restrictions on movement, interference in
the implementation of assistance, violence against
humanitarian personnel and attacks on water facilities.
Such events threaten the livelihoods of more than
7 million children in one of the most devastating
humanitarian crises in history.

The report also highlights that in Somalia, by
means of intimidation, a total of2,228 boys and 72 girls
were recruited and used by parties to the conflict. That

trend is repeated in many other contexts, not only in
Africa but also in the Middle East, and is used as a way
of perpetuating hatred and exclusion.

To break that cycle, we advocate for greater
protection of children and for the subsequent
reintegration of those recruited by armed groups. That
requires greater investment in education, training,
counselling and family reunification programmes.
Children too often continue to be stigmatized and
criminalized for acts that they were forced to commit.

All the aforementioned shows us that there is still a
long way to go to eradicate the abuses and horrors faced
by children in conflict that do so much harm to their
lives, well-being and development. In that context, last
February we endorsed the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers.

In conclusion, children's education is one of the
main rights affected and is very often the last to be
restored. In Syria, the hundreds of verified attacks on
schools have forced more than 2 million children to
interrupt their studies in order to save their lives. The
Dominican Republic is a signatory to the Safe Schools
Declaration as an initiative to raise awareness of the
reprehensible war practice of using school premises for
military purposes, and we advocate the immediate and
complete elimination of such a practice.

