Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are sure that with your vast experience
and able guidance the work of the Council will be
successful. We also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
Ambassador Lavrov, and his delegation on the excellent
work they did this past December.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
activities of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) indicates that, generally speaking, no
progress has been made in the political negotiations
between Georgia and Abkhazia and that the peace process
remains at a standstill.

It has not been possible to make any progress in
overcoming the differences of the parties over a solution
based on a federative state within the borders of Georgia
and one based on a union between two equal states. This
situation, in our view, adversely affects the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons.

My delegation believes that if the political dialogue
between the parties is not resumed soon, the situation
could continue to deteriorate, because, as the Secretary-
General rightly pointed out in one of his earlier reports,

"Situations of tense political deadlock prevent the
development of the stability and public confidence
necessary for economic assistance, reconstruction
and a return to normalcy for the persons affected".

We believe that the parties must show that they are
prepared to reach immediate agreement on the three
sticking points that so far have blocked progress in the
peace process: the return of refugees and displaced
persons in conditions of safety; an agreement on a special
status for Abkhazia; and the preservation of the territorial
integrity of Georgia, which is supported by the
international community. Accordingly, my delegation
believes that the negotiating points formulated by
President Shevardnadze and reflected in paragraph 8 of
the report of the Secretary-General constitute an
appropriate basis for the parties to reach a settlement. The
parties must also comply with international humanitarian
law and cooperate with UNOMIG, the peace-keeping
forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), in order to promote and
accelerate the return of refugees and displaced persons or
to legalize the situation of those who have already
returned, in keeping with the provisions of the
Quadripartite Agreement of 4 April 1994.

My delegation believes that the measures taken by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in conjunction

 

with the Government of Georgia and the Abkhaz
authorities, with the assistance of the Russian Federation as
facilitator and with the support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, are of the utmost
importance in order for the parties to resume negotiations
with a View to achieving a broad political settlement of the
conflict by means of a mutually acceptable protocol
covering a status for Abkhazia within the borders of
Georgia. My delegation acknowledges those efforts and
fully supports them.
Despite the situation of insecurity and the existing
tensions in various areas of the Abkhaz region, especially
in Gali, and the restrictions on freedom of movement that
continue to be imposed on the personnel of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, UN OMIG continues
fully to discharge its mandate and to cooperate satisfactorily
with the peace-keeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and with UNHCR. My delegation
believes that so long as no concrete steps are taken towards
the restoration of peace and stability in that region of the
world, the presence of UNOMIG will be necessary. We
agree that the Council should extend UNOMIG's mandate
for an additional six-month period and that it should call
upon the parties to achieve without delay substantive
progress towards a broad political settlement of the conflict
in the Abkhaz region.

Accordingly, we will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

