Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela abstained in the voting on
resolution 2209 (2015) on chemical weapons in Syria
because it believes that it prejudges the investigative
process being conducted by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), linking the
use of chlorine gas as a chemical weapon in the conflict
taking place in that country.

In that respect, we consider it necessary, prior to the
adoption of a resolution such as that on which we have
abstained, to conclude the investigation to determine
who is responsible for such an abominable act, above
all given the fact that Syria has been a victim of the
barbarism of terrorist groups that have moved into that
country with the goal of sowing hatred, intolerance and
violence, and that enjoy major military capacities.

Venezuela condemns the use of chemical weapons
anywhere in the world, whatever the circumstances or
motives, since their use constitutes a war crime. In that
regard, we attach great importance to the information
provided by the OPCW that all of the chemical
weapons declared on the part of Syria have been
removed from its territory. That demonstrates the will
and commitment of the Syrian authorities to strictly
observe the provisions of resolution 2118 (2013) and of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. The information presented
by the OCPW on the removal of chemical weapons
is evidence that Syria has fully complied with the
provisions of resolution 2118 (2013).

We reiterate our call for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict among all parties, in conformity with Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations. We affirm our
full support for the diplomatic efforts of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
to achieve a firm and lasting peace with the full
participation of all sectors of Syrian society. We wish
to responsibly call attention to the fact that resolution
2209 (2015), on which we abstained in the voting,
opens a dangerous path to the use of force, which could
jeopardize the dialogue process based on the Moscow,
Cairo and United Nations initiatives with a view to
peacefully ending the conflict.

