Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union. I should like, however, to make several remarks
in my national capacity.

Allow me to thank the President for convening
this crucial open debate and for preparing an excellent
concept note (S/2016/712, annex).

Poland strongly supports the strengthening of the
global non-proliferation and disarmament architecture,
based on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Bilogical and Toxin Weapons Convention. Resolution
1540 (2004) plays a pivotal role by reinforcing the
architecture by encouraging cooperation in the area of
non-proliferation. Its significance is even more striking
against the backdrop of emerging threats posed by
non-State actors. Such threats have become dangerous
in recent years with the growth in the capabilities of
some terrorist organizations, most notably the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, to produce and use toxic
substances as weapons.

For the past two years, Poland has conducted a
comprehensive review of its national procedures for
interdicting weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
The main goal was ensuring reliable decision-making
processes for scenarious involving detecting illegal
transfers of WMD materials. Equally important was
making certain that all national institutions were aware
of their responsibilities in such cases. That work led to
the development of a document on a national interdiction
mechanism, which aggregates all our international
obligations on non-proliferation, including United
Nations and European Union sanctions and tools for
their implementation.

At the regional level, jointly with Croatia, we
carried out a voluntary peer review of the national
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Poland
traditionally undertakes efforts to strengthen and
support the enforcement of chemical non-proliferation
instruments, while promoting a chemical-security
culture and enhancing the security of chemicals
in transit. Within the global partnership, we have
contributed to that work by co-chairing, together with
Ukraine, the chemical security sub-working group
from 2012 to 2015. One of its most visible outcomes
was the development of the integrated chemical
security and safety programme in Ukraine under the
auspices ofthe Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development.
The ongoing comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004) provides a unique opportunity to take action
on a broad spectrum of issues related to international
security. Poland supports the work carried out to date
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and looks forward to the conclusion of the
review, which will reaffirm the Committee's central role
in the global non-proliferation architecture. We would
like to take this opportunity to commend Spain for its
tireless efforts in guiding us all through that crucial
process, aimed at a concrete outcome in December.

It is important to maintain a dialogue between
the 1540 Committee and the various non-proliferation
mechanisms and export control regimes. That is already
happening in the case ofthe Missile Technology Control
Regime. There are numerous global initiatives the
objectives of which are in line with those of the 1540
Committee, such as the Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Material of Mass Destruction,
the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Nuclear Security
Summit, the Australia Group, the Union European
Union Chemical Biological Radiological and Nuclear
Risk Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Proliferation Security Initiative. We
believe that there is a large scope for building closer
ties and synergies between those groups and the 1540
Committee, which is the only universal forum with the
potential to focus diverse expert knowledge.

The threat posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors is global, and
no country will be able to prevent it from happening
without close cooperation with other partners. The
sharing of best practices and peer reviews are essential
to minimize those threats throughout the world.
Poland stands ready to share its experiences and assist
interested countries in the preparation and conduct of
1540 peer reviews or national review decision-making
procedures for preventing the proliferation of WMDs to
non-State actors.

In conclusion, let me assure the Security Council
that we join others in the Chamber who call for effective
and committed implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and for enhanced efforts aimed at combating the
threats posed by international terrorism.

