Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their reports and, even more,
for their dedication to global public service. The world
community is indebted to each one for their outstanding
leadership in the area of international criminal justice.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Permanent Representative
of Guatemala, for his service as chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. Ambassador
Rosenthal and his talented team have ably guided
the Informal Working Group over the past two years
as it confronted many important issues in the field of
international justice and accountability. Through their
work, they have made tangible contributions to the
fight against impunity.

The United States has strongly supported the work
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda since their inception. As we
all recall, the Tribunals were established in response to
the horrors committed in the Balkans and in Rwanda
in the early 1990s, when the slaughter of hundreds of
thousands of innocent men, women and children led to
a wave of international revulsion.

The Tribunals were founded on the firm conviction
that those responsible for mass atrocities - no matter
what their rank or official position - must be held
accountable. Once the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) were up and
running, they began delivering international justice on
an unprecedented scale. To date, the two courts have
tried more than 200 defendants accused of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
top political and military leaders. The Tribunals have
operated on the principles of fairness, impartiality and
independence, and in the process have built up a robust
body of international humanitarian law.

While events in Syria, the Sudan and elsewhere
have shown that the commission of mass atrocities
continues to embody and urgent and profound challenge
to the global community, the ICTY and ICTR provide
a warning to leaders around the world that there are
consequences for the choices they make, the actions
they take and the orders they give.

With the historic work of the Tribunals now nearing
completion, the United States commends the efforts
of the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals
to enact cost-saving, managerial and administrative
measures and to transfer the remaining functions of the
Tribunals to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. At the same time, we recognize that
the exact closure dates will depend on the completion
of ongoing and soon-to-begin trials and appeals.

Turning specifically to the ICTY, we note, with
satisfaction, that the Tribunal continues to focus on the
completion of all trials and appeals, rendering 13 trial,
appellate and contempt judgements between August
2012 and July 2013 - a larger number of judgements
than in almost any previous reporting period. We are
pleased that The Hague branch of the Mechanism began
operating in July.

We particularly want to commend the work done by
the ICTY to enhance the training ofjudges, prosecutors
and defense counsel in States of the former Yugoslavia.
That investment in human and institutional capacity
will pay long-term dividends in peace and stability. We
urge all Governments of the region to continue working
towards reconciliation, to avoid statements that inflame
tensions and to continue to bring more criminals to
justice in local courts.

Regarding the ICTR, we are pleased that the
Tribunal has wrapped up its workload of trials and
continues to complete appeals, which we hope will be
done by 2015. The Arusha branch of the Mechanism
opened in 2012 and is operating smoothly. The United
States urges all States Members of the United Nations,
especially those of the region, to cooperate with the
Tribunal in the apprehension of the nine remaining
fugitives. Those alleged mass murderers must be
brought to trial. The United States continues to offer
monetary rewards for information leading to their
arrest, whether those individuals are to be prosecuted
in the Mechanism or in Rwandan courts. We also call
on regional Governments to work with the Tribunal on
the relocation of several persons who have either been
acquitted by the ICTR or served their sentences, but
whose return to Rwanda is problematic.

Looking back 20 years, it should be clear to all
that the two Tribunals have made enormous historic
contributions to international criminal law. Not only
have they brought to justice perpetrators of some of
the most heinous crimes known to humankind, they
have also assembled records and archives that will be
publicly accessible and that will protect the truth from
those who might, in the future, attempt to deny or
distort it. The Tribunals have fostered respect for the
rule of law, developed capacity at the national level,
and enhanced reconciliation and peace. They have also
shown that no one, no matter how powerful, is beyond
or above the reach of law. Those achievements have
transformed international criminal justice in ways that
will stand the tests of time and create a safer and more
just world for generations to come.

