Mr. Da Costa (Timor-Leste): I shall begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I wish to express my
gratitude to you for convening this meeting on the
question of Timor-Leste. I should also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
report (S/2007/513), as well as his Special
Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, for an insightful
presentation of the situation in Timor-Leste.
I am deeply honoured to address the Council for
the first time. As Minister for Foreign Affairs I have
the privilege to speak on behalf of all the people of
Timor-Leste to express our utmost gratitude for the
Council's sustained commitment to the development of
our young country. Looking back at our past, it is not
difficult to conclude that the Timorese people bear on
their shoulders a heavy burden of pain and suffering.
But it is also apparent that they have always been able
to overcome obstacles and difficulties in expressing
and affirming their desires. The three rounds of
elections just concluded were no exception.

They were the first national elections run by the
Timorese, and an important assertion of our ability to
exercise our independence. The national authorities
and the electoral staff trained by the United Nations
carried out the necessary legal, operational and
logistical procedures successfully and in a highly
professional manner. Overall, with the extensive
support of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), the presence of international
observers and the International Stabilization Force, the
elections were peaceful, free, fair and transparent, as
well as a demonstration of the people's hope,
confidence and enthusiasm.

The first round of presidential elections was held
on 9 April, with a field of 8 candidates; the run-off was
held a month later, on 9 May. As a result of those
elections, former Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta
was sworn in as the new President, on 20 May,
succeeding Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao. The legislative
election held on 30 June was the culmination of the
long process begun with the presidential elections. The
election was a true test of the constitution of Timor-
Leste and the political and democratic maturity of the
Timorese. In electing their representatives to the
National Parliament, the citizens clearly expressed
their desire for political dialogue and plurality, together
with stability and national development.

The new 65-seat Parliament was inaugurated on
30 July, with 7 of 14 parties and coalitions gaining
seats. The President of the Parliament was elected on
the same day, while the two Vice-Presidents, a
Secretary and two Deputy Secretaries were elected the
following day. I am pleased to say that we have 18
seats occupied by women, which is the largest
percentage in our legislature's short history. On
6 August, President Ramos-Horta invited Mr. Gusmao,
President of the Congresso Nacional de Reconstrucao
07-49942
de Timor-Leste, nominated by the Alliance for a
Parliamentary Majority, a post-electoral coalition of
four parties, to be the new Prime Minister and to form
a Government. On 8 August, Prime Minister Gusmao
was sworn in, together with 10 Ministers, 2 of whom
are women who head the key justice and finance
portfolios, and 14 Vice-Ministers and Secretaries of
State. On 30 August, a further 12 members of
Government were appointed, bringing the total number
of women in the cabinet to 5. There are still three
outstanding positions of Secretary of State to be
appointed.

Throughout the electoral process, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, Atul Khare, and his UNMIT team provided
invaluable support to us, urging constitutional as well
as politically acceptable solutions. The Timorese did
their part, but without the substantial contribution of
the international community, including that of United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), such positive results would have not been
achieved.

On behalf of the people of Timor-Leste, I would
like to extend our most sincere appreciation to the
United Nations and to our bilateral partners for their
support throughout the process. I would like to
acknowledge the support of Australia, Malaysia, New
Zealand and Portugal. Those countries responded
without hesitation to our appeals, first during the crisis;
since then, they have maintained a continuous presence
on our national territory to guarantee public order.

The Government of Timor-Leste takes into
serious consideration the recommendations of the
Independent Electoral Certification Team. We are
aware that the benchmarks underpinning the
certification exercise were, in some cases, only
partially met. We are committed to addressing our
shortcomings in those areas in order to improve the
conduct of future elections, including by taking
measures to guarantee the independence of the
electoral authorities and the consolidation of the legal
framework.

We profoundly regret the loss of two lives during
the electoral period and the serious damage to private
and public property that occurred immediately after.
07-49942
These tragic episodes remind us that our emerging
democracy needs sustained assistance in order to
consolidate itself. Although I believe that there has
been a qualitative change since April 2006, the road
ahead is still long and challenging. For that reason, the
Government of Timor-Leste fully accepts and supports
the recommendations put forward in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/513) before the Council
today.

Through their vote, the people of Timor-Leste
sent a clear message to their leaders that peaceful
dialogue and inclusive politics should prevail. They are
committed to becoming a truly tolerant and pluralistic
society based on the rule of law and respect for human
rights. The leaders of Timor-Leste will facilitate that
process by strengthening the democratic institutional
framework and ensuring that the fruits of economic
development equally benefit all citizens. All political
parties - those that now form the Government and
those that do not, those that sit in the new Parliament
and those that do not - have pledged to adhere to the
fundamental principles of good governance and to
support a meaningful role for the opposition after the
election. They showed their commitment by signing
the political party accord in May of this year. Yet, to
achieve those goals and to keep our word, we must
overcome numerous challenges in the short, medium
and long term. The support of the United Nations will
be essential at each step of this tortuous road.

Fragile institutional structure is the major
challenge facing Timor-Leste. Coupled with limited
capacity and lack of skills and training, it undermines
the building of a culture of peaceful settlement of
conflicts. Justice is crucial also for building respect for
the rule of law, which is undermined by a widespread
perception of a lack of accountability. In this context, it
is essential to solve the petitioners issue and clearly
define the roles and functions of the National Police
Force and Armed Forces of Timor-Leste while ensuring
adequate civilian oversight mechanisms. Outstanding
socio-economic problems include poverty,
unemployment, violence against women and
humanitarian issues, such as the return of internally
displaced persons.

I believe Timor-Leste is at a crucial moment and
should seize the opportunity to build on its recent
security and democratic gains. In his inauguration
speech, Prime Minister Gusmao set the short-term
priorities of the Government and named consolidating
security as the first of these. Consolidating security
will include solving the petitioners issue and the case
of Alfredo Reinado and promoting dialogue with the
Armed Forces of Timor-Leste. A stable security
environment, which is a major pillar of the mandate of
UNMIT, would serve as a foundation for all further
developments. For this reason, interim law
enforcement continues to be the priority of the United
Nations police. Maintaining the current contingent at
its current strength until the expiration of the present
mandate is essential. Only a stabilized security
situation would allow the subsequent transition from
executive policing to the monitoring phase, depending
on progress achieved in the screening and certification
processes of the National Police Force.

The coalition of parties that form the fourth
constitutional Government is internally solid and
committed to an open and consultative approach within
the Cabinet, but also and especially with all other
parties. As an indication of that conciliatory attitude,
Prime Minister Gusmao offered Cabinet positions to
the former ruling party.

The post-electoral period, however, showed that
our nascent democratic mentality is still in need of
substantial guidance. Consolidating a culture of justice
in which citizens' rights are respected and disputes are
fairly settled through legal channels is the building
block of a free, open and democratic society.
Revamped support by UNMIT would be vital to
building the necessary capacity in thejustice sector.

The provision of protection and assistance to
internally displaced persons will remain an issue for
some time in Timor-Leste. As much as we would wish
for a short-term solution to this situation, there is none,
and addressing the root causes of the crisis requires a
medium- to long-term effort. Continuous efforts to
guarantee security, resolve land rights issues and
strengthen the judiciary and national- and community-
level dialogue initiatives to re-establish national unity
must be undertaken. Those are the preconditions for
the full reintegration of internally displaced persons
and for enabling them to reclaim their lives and
livelihoods. In addition to the challenges related to the
return and reintegration of the approximately 100,000
persons who remain displaced from and within Dili
since last year, we are now faced with a new
humanitarian situation in the Viqueque and Baucau
districts, where 323 houses were burned and around
6,000 citizens were affected last month.

I would like to personally thank all Member
States which have so generously assisted our young
nation in addressing its humanitarian crisis. Although
we continue to rely on the assistance of our partners at
this critical juncture, the Government of Timor-Leste
remains primarily responsible for delivering assistance
and protection to our people. In the recent past, we
have been fortunate to have received financial support
through the consolidated appeals process. In the
medium term, the Government of Timor-Leste aims at
being able to bear more of the financial burden of
responding to humanitarian emergency needs and to
enhance the level of preparedness and contingency
planning for future disasters. Timor-Leste appreciates
the support of the Central Emergency Response Fund,
which provided funds quickly and predictably during
the crisis.

As members can see, Timor-Leste is faced with
all sorts of formidable challenges. The international
community has so far been at our side. We shall not
forget, however, what we learned from the United
Nations Transitional Administration East Timor: that
consolidation of the State's institutional framework is a
long and difficult process. On behalf of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste, therefore, I
shall ask Council members to give consideration to the
possibility of extending UNMIT's mandate until 2012.
I understand that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General also foresees the need for
international support for at least two and half years
after the end of the present mandate, and I do agree
with him that a mission with a peacebuilding mandate
should subsequently be created and stay in place for
five additional years. I think, however, that a
peacekeeping mission would need to be in place longer
than 2010. In expressing Timor-Leste's gratitude for
the numerous signs of continued engagement by the
international community, let me assure the Council that
we are strongly committed to putting its trust and
investment to good use.

On 13 September, the new Government will
present its programme to the National Parliament. It
has committed itself to strengthening the institutional
framework, including the integrity and professionalism
of the civil service, the fight against corruption, and
investment in the security sector; to fighting impunity
by creating a functional, credible, independent and
impartial judicial system; to reforming the security
sector by revising the existing policies and promoting
dialogue among all national institutions to develop
highly professional forces that could participate in
international missions; to continuing the good work
done by previous Governments in the health sector,
with a view to ensuring universal access; and to
supporting the professionalism and independence of
the media, while facilitating access for the entire
population and dedicating special attention to the needs
of youth and women to enable them to participate fully
and meaningfully in all aspects of Timor-Leste's
development.

Security Council resolution 1704 (2006)
mandated UNMIT to

"promote a 'compact' between Timor-Leste and
the international community for coordinating
Government, United Nations and other
multilateral and bilateral contributors to priority
programmes" (para. 4 (f)).

In that regard, the Government of Timor-Leste
has prepared a 24-month recovery programme to
address the priorities emerging from the crisis. The
compact's implementation has begun with the
formation of the new Government of Timor-Leste.
Also, the Government of Timor-Leste has made
contributions to key priorities emerging from the crisis
and hopes that the development partners will enhance
support towards those key areas.

The new Government is strongly committed to
the economic advancement of Timor-Leste and
acknowledges the remarkable job of its predecessors in
building from scratch the foundations of national
development. To consolidate those achievements, it
will pay considerable attention to the private sector and
will encourage the opening of the country to foreign
investment. In that context, Timor-Leste is keen also to
deepen its economic and commercial ties with the
countries of the region. Advancing the negotiations for
accession to the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations is one of the first priorities of the new
Government.
07-49942

Timor-Leste is poised to participate meaningfully
in the family of nations. We pledge to put into practice
the universal principles of human rights to which we
adhere and which are enshrined in the international
covenants that we have ratified. We are committed to
participating in the best possible way in the United
Nations to foster the democratic values of dialogue,
tolerance and peace. We are determined to reinforce
our ties of friendship with the countries that are both
geographically and historically close to us, including
Australia, Indonesia and Portugal.

In particular, Timor-Leste and Indonesia are
seeking to deal with their past while deepening their
friendship. Although I am aware that some in this room
will not agree with me, the Government of Timor-Leste
believes that the best mechanism available to deal with
our shared past is the bilateral Commission of Truth
and Friendship. We understand the reservations of the
United Nations, but we encourage Council members to
reflect on the fact that countries in transition to
democracy, as both Indonesia and Timor-Leste are,
must be prudent and sensitive when looking at their
own realities.

I shall conclude by stressing that the Government
of Timor-Leste fully accepts and strongly supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report,
including in particular those pertaining to the
continued engagement of the formed police units and
United Nations police contingents until February 2008.

I am grateful for this opportunity to address you,
Sir, and the members of the Security Council. I also
wish to extend to the members of the Council an
invitation to visit Timor-Leste so that the new
Government can better benefit from its advice.

