Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
congratulates Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for
his detailed briefing on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We
appreciate the efforts of the various United Nations
peace missions in the countries of the region during the
period from 1 September 2018 to 28 February 2019.

Equatorial Guinea, faithful to the spirit and
commitment of resolution 2457 (2019), on building
a conflict-free Africa, a responsibility that falls
essentially to the member States, civil society and
institutions of the African Union, expresses its support
for all initiatives aimed at finding African solutions
to African problems, while recognizing the need for
effective and satisfactory partnerships for regional and
international cooperation. We consider compliance with,
and respect for, sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, the principles of non-interference,
good neighbourliness and regional cooperation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and countries of
the region to be the foundation for their stability and
development and, as such, should be taken on board.

Along the same lines as the briefing, we, too,
welcome the recent positive developments in the region,
such as the holding ofpeaceful elections and transfer of

power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan, under the auspices of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the peace agreement between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups,
facilitated by the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, and the current situation and return to
normalcy in Burundi, after the country approved a new
Constitution and took measures to hold elections by
2020. Its considerable contribution of troops to peace
missions reflects Burundi's spirit of reconciliation
and tolerance.
Equatorial Guinea values the efforts made and the
support and contributions provided by the international
community to the countries of the region. We
encourage all other parties that are directly involved
to promote confidence-building measures and uphold
their commitments in general, in particular those
under the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance.

We commend the work that the Advisory Board
of the Women's Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework is doing to ensure women's
genuine participation in the political, peace and
security processes in the region. We appreciate the
approval by ministers responsible for gender issues
of the regional action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a well-known fact that
violent conflict disproportionately affects women
and girls and intensifies existing gender inequalities
and discrimination. We value the regional efforts
undertaken by the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation
Network to achieve peace and security, safeguard the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all the
peoples of the region and combat impunity.

We condemn the activities of the illegal armed
groups in the region, foreign and domestic, and their
frequent or sporadic clashes with States' military and
security forces, which result in cross-border security
incidents that have a negative impact on peace and
stability in the region. We commend the Special Envoy's
good offices in the region with regard to monitoring
and ensuring dialogue on the effective implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for ex-combatants and people associated
with armed groups, activities that align with the
African Union agenda for promoting political, social
and economic integration and its pledge to end all wars
on the continent by 2020, as cited in resolution 2457
(2019), and to achieve the goal ofa conflict-free Africa,
as stated in the Solemn Declaration adopted on 26 May
2013, on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
African Union.

We appreciate the measures that the Governments
of the region have taken to address the humanitarian
situation. However, we are concerned about the region's
11.2 million forcibly displaced persons, including
7.2 million who are internally displaced, and its more
than 4 million refugees and asylum seekers. We are
also worried about the destabilizing activities of armed
groups and the ongoing conflicts between communities
that continue to be exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola and need adequate technical and
financial assistance.

The efforts of the international community should
be aimed at promoting regional cooperation and
socioeconomic integration and providing sufficient
funds for carrying out the various regional humanitarian
response plans for refugees from Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan.
We condemn the frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel and their transport and equipment, which are
violations of international humanitarian law. All parties
to armed conflicts must ensure and facilitate full, safe,
immediate and unhindered access for humanitarian and
medical personnel.

My delegation supports the collective efforts of the
United Nations, the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations to address the conflicts
in the region properly, which has resulted in the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the two
organizations as a concrete step towards implementing
their joint framework for enhanced partnership in
peace and security. We urge the African Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie, the
Southern African Development Community and
international partners to continue to develop synergies
with the member States of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region for implementing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
promoting effective cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations among all countries in the region, including in
combating armed groups and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and pursuing economic integration.

