Mr. Martin: It is just three months since Tripoli
fell to forces committed to ousting the Al-Qadhafi
regime and just one month since the end of serious
fighting. Last week, the National Transitional Council
(NTC) approved the interim Government formed by
the Prime Minister it had elected, Mr. Abdurrahim
El-Keib. On the day the ministers were sworn in, last
Thursday, I was able to discuss with the Prime
Minister, along with one of his two Deputy Prime
Ministers and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
priorities for his Government and for the support of the
United Nations, and to have more specific discussions
on matters crucial to public security in meetings with
the new Ministers of the Interior and Defence.

More than one of my Libyan interlocutors has
asked, somewhat rhetorically, how the state of affairs
in Libya today compares with the condition of other
post-conflict countries so soon after the end of fighting
and change of regime. But if the answer to that
question is a positive one, it is because Libyans have
not been complacent but have shown great initiative
and responsibility, especially at the level of their cities,
2

towns and localities. They know that they now face
great challenges, requiring effective central and local
governance.

The interim Government that is to tackle these
challenges until after the election of a National
Congress in seven months time comprises two Deputy
Prime Ministers and 24 Ministers, selected by Prime
Minister El-Keib after extensive consultations. He
emphasized his intention to select candidates based on
professionalism and relevant experience, and at the
same time he appears to have given careful
consideration to ensuring representation of the various
regions. Only two of the Ministers are women,
appointed to the portfolios of Health and Social
Affairs.

There is overwhelming agreement that the first
and foremost of immediate challenges is in the area of
security, and it is a multifaceted challenge. Beyond the
needs of the war-wounded and bereaved - to be
addressed not only by the new Minister of Health but
also by an expanded Ministry of Social Welfare,
Families of Martyrs and Missing Persons -
determining the future of the revolutionary fighters is
fundamental to security in the short and longer terms.
The new Minister of Defence has the task of shaping a
new army and integrating regular military who fought
for the revolution and new brigades formed largely of
civilians, and while doing so to manage tensions
among them.

The latter challenge is even more immediately
one for the new Minister of the Interior. The brigades
remain the current providers of public security,
notwithstanding the growing deployment of police, but
at the same time undisciplined elements within them
can threaten public security. There have been further
recent security incidents in and around Tripoli. The
Minister told us of his plans to bring brigades under the
control of his Ministry and to absorb substantial
numbers into Ministry of the Interior forces, including
the police, and he envisages requesting United Nations
support in training and the coordination of
international assistance.

We are also prepared to assist the Commission on
Warriors' Affairs, which is mandated to have overall
responsibility for the future of the revolutionary
fighters and for identifying educational and
employment opportunities for those not to be
integrated into the security forces. It is by finding
11-60794
futures for the fighters that the weapons that have been
in their hands can be brought under control.

The other major aspect of the security situation is
the one that so deeply concerns Libya's neighbours and
concerned the Council when it adopted resolution 2017
(2011) - the presence and proliferation of
conventional and non-conventional weapons and
related materiel. Of particular concern is the large
number of man-portable air defence systems
(MANPADS) and ammunition still unaccounted for,
which pose both a disarmament problem for Libya
internally and a proliferation risk regionally. While that
is a legacy of the Al-Qadhafi regime, the new
Government fully recognizes its responsibilities in this
respect, and the Prime Minister again expressed to me
Libya's willingness to cooperate with international
assistance, within a framework of national sovereignty
and decision-making.

Over the past few weeks, bilateral partners have
been supporting the Ministry of Defence in identifying,
securing, storing and, where appropriate, disabling
those weapons. It is difficult, however, to make
accurate assumptions about the number of MANPADS
that are circulating in Libya or may have crossed
borders into neighbouring countries. There were no
official records kept of the weapons before the
revolution, and the Al-Qadhafi forces moved many of
them around in the last days of the conflict, including
to unofficial storages and caches in residential areas.
Initial efforts suggest that a substantial number of these
weapons were destroyed during the NATO campaign or
have been taken in possession by revolutionary
brigades and militias. Reclaiming the latter weapons
and transferring them into safe storage sites will need
to be part of the larger effort of their integration into
the future security forces of the State and specific
demobilization and weapons abatement programmes.

A full and reliable picture of all MANPADS
storage sites or current holders of these weapons does
not exist to date. Despite individual media reports
about such weapons having been sighted in
neighbouring countries or claims by groups in
neighbouring countries that they have gained access to
these weapons, the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) has not yet received verifiable
information of such occurrences.

Meanwhile, UNSMIL has been briefed on Libya's
related efforts to establish an effective border security
11-60794

and management system. We have shared our
information with the members of the Panel of Experts
who visited Tripoli recently, and intend to work closely
with all concerned to ensure a coordinated approach to
the implementation of resolution 2017 (2011). For
UNSMIL to continue to facilitate and coordinate
international support to the efforts of the Government
in this area as effectively as possible and to assist in
coordination with neighbouring countries, we will be
building a dedicated capacity within the Mission.

As far as chemical weapons and nuclear materials
are concerned, the picture is far clearer and more
encouraging. The report of the Secretary-General
records the satisfactory outcome of the first post-
conflict visit of the inspectors of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The
OPCW is planning a further visit in December,
including to two sites in Sabha and Sokna, now
formally declared to them by the new Libyan
authorities, where additional materials have been found
and the sites secured. The International Atomic Energy
Agency is planning its first visit of safeguards
inspectors to Libya, also in December. UNSMIL
provides security and logistics support to these efforts,
as requested.

The Government will need a little time to work
out the different responsibilities of its ministries and
other bodies in addressing all these tasks across the
security sector - integration and demobilization,
training and development of police and a new army,
weapons control and border management - but there
is no doubt about its sense of urgency. Nor is there any
doubt about its desire for United Nations support and
coordination of international actors. The Prime
Minister has asked us for a detailing of potential
United Nations assistance in these areas, and we shall
be providing this and discussing it with him and
relevant ministers.

The security situation and the way in which it
develops in the near future cannot be separated from
Libya's urgent need for liquid funds. This has been
emphasized and re-emphasized to me by every
interlocutor, from the Chairman of the National
Transitional Council and the Prime Minister down, and
is echoed in the popular claim that Libya has the right
to resume the control of its assets. It needs to be clear
that assets are not being withheld for any longer than is
required by the rationale of resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011), and that asset-holding countries are
3
making every effort - as must Libyan authorities
themselves - to overcome as quickly as possible the
technical requirements for funds to flow. I hope that
the Council, the main asset-holding countries and the
Libyan authorities can speedily agree on a coordinated
approach to these issues. The stabilization of the
country, the success of the Government and the
perception of the international community are all at
stake.

The contrast between the knowledge that Libya
has great national wealth and the inability of citizens
even to draw fully from their own bank accounts is an
inflammatory one, coming at a time when a new
Government needs not only to deliver but also to
manage expectations. Related effects are also felt
regarding United Nations support. While the Joint
Mine Action Coordination Team (JMACT), in which
the United Nations Mine Action Service works with
international non-governmental organizations,
continues to clear areas and to promote risk education
for the affected population, there remains an urgent
need to expand such activities. JMACT is ready and
able to undertake this expansion, but substantial
additional donor resources are urgently required
pending the receipt of Libyan Government support.
The assumption that funding by international donors is
not required, in this and other areas, because of Libya's
wealth will become true only when the Government
actually has sufficient funds to meet the country's most
urgent priorities.

In his report as well as during his visit, the
Secretary-General has continued to emphasize the
importance of national reconciliation and the need to
address the legacy of human rights violations, as well
as current human rights issues. The National
Transitional Council is planning a major national
meeting on reconciliation in December, to be addressed
among others by Libya's foremost religious leader,
Sheikh Sadiq Al-Gheriani, with whom I had the
privilege to discuss these issues recently. The Prime
Minister told me of his intention to ensure that his
Government builds on local efforts already taking
place and the work of the NTC itself. The challenge of
transitional justice is highlighted by the strong desire
in Libya that Saif al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and other
prominent figures of the Al-Qadhafi regime, if others
are captured or extradited to Libya, be put on trial in
the country.
Meanwhile, UNSMIL is working closely with the
National Commission for the Search and Identification
of Missing Persons in operationalizing its mandate and
encouraging the international community to provide it
with technical and other support. I had an immediate
opportunity to urge the Ministers of the Interior and
Defence to give high priority to addressing swiftly the
concerns regarding detention set out in the report of the
Secretary-General. Today in Tripoli, my colleagues
have done the same, and offered the assistance of the
United Nations, in UNSMIL'S first meeting with the
new Minister of Justice. It is indicative of the
difference from the attitudes of the past regime that
there is no denial that human rights are being violated,
and in most cases international organizations are
granted access to detainees. The new Minister of the
Interior told me he welcomed public criticism as
strengthening his hand in tackling the issues.

But my meetings in Tripoli with many of the
diplomatic representatives of African countries with
nationals in detention have further illustrated for me
and my colleagues the seriousness of the issue, and the
new Government must show that it is a priority for
effective action. The authorities have expressed their
intention to work with partners on establishing a legal
framework for managing migration, and this too is a
matter of urgency. The protection of internally
displaced persons, minorities and migrant workers
from sub-Saharan Africa was a focus of the visit my
Deputy has just made with national counterparts to the
south of Libya.

I can report some further progress beyond that
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
regarding the path to election preparations. On
20 November, the NTC formally appointed an eight-
member committee to study requirements for the
election process, work with international organizations
and prepare the appointment of a chairperson and
members of an electoral commission and its budget.

The committee's chairman and other members are
persons with whom the UNSMIL electoral team had
already been working. We have continued to stress that
if credible elections for a national congress are to be
held by June 2012, early decisions have to be made on
the electoral system, including the number and size of
electoral constituencies and the electoral formula, as
well as possible special measures for women and other
groups; on the eligibility of candidates and voters; and
on the authority, composition and appointment of the
electoral commission. The time period for legislation
to be adopted is brief, yet a process of consultation is
essential as Libyan civil society and emerging political
groups begin to debate election issues.

Women are asserting themselves as active
participants in this vibrant civil society. I and several
of my colleagues took part earlier this month in a five-
day national conference organized by two women's
organizations, based respectively in Tripoli and
Benghazi, to promote awareness and strategize
regarding issues affecting women in Libyan society.
The event was the first of its kind in the aftermath of
the revolution, and reflected the courage, determination
and adaptability of Libyan women in the face of
changing circumstances.

The coming into office of the new Government is
also the moment to review the arrangements for
coordination regarding assessment of needs for
international assistance, agreed in principle with NTC
representatives, and to launch those assessments it
regards as priorities under the leadership of the
counterparts it designates. I am glad to have had the
recent opportunity to visit the United Arab Emirates
and Qatar to discuss cooperation in support of Libya,
and look forward to the international community in
Tripoli being joined by the special representatives of
the League of Arab States and of the African Union,
which those organizations have stated their intention to
appoint. Cooperation with the African Union will be
especially important regarding issues affecting Libya's
neighbours and the wider region, and UNSMIL will be
represented in the inter-agency mission, led by the
Department of Political Affairs, that will visit Sahel
countries in December to assess country-specific and
regional needs and recommend a system-wide strategy
for United Nations response.
11-60794

The report of the Secretary-General concludes
with the recommendation of a three-month extension of
the mandate of UNSMIL. I think it is evident to
members of the Council why it has not been
appropriate to make recommendations for a 12-month
period before the Government was in place. To have
attempted to do so would have been to violate the
principle of national ownership, which the Council has
repeatedly agreed must guide us.

The Secretary-General's 19 August 2011 report
on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict stated
that

"Early planning must include a strong field
perspective, with United Nations staff already in
country working with national stakeholders to
assess national priorities and existing national
capacity, including in the diaspora. This will help
to ensure that planning is driven by national
priorities and needs and not by the availability of
international staff or other resources"
(5/2011/527, para. 17).

That is indeed the approach to which we are
committed, in a post-conflict context very different
from any other. Time will still be short to engage with
Libyan stakeholders to present recommendations that
reflect their views for Council consideration in March,
and flexibility will still be required beyond that. We
have set some precedents in our early planning for
post-conflict Libya and our speed of response. I trust
that we will continue to have the support of the
Council as we build on those.

