Mr. Zoubi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish also, through you, to express our
thanks to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his
leadership last month. I should also like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, and to thank
him for his briefing to the Security Council this
morning.

My delegation would also like to align itself with
the statements made by the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait on behalf of the Group of Arab States and by
the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in the
context of the Council's consideration of the item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question".

The question of Palestine remains the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The situation in the Middle East
is directly affected by any progress or backward
movement on the question of Palestine. Jordan
welcomes the agreement reached in the holy city of
Mecca between Fatah and Hamas as an important step
towards the creation of a government of national unity.
It will bolster practical, serious efforts to reach a just,
peaceful and fair settlement in accordance with the
terms of reference of the peace process, the relevant
international resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the fundamental principles of the Road Map.

While the Palestinian parties were consulting and
reaching agreement in the holy city of Mecca, Israel
initiated excavation and demolition work on the
historic road leading to the Al-Bab Al-Maghriba,
abutting Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That represents a serious
escalation that jeopardizes Islamic holy sites in the city
of Al-Quds. It is unacceptable under any pretext and is
likely to trigger emotional responses and lead to grave
consequences.

The Hashemite leadership has given the utmost
attention to the issue of rebuilding and restoring
Islamic holy sites in Al-Quds al-Sharif. The Dome of
the Rock and the Al-Aqsa mosque were restored in
1952 and again following the fire at Al-Aqsa in early
1969.

Earlier this month, Jordan completed the
rebuilding of the Salahaddin shrine and has returned it
to the Al-Aqsa mosque, having thus repaired the
damage done to the shrine by the 1969 fire. The
Jordanian Government has strongly condemned Israel's
violations of the sanctity of the holy Al-Aqsa mosque,
beginning with excavation work and followed by the
use of force against worshippers in the compound.

The desecration of any holy site or symbol is of
the utmost seriousness, and the continued excavation
by Israel of Islamic holy sites can lead only to a further
escalation of violence, which certainly will not help
efforts to reactivate the peace process and return to
direct negotiations.

The Bab Al-Maghriba area, where Israel is
undertaking its excavations, is part and parcel of
Al-Haram al-Sharif, as it is one of the main entryways
to the site. It is an Islamic site and must not be
desecrated. Its maintenance and restoration are the
responsibility of the religious authorities, not of the
Israeli Government.

Furthermore, Al-Haram al-Sharif, including the
Bab Al-Maghriba area, is inside the city of Al-Quds -
Jerusalem - to which the relevant Security Council
resolutions apply. The Israeli Government knows full
well that Israel has no sovereignty over Al-Quds. No
Security Council resolution recognizes Israeli
sovereignty over Al-Quds. These latest Israeli practices
are a clear violation of those resolutions and represent
an attempt to change the legal status of the city of
Al-Quds, an occupied city to which the Fourth Geneva
Conventions of 1949 apply, just as they do to all
territory occupied by Israel since 1967, including the
city of Al-Quds.

All of those Israeli actions are a clear violation of
the legal opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the construction of the wall, which called for Israel
to refrain from any attempt to change the demographic
or geographic status of Al-Quds and the Palestinian
territory.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan calls on the Israeli Government immediately to
cease its illegal violations. We call on the Security
Council to move quickly and to make every effort and
use its good offices to put an end to illegal Israeli
practices such as excavation work and its attempts to
destroy Islamic sites in Al-Quds. We warn of the grave
consequences of this escalation, which strikes at the
heart of all the efforts made by the international
community, including the Quartet, to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.

Reactions to Israel's excavation and demolition
work were not limited to the Arab world or the Islamic
world. Indeed, the parties that ordered such work have
now realized the widespread condemnation to which it
has led, even inside Israel, and perhaps they now
realize how unwise their decision was.

