Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting. I
also welcome the Foreign Minister of Colombia, who is
present with us today to participate in the meeting. And
I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Columbia, for his
invaluable briefing on the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/780), which deals with the notable achievements
and the challenges facing the implementation of the
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and
the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace.

Since the signing of the historic Colombian
peace agreement, which ended 50 years of conflict,
Colombia has been able to achieve a great deal of
national successes and gains, notwithstanding the
challenges facing the implementation of the agreement.
That requires intensified efforts by all stakeholders to
safeguard the successes and make further ones.

Concerning socioeconomic reintegration, we
appreciate the efforts undertaken by the Colombian
Government through the continued implementation
of programmes related to the Colombian peace
agreement in terms of the socioeconomic and political
reintegration of former members of the Fuerza
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP). The Government's communique
of 14 August concerning a transition period of two
years for training and reintegration in certain locations
following the expiration of their legal status is a
positive step in implementing the peace agreement. We
urge all stakeholders to contribute to expediting the
reintegration process by providing the necessary legal
and security guarantees for former FARC members. We
fully recognize the magnitude of the many challenges
that all stakeholders will face.

In that regard, we welcome the support extended
by all stakeholders for the National Pact for Political
Culture and Non-Violence during the Electoral
Campaign, which rejects violence and promotes both
dialogue and political rights during the election to be
held on 27 October. We hope that the elections will
be a success and a contribution to the Colombian
peace agreement.

Turning to the security situation, the continuing
murders, violence and threats targeting former members
of the FARC-EP as well as community leaders and
human right defenders is a source of great concern.
We need greater efforts to address the situation, while
also promoting security guarantees and precautionary
measures. To that end, we note the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations Verification Mission by
communicating with the Ministry of the Interior and
civil society to establish a national comprehensive
policy to protect those groups.

We reject the statement made by former FARC-
EP leaders announcing that they would take up arms
again. That could undermine the implementation of the
peace agreement.

Lastly, pertaining to the efforts of the United
Nations Verification Mission, we pay tribute to the
Mission's ongoing efforts to strengthen the peace
process under the auspices ofthe Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, while cooperating with local
and national authorities and many agencies, including
the United Nations Development Programme, the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Population
Fund, as well as the private sector. We also pay tribute
to the role played by the Mission in encouraging youth
and youth organizations to participate in building peace
through volunteer work, athletics, cultural activities
and dialogue.

