Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement that will be delivered shortly
by the Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf
of the European Union. Therefore, I will limit my
statement to the following remarks.

Slovakia expresses its deep concern about the
deteriorating situation in the Middle East and the
escalation of hostilities between Israel and Hizbollah.
We urge all parties to cease the hostilities and violence
and to return to political and diplomatic means for
resolving the current crisis. We fear that the escalation
of the current crisis and violence might have dire
consequences not only for the countries involved, but
also for regional and global security. In this regard, we
would like to reiterate our firm belief that there is no
military solution to the Middle East conflict. The only
way to achieve a comprehensive and lasting settlement
is through peaceful negotiations and full
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the principles defined by the Quartet in
the road map.

We have repeatedly condemned terrorist actions
and provocations by Hamas and Hizbollah that have
led to the current crisis. We call on all States to
exercise their influence on Hizbullah and Hamas to
secure the release of the kidnapped Israeli soldiers and
to stop their terrorist actions, including firing missiles
against Israel.

While we recognize Israel's right to self-defence
against terrorism and its perpetrators, we urge Israel to
exercise that right with utmost caution and restraint.
We call on Israel not to resort to the disproportionate
use of force and to do everything possible to avoid the
loss of innocent lives, destruction of civilian
infrastructure and increased suffering of the civilian
population. We are particularly concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Lebanon and
the increasing exodus of Lebanese people caused by
military actions.

We commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its quick action. We
call on OCHA and other United Nations agencies to
intensify their efforts in response to the deepening
humanitarian crisis, in order to help alleviate the
human suffering of an increasing number of internally
displaced persons and refugees. We call on all parties
to secure unobstructed access for humanitarian
assistance. In that respect, we would like to reiterate
that protection of civilians in a time of conflict is an
obligation under international humanitarian law.

We commend the initiative of the Secretary-
General to provide his good offices to defuse the
current crisis and stop the bloodshed. We welcome his
proposals for a solution, as presented yesterday. We
believe they should be seriously considered by the
Security Council and reflected in a future resolution
aimed at reaching a lasting and sustainable settlement.
At the same time, diplomatic efforts to resolve the
current crisis should be broadened and intensified to
prevent further destabilization of the Lebanese
Government and of the whole region. We welcome and
fully support the statement of the G-8 leaders at the
St. Petersburg Summit concerning the situation in the
Middle East and their commitment to pursue efforts to
restore peace.

We believe that it is important that the Security
Council respond quickly and in a concrete way to the
call of the G-8 leaders to develop a plan for the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006). That was also one of the elements necessary for
a solution suggested by the Secretary-General
yesterday.

The international community must help the
Government of Lebanon to establish full sovereignty,
assume full control over the whole of the country's
territory and disarm all militias - which, in our
opinion, is key to achieving a lasting and sustainable
solution and is an important precondition for the
stabilization and continuation of the democratic
processes in the country. The idea of a stabilization
force as a part of that plan deserves, in our view,
further consideration and elaboration.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
restoration of calm in Lebanon is an important step
also for the restoration of the peace process in the
Middle East region as a whole. In that regard, we are
concerned about the deteriorating situation between
Israel and the Palestinians and about the increasing
number of civilian casualties on both sides as a result
of hostilities and terrorist actions.

We think that the Palestinian Government, led by
Hamas, missed an important opportunity to advance
the peace process by their continued refusal to accept
three principles defined by the Quartet. In our view,
that is a basic precondition for becoming a partner in
the peace talks. In order to create favourable conditions
for a return to dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinians, we hope that President Abbas will
succeed in his efforts to create appropriate support
among the Palestinian people for the objectives set out
in the road map. We think that the international
community should also extend its full support to him in
that endeavour by addressing urgent humanitarian
needs of the Palestinian population through the
temporary international mechanism administered by
the European Union. In that context, we urge Israel to
resume transfers of withheld Palestinian tax and
customs revenues.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm our full support for a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement to the Middle East conflict based on
all the relevant Security Council resolutions and on
negotiations leading to implementing the vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security.
