Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): I should like to
express my deep respect to the Council and thank it for
its condolences

following the demise on 2 August ofa Cameroonian

peacekeeper from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).

The situation in the Central African Republic has,
since the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/227), experienced positive developments
marked by the progress we have seen in the political
process, namely with respect to the Bangui Forum.
That political progress, combined with the deployment
of MINUSCA in almost 40 locations, has contributed
to an improvement in the security situation, which
nonetheless remains fragile. This improvement has
allowed for the return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the resumption of economic activity. These
returns took place in locations where MINUSCA is
deployed. However, many parts of the territory remain
affected by attacks by armed groups. MINUSCA
is frequently informed about actions involving
harassment, racketeering, arbitrary detention and
serious violations of human rights, such as the inhuman
treatment inflicted in cases of suspected witchcraft.

In the western part of the country, the recent
increase in the number of violent incidents on the main
road connecting Bangui to Cameroon is worrisome.
Since the month of May, three peacekeepers have been
injured in that area, one severely, and, on 18 July, armed
men shot at a World Food Programme vehicle that was
being escorted by MINUSCA, killing a Cameroonian
driver.

The strengthening of MINUSCA's presence
through the deployment of force reserve units and
actions targeted against the alleged perpetrators of
those incidents have made it possible to avert the
strikes envisaged by the transportation union. Also in
the western sector, I welcome the fact that the efforts of
the entire United Nations family in the Central African
Republic have led to the release of 91 Fulani Muslims
who were being held against their will in villages in the
Yaloke region.

In the central sector, intercommunal tensions
among ex-Seleka factions and anti-balaka groups in
the Bambari and Kaga Bandoro areas continue to
pose threats in terms of the protection of the civilian
population. The violence has nevertheless decreased
in the Bambari sector, where the appeals made by the
Head of State of the Transition during her recent visit to
that city should contribute to the further return of IDPs
in certain areas of the city.
(Spoke in English)

In the eastern part of the Central African Republic,
ex-Seleka continue to have a significant military
presence. Although they pose only a minor security
threat, MINUSCA is exercising its extension of
State authority mandate to end their illegal taxation
practices. In addition, the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) continues to operate in south-eastern Central
African Republic, extorting food and other means of
survival. MINUSCA is establishing three temporary
operating bases in this LRA-affected area to improve
its protection-of-civilians effort and further limit the
LRA's ability to operate.

Finally, on 15 June, forces of the Central African
Republic and the Sudan operating under the tripartite
military force arrived unannounced in Birao, an eastern
town with a heavy ex-Seleka presence. Thanks to the
proactive MINUSCA forces on the ground, an armed
clash was averted, notably during the withdrawal of the
tripartite military force elements. It is worth noting that
the tripartite force does not benefit from an exception
under the United Nations sanctions regime for the
Central African Republic.

Security is gradually improving in Bangui, where
signs of normal life lend a sense of confidence and
gradual returns from the airport camp for internally
displaced persons to other areas of the city indicate a
positive but fragile trend. The anti-Balaka stronghold
of Boy-Rabe and the Muslim-dominated PKS remain
hotspots in the capital city. MINUSCA is using a robust
approach to restore the rule of law in both areas, as
demonstrated by the search-and-arrest operation that
took place in PKS three days ago.

MINUSCA works closely with humanitarian
actors through its protection-of-civilians strategy and
within the framework of its senior management group
(Protection), where military and police deployment
locations are regularly adjusted to better protect
civilians and support humanitarian action. Despite
the positive steps forward, the humanitarian situation
remains a significant concern. More than 2.7 million
people require assistance, some 450,000 are still
refugees, and close to 400,000 citizens of the Central
African Republic are displaced inside the country.
However, only 30 per cent of the humanitarian appeal
has been funded. Against this background, I urge
Member States to sustain the positive developments in
the country by responding to the humanitarian appeal.

At the political level, the main success of the
Bangui Forum - which was remarkably led by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa, Mr. Bathily, and the Central Africans
authorities - is the spirit of dialogue and inclusivity
and the sense that the good of the country eventually
prevailed. Against this background, the recent vote
of the National Transitional Council to deprive the
refugees of their right to vote represents an alarming
step backwards and a reminder that more effort should
be focused on reconciliation.

On 25 May, the Economic Community of Central
African States announced its decision to consider
positively an extension of the political transition in
the Central African Republic until the end of 2015.
Shortly thereafter, the authorities of the Central
African Republic announced the electoral calendar:
a constitutional referendum on 4 October, the first
round of presidential and legislative elections on
18 October, and a second round on 22 November. In the
meantime, 478,000 voters have registered, primarily
in Bangui, and the process is getting under way in the
rest of the country. The restoration of State authority
and the electoral process are being buttressed by the
deployment of all 16 prefects and 71 sub-prefects,
who have benefitted from transport, training and
administrative kits provided by MINUSCA and
international partners. Although the electoral budget
has been reduced by 18 per cent, an $11-million funding
gap remains. I call upon international donors to make
additional commitments to this critical element of the
peace process.

MINUSCA continues to use its urgent temporary
measures mandate to arrest spoilers where the State
lacks the capacity to do so. In that regard, I also welcome
the Transitional Authority's decision to establish the
Special Criminal Court to investigate serious crimes
committed since 1 January 2003. I call upon donors
to support the Court with financial donations and the
secondment of international magistrates.

Despite the availability of funds and progress
initiating the pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR)of the ex-Seleka in Bangui, we have
yet to regroup and disarm the combatants throughout
the country. Indeed, most of the signatories would like
to respect their commitment under the DDR agreement,
but recent political developments have raised doubts,
in particular among the ex-Sele'ka. In the meantime,
MINUSCA is working closely with the transitional
authorities to move the process forward in order to
establish a situation conducive to calm and transparent
elections.

(spoke in French)
The Central African Republic is at a crossroads.
The next steps will be difficult because they will
require leaders to surpass themselves, forgiveness from
the people and justice for the benefit of all. I thank the
donors that have supported the process, including those
that made commitments at the Brussels conference on
26 May. I welcome in particular the contribution by the
Peacebuilding Fund $10 million that will be allocated
to priorities identified at the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation.

The international community has fulfilled much of
its moral obligations to the Central African Republic,
including through the deployment of African, French
and European forces and, since September, United
Nations peacekeepers. Today, the stabilization of the
Central African Republic will require a multifaceted
support so as to open a new page of the history of that
country through free and transparent elections open
to all. We have lit the flame of hope; it is our moral
responsibility to prevent it from going out.

