Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like first and
foremost to applaud Nigeria for initiating this important
open debate on security sector reform (SSR) with a View
to achieving the first-ever resolution on SSR, which
Slovakia strongly supports and plans to co-sponsor. I
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
for his inspiring statement as well as for his report on
SSR (S/2013/480), issued last year, which gives a clear
Vision for the way forward.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. In addition, I
would like to make few remarks in my national capacity.

Slovakia has been a proud sponsor of the issue of
security sector reform within the United Nations system.
In that regard, I am proud to note that the first Security
Council open debate on this subject took place under
our presidency in February 2007 (see S/PV.5632). In the
seven years that have passed since, the Organization
has achieved significant accomplishments. That
progress is required given the growing number of cases
the Security Council is dealing with. We are pleased
to note that the draft resolution to be adopted today
seeks concrete approaches to implementing the many
important recommendations of the Secretary-General's
report on SSR.

Slovakia is committed to building such partnerships,
as suggested in the report of the Secretary-General,
in support of the comprehensive and sustainable
implementation of the recommendations made therein.
We seek to enhance three types of partnerships: among
Member States, between the United Nations and
regional organizations and among the United Nations,
Member States and civil society.

First, in its capacity as founder and co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of SSR, Slovakia, based on its own
experience of transformation, has made significant
efforts to raise awareness and knowledge regarding
SSR and related United Nations processes among
Member States. Through regular meetings and events,
we have sought to forge consensus around the United
Nations SSR agenda. As an example, the launch of the
Integrated Technical Guidance Notes in New York in
December 2012 and in Geneva in March 2013, and the
high-level meeting on the Secretary-General's second
report on SSR in November 2013 in New York, served
to consult Member States on priorities for further
developing the United Nations approach to SSR.

Secondly, Slovakia endeavours to support the
forging of partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations. It is only natural to seek
ways for fostering cooperation in the domain of SSR
between the United Nations and the African Union, as
well as the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Slovakia has already
co-organized a couple of events in Africa in order to
encourage stronger partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in the field of SSR,
and we plan to continue with that effort in the near
future. Likewise, Slovakia aims to enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE. In July
of this year, Slovakia will be co-host a joint United
Nations-OSCE event on SSR, in partnership with
Switzerland as the current chair of the OSCE.

Thirdly, Slovakia also seeks to further strengthen
working partnerships among the United Nations,
Member States and civil society. Civil society should
be integrated at every stage, from the development of a
common national security vision, to the implementation
of reform processes, and the review of progress. Most
recently, we have addressed these issues in international
conferences and seminars, including an event organized
in New York together with the Japanese and Tanzanian
Governments on inclusivity in SSR. I would like to
highlight the instrumental expertise and support that
has been provided by non-governmental organizations.
In particular, Slovakia maintains a long-standing
partnership with the Geneva Centre for the Democratic
Control of Armed Forces and its international security
sector advisory team. They, I note, provided their
valuable support to many SSR events as well as
assistance to individual countries in supporting SSR.
They have also greatly contributed to the development
of the United Nations Integrated Technical Guidance
Notes with their expert inputs.

I would like to highlight three areas that I believe
merit particular attention when reflecting on the way
ahead. They relate to the need to strengthen core
capacities for the United Nations to deliver support, to
coordinate its support and to review the progress of its
delivery on the ground.

First, there is a need to strengthen its internal
capacities. The significant increase of SSR structures
in peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as well as the rise in mandates of missions to
support SSR-related tasks, underline the real demand
for strengthened resources. I encourage further
reinforcement of United Nations capability to deliver
coherent support, including the strengthening of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operation's SSR Unit,
as that will translate, in our View, into more advanced
collaboration in the field and an enhanced ability to
provide adequate guidance and assistance to Member
States.

Secondly, the United Nations should continue
to enhance its coordination capacity to deliver SSR
support as one. Significant progress has already been
achieved in that regard. Besides the efforts of the
inter-agency SSR Task Force and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operation's SSR Unit as its secretariat,
I would like in particular to emphasize the Integrated
Technical Guidance Notes, which are a landmark in
fostering a "Delivering as one" approach to supporting
the nationally led SSR efforts ofMember States. Finally,
we fully support request of the Security Council to
make SSR an integral part of the good offices role of
the Secretary-General's Special Representatives.

Thirdly, by enhancing its capacities in carefully
reviewing the progress on SSR through systematic
monitoring and evaluation processes, the United
Nations could not only improve its endeavours with
lessons learned, it could also ensure that its resources
are allocated in the most effective, efficient and
sustainable manner possible. In that regard, I welcome
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations inter-agency
SSR Task Force to develop a specific integrated
technical guidance note on monitoring and evaluation.

In conclusion, I would like to assure you, Sir, that
Slovakia will continue to be engaged in supporting the
Secretary-General's efforts to build a comprehensive
approach within the United Nations to SSR as an
important element contributing to the maintenance of
sustainable international peace and security.

