Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on strengthening
multilateralism at a very important time in our
world today. We also thank the Chinese delegation
for preparing the concept paper for this meeting
(S/2018/982, annex).

We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his valuable statement. We also thank the Representative
ofthe State of Qatar, Ms. Alya Al-Thani, who delivered
a statement on behalf of the President of the General
Assembly; Ms. Inga Rhonda King, the President of the
Economic and Social Council; and Judge Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yousef, the President of the International Court
ofJustice, for their briefings today. This has been a rare
and important opportunity to listen to all the Presidents
of those organs of the United Nations.

Our world today is facing conventional and
contemporary challenges. The threats we face are
transnational and more complicated and interlinked
than ever before, as a result of the information
technology revolution and significant advances in
technology, communications and transportation.
Threats to international peace and security are ongoing
and have unfortunately been on the rise in recent years.
We see that especially in the Middle East, where a
number of countries are enduring security and political
instability. The threat of terrorism is a daily reality,
and no region around the world is safe from its evils.
The consequences of armed conflict in one region are
now capable of having political, security, economic and
humanitarian implications for other, safe countries in the
world. All those consequences may come to be if we do
not address them with radical solutions. Humanitarian
disasters and the migrant and refugee crises arising
from armed conflicts at the intra-State and inter-State
levels are a case in point. All those challenges and more
that are confronting our world today require collective
action. International challenges require international
solutions. No one country, regardless of its size, military
or economic strength, can address those challenges
alone.

Multilateralism is at the core of the global system
that we all accepted when we established the United
Nations, over seven decades ago. The cornerstone of
that multilateral global system is the Charter of the
United Nations, which is considered an instrument of
international law and establishes a clear framework to
govern relations between countries. All Member States
must commit to the Charter and its noble purposes and
principles, in words and deeds.

The Charter of the United Nations is as relevant as
ever today. It is the basis of our collective security system
and provides different tools to deal with challenges
in a collective and efficient manner. Much has been
accomplished pursuant to the provisions of the Charter.
However, we must recognize that the aspirations as set
out in the purposes and principles 4 such as living in
peace and security without Violence - continue to be
elusive.

We must work in a collective and unified manner
to contain violence and aggression, build friendly
relations between countries, respect the principles of
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of others, promote equal rights, uphold the right of
peoples to self-determination and encourage respect
for human rights.

The State of Kuwait is strongly committed to the
Charter. During our presidency of the Security Council
in February, we held a high-level meeting on the Charter
of the United Nations and its role in maintaining
international peace and security. The meeting was an
opportunity to build on what was discussed in previous
meetings on this topic, including the meeting held by
China during its presidency of the Council in February
2015 (see S/PV.7389).

As we talk about multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations, allow me to recall the process of
liberating the State ofKuwait in 1991. That is considered
an example that shows what can be accomplished when
the international community works together under the
auspices of the United Nations and through legitimate
resolutions adopted by the Security Council to support
the rule of law, righteousness and justice. The process
of liberating the State of Kuwait is a historic model
of the concept of collective security and a successful
embodiment of multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations in stopping aggression that was a blatant
and clear violation of international law and the Charter.

In this month back in 1990, the Security Council
adopted resolution 678 (1990), which granted the
previous regime in Iraq until 15 January 1991 to
withdraw from the State of Kuwait; otherwise all
the necessary means were to be used to restore
international peace and security. After that bitter
invasion, it has been proven that the first line of
defence of small countries such as the State of Kuwait
is a global multilateral system based on law andjustice
that guarantees the rights, safety and security of small
countries. We believe that it is necessary to enhance
their representation in United Nations organs, given
that the majority of United Nations Members are small
countries.
We are concerned about the increasing trend of
questioning the value of multilateralism and about
measures taken by certain countries through their
unilateral policies that place their narrow national
interests above the public interest. That is undermining
the international order that we have known since the
end of the Second World War.

The State of Kuwait truly believes in the importance
of multilateralism at the regional and international
levels. We also believe in the importance of promoting
collective action among countries and partnerships
with regional organizations to reach solutions to the
challenges in our region and in the wider world.

In that regard, the United Nations plays an important
role in leading global action to confront such challenges,
including international humanitarian action to alleviate
the suffering of people from armed conflicts and natural
disasters, while effectively contributing to regional
and international efforts to resolve conflicts through
peaceful means, including preventive diplomacy and
mediation; ensuring the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction; achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development; as well as confronting the
consequences of climate change and enhancing human
rights and the rule of law. We cannot achieve any
progress in those matters, or others if we do not engage
in collective action and constructive dialogue.

I would like to renew our support to the vision ofthe
Secretary-General on reforming the peace and security
pillars at the Secretariat. We support his annual report
on the work of the Organization (A/73/1) where he
stressed the importance of multilateralism. I also want
to quote from the statement of the Secretary-General
before world leaders, during the general debate of the
General Assembly in September, where he summarized
the state of our world today:

(spoke in English)

"The world is more connected, yet societies are
becoming more fragmented. Challenges are
growing outward, while many people are turning
inward. And multilateralism is under fire precisely
when we need it most." (A/73/PV6, p. I)

(spoke in Arabic)

In conclusion, we call on the international
community, especially the Security Council, to make
more effort and enhance constructive partnerships and
collective action to confront the political, security,
economic and humanitarian challenges facing our
world, and we also underscore that we cannot do that
effectively unless we do it together in the context of
multilateralism.

