Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): After
listening to our briefers during this most important
exercise, Iwould like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his introductory remarks and, in particular, for bringing
us together around this table. I would also like to thank
the Force Commanders for sharing with the Security
Council their visions of an effective implementation of
the peacekeeping operations mandates for which they
are responsible and which have been assigned to them
by the Council. It has also been an opportunity for them
to give us feedback on what they have experienced day
to day in various theatres of operation.

This event was more than necessary as it takes place
in the context of the review in which we are seeking
to reorienting efforts aimed at adapting peacekeeping
operations and their mandates to the current realities.
We believe that there is nothing more useful for the
Council than to interact with force commanders and
peacekeeping operations in order to better take into
account the challenges and specificities of each theatre.
Let us recall that each operation is sui generis.

This meeting is of particular importance to my
delegation because my country, Senegal, is present in
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
with troops totalling 1,513 men, a task force consisting
of an infantry battalion and a tactical helicopter unit. In
the second half of 2017, the number of troops deployed
will increase to 2,253. The helicopter unit will be called
upon to intervene in Liberia should the need arise.

We would once again reiterate our gratitude to
the Force Commanders for the outstanding work they
have accomplished, often in complex and difficult
situations, in carrying out Security Council mandates.
In particular, I commend the Force Commanders of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MINUSCA,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
for their important briefings, which highlighted
the political, security and strategic challenges our
missions are facing. The effective implementation
of these challenges will undoubtedly depend on the
effectiveness of our missions and the image and
credibility of the Organization.

Having said that, I would now like to ask the Force
Commanders a few questions.

With regard to MINUSCA, I would first like to
express our deepest condolences to Lieutenant General
Balla Keita for the loss of Cambodian and Moroccan
soldiers during clashes over the last few weeks. I
would also like bear witness to our satisfaction for the
professionalism General Keita has demonstrated in
carrying out his mission. In addition, I would also like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the two Chadian
soldiers who fell in Mali under the flag of MINUSMA.
We therefore express our heartfelt condolences to Chad.

Lieutenant General Keita mentioned earlier that
attack helicopters were used for the first time to slow
down the advance of armed groups. My first question is
what led him to take this type ofdecision. This decision,
I would remind the Council, was most courageous as
it was unprecedented. Secondly, I would like to know
whether he thinks that the use of these types of air
assets can play a decisive role in carrying out mandates,
particularly in the context of the protection of civilians.

With respect to UNMIL, the Senegalese contingent
was called upon to intervene in Liberia while it was
serving in MINUSMA, that is to say, in Mali. The
experience we saw in the decommissioning of assets
in the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and
their transfer to MINUSCA showed that this type of
operation requires good planning and coordination
between the two missions and the Secretariat. I would
like to ask Major General Salihu Zaway Uba what
arrangements have been made for the reception and
operational integration of this contingent.

With regard to transitions and the exit strategies
for missions, we have seen that this is a most difficult
endeavour, requiring early planning that takes due
account of the conditions on the ground and the objectives
to be attained to close a peacekeeping operation and see
to the needs of making the transition to an integrated
peacebuilding office or other arrangement. Seen in
this light, the transition in Liberia, which will follow
a peacebuilding plan developed as part of the planned
drawdown of UNMIL, could become a benchmark
for other missions to strive to match. I would like to
hear the views of the UNMIL Force Commander on
his experience in planning and strategy with respect
to the orderly withdrawal and exit of UNMIL without
jeopardizing efforts to achieve the long-term goals of
peace and stability.

