Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I too would like to begin my
statement by strongly condemning the heinous and
cowardly terrorist on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu. We extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of the victims, and wish a speedy recovery to
the wounded.

I would also like to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom for bringing this important issue to
the Security Council's agenda six years after it was
last discussed. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary General, Mr. Eliasson and Africa Progress
Panel Chair Mr. Annan, as well as the representatives
of the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme for their briefings and the important
information they have provided us.

The blessing-and-curse dichotomy of natural
resources is evident. Some countries are among the
richest in the world due to their natural resources, while
many others that are rich in such resources are the
poorest in the world. In fact, four of the five countries
that are considered to be the poorest in the world possess
a wealth of natural resources, including oil, gas, gold,
uranium, titanium, diamonds, copper, silver and coltan.

There is an undeniable link between natural
resources and conflicts. In some conflicts, parties fight
to gain control over such resources; in others, they use
the profits gained from these resources to continue
fighting. There is even a correlation between the
illegal extraction of natural resources and incidences
of sexual violence, which is very concerning. Turkey
also strongly condemns the recruitment of children in
the exploitation and extraction of natural resources in
armed conflict.

In order to combat this scourge, all measures
should be taken to prevent the illicit trade and illegal
exploitation of these resources. Their effective and
transparent management would contribute to this end.
Therefore, all initiatives that promote transparency and
encourage stability play an important role. In addition,
effective cooperation between source, transit and
destination countries is needed to combat illicit trade.
However, the transparent and effective management
of such resources is not enough on its own. Good
governance, development and stability are equally
important, and all of these elements are mutually
reinforcing.

The private sector can also make important
contributions to our work by helping to develop the
extractive industries and generate the resources needed
for the development of the countries in question. But
in this process they must act with corporate and social
responsibility. National Governments should hold their
private sector firms accountable for their practices and
role in the stability in the host country. Commercial
interests should never supersede the interest of the
host countries, or especially of its people. Civil society
also has an important role to play, which can range
from collecting data and assisting countries with their
expertise, to monitoring the practices of domestic and
foreign actors.

As a key actor in post-conflict settings, the United
Nations also has an important role to play in the matters
taken up in today's open debate. It can assist post-
conflict countries in need in building their capacities in
the management of natural resources. Such assistance
can take different forms, including helping them to
design or strengthen their regulatory structures and
relevant national legislation.

However, the institutional capacity of the United
Nations also needs to be further developed in this area.
Furthermore, the United Nations' entities and their
efforts must be well coordinated, and take an integrated
and multi-dimensional approach. In this context, the
Peacebuilding Commission is well placed not only to
coordinate efforts, but also to provide the necessary
guidance and resources at its disposal.

We believe that during the Council's future
deliberations on conflict and post-conflict situations,
the natural resource dimension should also be taken
into account, where necessary. We should never lose
sight of the fact that the resources below the ground
belong to those who live over that ground. No party
should attempt to unjustly exploit or illegally seize the
resources of another. In addition, as is often stated,
natural resources alone are not the source for conflict.
In this regard, confronting the root causes of conflict,
addressing the other factors that fuel conflict, and
preventing and peacefully resolving conflicts with such
instruments as mediation is of paramount importance.

