Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic ofIran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to thank
Pakistan for taking the initiative to organize this debate
on counter-terrorism. I would also like to thank Foreign
Minister Khar for her presence and for presiding over
today's meeting. We hope that today's open debate will
help us to direct the discussions at the United Nations
and in the Security Council towards finding more
effective measures for the global fight against terrorism,
in accordance with the desires and expectations of the
general membership of the United Nations.
Terrorism is a common threat faced by the entire
international community. The NAM. has always
supported decisive combat against all forms ofterrorism,
wherever and whenever they occur, and believes that
counter-terrorism efforts should be immune to any form
of politicization or double standards. Otherwise, such
efforts would be off-track, run counter to the original
intent of the fight against terrorism, or even give rise
to impunity for perpetrators. Counter-terrorism efforts
should be based on international cooperation, with
strengthened coordination and synergy, and the United
Nations should play the central coordinating role.

Over the past few years, the Security Council
has adopted a series of counter-terrorism resolutions,
and the General Assembly has adopted the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
latter document, with its three subsequent revisions,
provides necessary guidance for international counter-
terrorism cooperation. NAM. calls for a transparent,
comprehensive and balanced implementation of the
Strategy and agrees to actively engage in future meetings
on its implementation. In that regard, NAM. also calls
for the enhanced engagement of Member States in the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force.

We recall the third biennial review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy held on
29 June 2012, where it was decided, inter alia, that the
Task Force would interact with Member States on a
quarterly basis, providing briefings and comprehensive
reports on its current and future work, as well as
a periodic workplan of its activities. In that way,
transparency would be assured and Member States
would be able to assess the work being done by the
Task Force and offer policy guidance and feedback on
Counter-Terrorism Strategy implementation efforts, as
reflected in General Assembly resolution 66/282. We
welcome the briefings held so far by the Task Force and
hope that such interactions will help it streamline its
activities in accordance with the wishes of the Member
States. In that regard, we emphasize once again that
counter-terrorism efforts should adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and fully respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.

NAM. is of the view that terrorism should not be
equated with the legitimate struggle of peoples under
colonial or alien domination and foreign occupation
for self-determination and national liberation. The
brutalization of people under foreign occupation
should continue to be denounced as the gravest form
of terrorism. We continue to condemn the use of State
power to suppress peoples' exercise of their inalienable
right to self-determination and to struggle to dispel
foreign occupation.

We note the recognized and growing potential
links between international organized crime and the
financing of terrorism, including money-laundering,
and stress the need to promote cooperation and
coordinate efforts in fighting those menaces. The
financing of terrorism is a matter of grave concern that
must be fought with determination. In that regard, we
strongly condemn criminal hostage-taking incidents
that have led to demands for ransom and/or other
political concessions by terrorist groups, and call upon
all States to cooperate actively in addressing that issue
in all its aspects, including its legal aspects.

It is the firm conviction of NAM. that multilateral
cooperation under United Nations auspices is the most
effective means to combat international terrorism. NAM
reiterates its call for an international summit conference
to be held under the auspices of the United Nations in
order to formulate a joint, organized response by the
international community to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including by identifying its root causes.
It further reiterates the importance of the conclusion of a
comprehensive convention for combating international
terrorism and, in this respect, notes the negotiations
in the Ad Hoc Committee on terrorism, established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/210, for
the elaboration of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism and the continuing efforts to
that end.

NAM. has always underlined the important role of
regional and international organizations in creating
frameworks of cooperation and for the sharing of best
practices in the fight against terrorism. In this regard,
we support national, regional and international efforts
and arrangements that seek to implement, where
appropriate, the pertinent international legally binding
instruments and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution 46/51 and
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), and regional
arrangements and instruments relating to combating
terrorism. We emphasize the need to strengthen
cooperation with all States in this regard, and underline
that such cooperation should be in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and the
relevant international conventions. In this context, we
urge the relevant United Nations organs to promote ways

and means to support and strengthen such cooperation.

Finally, the Movement believes that more steps
are needed, along with the necessary political will of
Member States, to improve the existing approaches,
procedures and mechanisms of both the General
Assembly and the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism so that international measures to
counter terrorism can be undertaken in a coordinated,
transparent, accountable and consistent manner.
In this way, the United Nations as a whole and the
Security Council, in maintaining international peace
and security, can deal more efficiently and effectively
with the ever-more complicated and growing threat of
terrorism. The Non-Aligned Movement stands ready to
contribute to the achievement of this goal.

