Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive and valuable briefing on the situation in
the Middle East and the Palestinian question.

We have been closely following the escalation
of violence in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly the Gaza Strip, and we are deeply
concerned about these developments, which undermine
the hopes for peace. We strongly support the efforts
of the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator, the
Government of Egypt and others to restore calm. We
welcome all attempts to reduce tension and prevent
further escalation.

The deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in Gaza is extremely worrying.
Essential services such as water, fuel, electricity and
access to health care must be restored as soon as
possible, and we must prioritize enabling the movement
of people, goods and services. It is also equally
important to promote intra-Palestinian reconciliation
and support Egypt's efforts to bring the Gaza Strip
under the Palestinian Authority's control, as laid down
in the 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the
Jericho Area. It is vital that all sides exercise maximum
restraint and work to de-escalate the tension to avoid
continuing to endanger the lives of innocent civilians.
Any escalation merely undermines efforts to improve
the lives of Palestinians and support the return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza.

It is self-evident that unless the peace process is
advanced and the underlying problems are resolved
peacefully, this latest tragedy will only be repeated and
the situation will once again move rapidly towards a
point of no return. It is critical that we find ways and
means to limit the damage and to work, however difficult
it may be, to continue the peace process and save the
two-State formula. That is the long-held position of the
United Nations and the international community. There
is no doubt that it is still the best and the only realistic
option for the future. Of course, the same underlying
problems and obstacles to peace persist. There has been
little or no sign of movement, and the present situation
is hardly conducive to sustainable peace or security for
either party. It is clear that genuine efforts to remove
the obstacles are a prerequisite for any meaningful
progress towards realizing a two-State solution. In other
words, it is essential to ensure that direct negotiations
between the parties are resumed without preconditions
or delays. The international community as a whole,
and the Security Council in particular, must put their
full weight behind this and do it as quickly as possible.
The sooner that happens, the better it will be for both
Israelis and Palestinians, and indeed the entire region.

