Mr. Takasu: First of all, on behalf of the
members of the Peacebuilding Commission, allow me
to express our heartfelt gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for providing a timely opportunity to discuss the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission.

In September 2005, our leaders adopted the
World Summit Outcome Document, which explicitly
emphasized the need for a "coordinated, coherent and
integrated approach to post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation with a View to achieving sustainable
peace" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 97).
The Outcome Document further states that the
Commission was established "to bring together all
relevant actors to marshal resources and to advise on
and propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery" (para. 98).

With that in mind, let me briefly look back on the
first year of the work of the Commission. The first
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
contained in document S/2007/458, provides a detailed
account of the work and activities of the Commission
during the first year of its operation. The process of
compiling the report reflected the seriousness with
which the Commission's membership has undertaken
its work and the significance it attaches to its
anticipated contribution to peace consolidation and the
promotion of national ownership of peacebuilding
measures in post-conflict situations. Here, I would like
to pay special tribute to Ambassador Gaspar Martins of
Angola for his dedication and leadership in steering the
initial stage of the Commission's work.

In the course of approximately 50 formal and
informal meetings and briefings held in its various
configurations, the Peacebuilding Commission
addressed critical organizational, methodological and
thematic issues, as well as the country-specific issues
of Burundi and Sierra Leone, coordinating various
contributions to sustainable peace and opening avenues
for mutual commitments between the international
community and the countries under consideration. I
believe that, in its first year, the Peacebuilding
Commission contributed significantly to the promotion
of integrated post-conflict peacebuilding strategies in
Burundi and Sierra Leone by deepening the dialogue
with all relevant stakeholders. As mentioned in the
annual report, the Commission intends to further
strengthen the effectiveness of its engagement with
Burundi and Sierra Leone.
07-54678

The Commission endorsed the development of

the Integrated Peacebuilding Strategy (IPBS) for

Burundi, of which the Strategic Framework is an

important step. A key next step is to develop the

in-country tracking and monitoring mechanism, which

we already began to take under the guidance of the

coordinating Chair, Ambassador Johan Lovald of
Norway.

In Sierra Leone, the presidential and
parliamentary elections were held successfully. Our
coordinating Chair of the country-specific meeting on
Sierra Leone, Ambassador Frank Majoor of the
Netherlands, has just come back from Sierra Leone
with the most updated information. Work will continue
on the draft of IPBS, so that we may come to an
agreement as soon as possible.

The Peacebuilding Commission also sought to
accumulate best practices and lessons learned on some
critical peacebuilding issues. Through the Working
Group on Lessons Learned, the Commission was able
to benefit from existing experiences of peace
consolidation on such important issues as post-conflict
elections and regional approaches to peacebuilding.
The Working Group, under the able chairmanship of
Ambassador Gallardo Hernandez of El Salvador,
intends to consider other relevant issues in the second
year

As clearly underlined in its first annual report, the
Peacebuilding Commission faced challenges during the
initial phase of establishing its organizational
structures, defining its working methods and finding
ways to fulfil its core mandates. Some of those
challenges will be the subject of additional discussion
during the second session. The "Conclusions" section
of the report is a reflection on key outstanding issues
and challenges before the Commission, namely, the
development of monitoring and tracking mechanisms,
working methods, advocacy, the Peacebuilding Fund
and relationships with other relevant bodies.

The United Nations peacebuilding architecture is
now fully in place: the Peacebuilding Commission,
comprised of the Organizational Committee, the
country-specific meetings and the Working Group on
Lessons Learned; the Peacebuilding Fund and its
advisory group; and the Peacebuilding Support Office.
As the Commission is entering its second year of
activity, we must ensure that its activities are carried
out in a coherent and integrated manner. We believe it
07-54678

appropriate for the Commission to begin addressing the
issues to be considered in adding new countries to the
Commission's agenda, in close consultation with the
referring bodies, including the Security Council.

Secondly, strengthening the Commission's
relationship with relevant bodies and actors, such as
the United Nations principal organs, namely the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Secretariat, funds and
programmes, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions and civil society, is
essential. As part of such efforts, I myself, as Chairman
of the Commission, will make constant efforts and
avail myself of every opportunity to establish closer
working relationships with those organizations.
Therefore, Mr. President, I look forward to working
closely with you and the Security Council to discharge
most effectively the mandates of the Commission and
to achieve the purpose of the Commission, which is to
bring real beneficial change and to have a tangible
impact on the countries and communities in post-
conflict situations.

Exploring thematic issues relevant to
peacebuilding is also a matter of great importance. I
am particularly convinced that discussing broad policy
guidance on peacebuilding activities in general,
without focusing on a specific country, is worth
pursuing.

Raising awareness of the Commission's work, not
only among relevant actors but also among the public
at large, would greatly enhance the understanding of
and bring necessary attention to the work of the
Commission and the countries under its consideration.
In that regard, we intend to make every effort to
heighten the Visibility of the Commission's work. At
the same time, we would hope for individual Member
States to join our efforts to promote the work of the
Commission.

As Chairman of the Commission, I would like to
assure all members of the Security Council of our full
dedication and commitment to the success of the
Commission. In that spirit, we ask all of you to lend
your valuable and much-needed support to our work at
the Commission.

