Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): My delegationjoins others in
expressing appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Andrzej
Duda, President of the Republic of Poland, and his
delegation for convening today's open debate on the
theme of upholding international law within the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are grateful for the briefings delivered by Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti on behalf ofthe Secretary-General,
and by Judges Hisashi Owada and Theodor Meron.

It is significant that today's debate comes in
the wake of the high-level event on sustaining peace
convened by the General Assembly in April (see A/72/ PV.83-87). Today's debate once again reinforces the
need to seek integrated approaches to the maintenance
of international peace and security, while highlighting
the political, developmental, human rights, rule-of-law
and justice dimensions of peace and security.

Respect for international law, as an essential tool
for preventing conflict, conflict resolution and in
building sustainable peace is most critical given the
current complex and multidimensional threats to peace
and security. There is therefore an urgent need for a
renewed commitment by all Member States to respecting
international law in order to ensure that this tool can
be effectively utilized for the maintenance of peace
and security. Respect for a rules-based international
system, as provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law, is the
responsibility of all Member States, without exception.
In meeting that responsibility, we must take every
opportunity to promote and enhance the prospects
for the pacific settlement of disputes, using binding
legal procedures, in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter, and all available mechanisms, including
conciliation, arbitration, negotiation, mediation and
judicial settlement.

In contributing to today's important debate, Ghana
wishes to make the following recommendations on
the subject.

First, we need increased capacity-building at the
national level in order to enhance wider appreciation
and respect for international obligations in the context
of peace and security. The United Nations Programme
of Assistance for the Teaching, Study, Dissemination
and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which
has been in existence for approximately 50 years,
could be instrumental in those efforts and should be
supported and enhanced.

Secondly, the Security Council should increasingly
draw on existing judicial institutions of international
law, such as the International Court of Justice, and
make greater use of the Court as a source of advisory
opinions for the interpretation of the relevant norms of
international law and on controversial issues.

Thirdly, the international community must do
more to ensure accountability for international crimes,
including genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, through the use of commissions of inquiry
and referrals to the International Criminal Court in an
effort to end impunity, bring perpetrators to justice and
serve as a deterrent.

Fourthly, there should be continuing close
collaboration between the Security Council and the
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations
system to ensure the sustainability of rule-of-law
measures, especially in peacebuilding in post-
conflict situations.

Fifthly, we advocate strengthening the relationship
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional arrangements or agencies in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. That cannot be overemphasized.
Ghana's working paper on how to bridge gaps in
regional arrangements is currently under consideration
by the Sixth Committee. We look forward to working
with all Member States to fine-tune those proposals.

Lastly, we urge renewed commitment to collective
security, which rests on full respect for international
law and the equality of all Member States and on our
resolve to avoid unilateral actions in addressing threats
to peace.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to
reaffirm Ghana's commitment to promoting respect
for international law and to playing its role in global
and regional efforts in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

