Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev and Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni for their respective briefings. China
listened closely to the briefing by Mr. Liberty.

The security situation in Liberia has stabilized
in recent years and economic development is back on
track. China is confident that under the leadership
of President Weah the Liberian Government and its
people will achieve even greater success on the path of
nation-building and development.

China pays tribute to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) as its mandate has come to an
end and commends it for the important contribution
it has made to maintaining peace and stability in
Liberia. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
an important means of maintaining international peace
and security. China has always believed that United
Nations peacekeeping should be subjected to timely
adjustments in accordance with actual conditions and
developments on the ground, up until its final exit.

At the same time, it is necessary to fully respect
the will of the countries concerned and to work in
close coordination with countries of the region and
subregional organizations. UNMIL is a success story
that is worth studying in order to identify lessons
learned. Following the departure of UNMIL, we
call upon the international community and Liberia's
bilateral and multilateral cooperation partners to
enhance coordination with the country. We also
call on the United Nations country team and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as regional and
subregional organizations, to strengthen coordination
with the Liberian Government and to leverage their
own expertise to play a positive role in strengthening
the capacity-building of the country and to continue to
assist Liberia in its economic and social development
and the improvement of people's livelihoods.

Whether in nation-building or fighting the Ebola
outbreak, China has consistently stood by Liberia's side.
China has actively participated in UNMIL operations.
In 2017, the United Nations conferred Peace Medals to
all members of the Chinese peacekeeping riot squad.
In February, the squad was awarded Liberia's national
medal by President Weah.

Looking forward, China will continue to pursue
an African policy based on sincerity, practical
results, affinity, good faith and upholding the values
of friendship, justice and shared benefits. China will
forever be a true friend and reliable partner of Africa.
China will continue to play a constructive role,
alongside the international community, in order to help
the African continent achieve durable peace, prosperity
and development.

