The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

Three months ago, this Council adopted
resolution 1803 (2008) to impose additional sanctions
on Iran. These sanctions as well as those adopted
earlier by the Council in resolutions 1737 (2006) and
1747 (2007) are designed to discourage and halt Iran's
pursuit of technologies that would provide it with a
nuclear-weapons capability. With that in mind, I would
like to make five points.

First, we welcome the report of the Committee
Chairman and are pleased to note the important
activities being pursued by the Committee. We
welcome the fact that many States have submitted the
reports required by the aforementioned resolutions and
we encourage all States that have not yet done so to
provide their reports to the Committee as soon as
possible.

We also reiterate the Council's call upon all
States to exercise vigilance over the activities of
financial institutions in their territories with all banks
domiciled in Iran, in particular with Bank Melli and
Bank Saderat and their branches and subsidiaries
abroad.

08-3802]

Secondly, we note with great concern the 26 May
2008 report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) concerning Iran's
continuing non-compliance with resolutions 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008). Most disturbing
is that Iran continues to defy the Security Council and
has not suspended its uranium enrichment- and heavy
water-related activities. Instead, Iran has expanded its
installation and operation of new centrifuges and is
testing advanced centrifuge designs using nuclear
material. Iran has also continued the construction of a
new IR-40 reactor.

Thirdly, long outstanding questions about Iran's
past nuclear activities, including those that indicate
Iran's efforts to develop a nuclear warhead, remain
unanswered. IAEA Director General ElBaradei stated
clearly that Iran must provide "substantive
explanations" for these activities and that it is essential
that Iran provide all requested information,
clarifications and access outlined in the report without
further delay.

Fourthly, we expect Iran to comply with its
international obligations concerning its nuclear
activities, including the full and verifiable suspension
of its proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities and full
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and to implement the Additional Protocols.
08-3802]

Only through all of these steps can Iran begin to
establish confidence that the nature of its nuclear
programme is exclusively peaceful. Iran must provide
to the IAEA full disclosure of any weapons-related
work and allow the IAEA to verify that any such work
has ceased.

Fifthly, we affirm the dual-track strategy on this
issue, which is reinforced by the updated P-5+l
package that will be delivered to Iran in the near term
and reiterate our belief that a mutually satisfactory
negotiated solution remains open to Iran. At the same
time, all Member States must implement robustly their
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008), as well as other
pertinent resolutions. The Council should stand ready,
in accordance with the stated intention in resolution
1803 (2008), to supplement those sanctions with
additional measures.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.35 am.
