Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): I would like to
begin by reiterating Kazakhstan's firm condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
share the view that this heinous and inhuman evil must
be rooted out and eliminated through our decisive and
collective action.

Kazakhstan is proud to be a sponsor of today's
resolution on foreign terrorist fighters (2178 (2014))
because we believe the fight against international
terrorism demands a long-term, comprehensive
approach. It is an approach that must be built on
greater regional and global cooperation, with the active
participation of all United Nations Member States and
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Terrorism has no national or
ethnic identity, citizenship or religion. It poses a threat
to all nations, rich and poor. And that threat, which
ignores borders, is growing rapidly. It can be tackled
successfully only ifwe combine our efforts and broaden
our multifaceted cooperation to counteract it. Member
States must unite and work together to implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
adjust their national legislation accordingly.

We believe that the main focus and priorities
of counter-terrorism efforts should be as follows.
First, we should further develop universal anti-terror
legal instruments and other mechanisms. Secondly,
we should build our national and international
anti-terrorism capacities and expand networks and
mechanisms that enable us to exchange best practices.
Thirdly, we should develop an international database
of terrorist organizations and individuals. Fourthly, we
should strengthen our commitment to fighting money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism and improve
our tools for doing so. Fifthly, we should increase our
efforts to prevent terrorists from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction, arms, nuclear and other
hazardous materials, and travel documents.

Lastly, all Member States and other stakeholders
should encourage the integration of migrants into
their new societies, reduce their social and economic
marginalization and increase dialogue between ethnic
groups, religious denominations and cultures in order
to reduce the risk of radicalization. Kazakhstan, where
more than 130 ethnic groups and representatives of
17 religious denominations live in peace, is committed
to promoting the ideals and values of inter-ethnic and
interfaith dialogue in order to attain peace and security.
We regularly host the Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions in order to help spiritual
leaders use their authority and wisdom to guide their
congregations towards shared peace. This final point is
vital ifwe are to reduce the opportunities and conditions
conducive to terrorism and tackle the use of the rhetoric
of social injustice and religious extremism in recruiting
foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries.

In closing, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's
strong commitment to working with all partners in our
region and in the international community to address
the challenge of international terrorism.

