Mr. Sen (India): Thank you, Mr. President, for
scheduling today's debate on an issue which is of
significant importance to all Member States, both
within and outside the Security Council. Let me also
take this opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month.

While the Charter confers upon the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, paragraph 1 of
Article 24 also stipulates that it acts on behalf of all
Member States in discharging that responsibility.
Accordingly, the Council's working methods have
always been of direct, abiding and immediate interest
to all Member States. That is underscored not only by
the interest of many States in today's topic, but also by
the fact that issues relating to the Council's working
method were identified almost 60 years ago. It was in
April 1949 that the General Assembly unanimously
adopted its resolution 267 (III) on this issue - a
resolution which regrettably remains unimplemented.
However, its adoption underlines that such criticism
has substantial precedent. An equally illustrious
pedigree is shared by the Council's rules of procedure,
which have adamantly remained "provisional" over the
decades.

While we are happy to discuss the Security
Council's working methods in an open debate in the
Council, I must emphasize that this is an issue that
transcends the limited membership of this body. The
extent of interest among non-members of the Council
and the fact that the Council acts on behalf of the
larger membership reinforce the point that the General
Assembly has a legitimate role in deliberating upon the
working methods of the Council.

Nonetheless, the very fact that we are debating
this issue here reflects recognition of the existence of a
problem. Indeed, the note by the President of the
Security Council dated 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507)
voiced some of these concerns by listing some 63
action points. While the concept paper for this meeting
(S/2008/528, annex) assessed the implementation of
those measures, we do not fully share its somewhat
optimistic conclusions.

Troop-contributing countries have also long
sought to be involved in decision-making in
peacekeeping operations, rather than being consulted in
a pro forma manner. Concerns persist over access to
information and documentation; the absence of access
to the Council on particular issues as a matter of
routine for both the country concerned and important
stakeholders; and the lack of systematic access,
including by island and small States, to subordinate
bodies of the Council. All these are recognized to be
among the problems besetting the Council.

While I shall not dwell on problems in the
Council's working methods through a recitation of
various examples - the statement of the Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement adequately covers the salient
points - there can be no ignoring the growing chorus
of voices that recognize flaws in the Council's working
methods.

Yet, the many flaws in the Council's working
methods are only symptoms of a deeper malaise that
lies in its structure and composition. The problem of
the Council is not only a problem of working methods,
but also one of additional requirements for logistical,
defence and financial capabilities and reinforced
legitimacy, which would lead to wider acceptance and
more effective implementation of optimal decisions.
Thus, the lacunae in the working methods of the
Council cannot be fundamentally rectified without
equally comprehensive reform and expansion of the
membership of the Council in both the permanent and
the non-permanent categories. In that connection, we
endorse the point made by South Africa and other
countries.

It is sometimes argued that we could consider
reform of the Council's working methods as an end in
itself. However, in the real world, achieving genuine,
lasting and necessary improvements in the working
methods of the Council cannot be divorced from an
expansion in the number of permanent members. It is
necessary to underline that point, since earlier we
witnessed an expansion in the number of
non-permanent members, with little improvement in
the Council's working methods. To acknowledge that is
not to denigrate the conscientious and strenuous efforts
of many non-permanent members in the past. However,
their efforts were always doomed to fail, because the
structure of the Council had not changed.

Not the least of the limitations was the fact that,
by their very nature, non-permanent members are
transient and lack the institutional memory necessary
to follow through and implement far-reaching changes.
The challenge of being new members on the Council
also adds to that problem. The very fact that the
arguments that are being made today to improve the
Council's working methods are the very same ones that
have been made for more than 60 years simply proves
the point.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate our firm
conviction that genuine and lasting improvements in
the working methods of the Security Council can be
possible only as part of a comprehensive process of
Council reform based on both reform and expansion of
its composition in the permanent and non-permanent
categories. It is only when there are new permanent
members that are held accountable to the wider
membership through an appropriate review mechanism
that there will be a genuine response to the long-
standing demand for meaningful and durable changes
in the working methods of the Council. In the absence
of such comprehensive reform, a fundamental
improvement in the working methods would either
escape us, as it has for more than 60 years or, even if
miraculously achieved, would not last without the
institutional memory, continuing commitment and peer
example of new permanent members held accountable
to the general membership.

