China highly commends the initiative of convening this open debate via video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome President Kaljulaid to the meeting and thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing. We also welcome the participation of President Maurer and Ms. Sirleaf. The international community, including the Security Council, has made tremendous efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict. The Council has adopted a number of resolutions and presidential statements in that regard. Nevertheless, our work still faces multiple challenges, compounded by evolving situations of conflicts and new risks, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As they account for the vast majority of casualties, civilians bear the brunt of wars and armed conflicts. The Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/366) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict presents a bleak picture of ongoing civilian suffering in armed conflicts. In 2019, the United Nations reported more than 20,000 civilians killed and injured and millions of civilians displaced as a result of attacks in 10 conflicts. China strongly believes that the paramount importance of protecting civilians in armed conflict can never be overemphasized. We therefore call for in-depth discussions and concrete Council action on this issue. First, we must address the root causes of conflicts and promote development for peace. That is the best way to protect civilians. In many cases, abject poverty and hunger trigger violence and conflict, which in turn undermine development and exacerbate poverty and food insecurity. Only by addressing the root causes can we break this vicious circle. Sustainable and inclusive development is key to achieving long-term stability and sustaining peace. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development must be effectively implemented, with poverty eradication as the first priority. There are only 10 years left for us to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. It is time for action. China firmly supports the Secretary-General's Decade of Action initiative and calls on the international community to jointly pursue innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. Secondly, the Security Council should work tirelessly to prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts through political dialogue, mediation and negotiation. Preventing, de-escalating and resolving conflicts by peaceful means is the most effective way to protect civilians. At present, armed conflict continues in certain areas, resulting in a high number of civilian casualties. We urge all parties concerned to respond positively to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and to move towards political settlement through inclusive dialogue. The fundamental principles of international law, such as the peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition of the threat or use of force, must be upheld. Many prolonged conflicts are a product of violations of the Charter of the United Nations and other basic international law. For example, the people of Syria and Iraq have endured years of suffering due to the use of force unauthorized by the Security Council. That should not happen again. Thirdly, all parties to conflicts must fulfil their obligation, under international law, to protect civilians. The Geneva Convention, international humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1265 (1999), and other resolutions concerning women, children, medical personnel and missing persons, must be fully implemented. We urge all parties to conflicts to refrain from the asymmetric use of force in densely populated areas. There should be zero tolerance of harming civilians. It is also critical for all parties to give special attention and care to vulnerable groups - particularly women and children - and to facilitate safe and unimpeded humanitarian access. The COVID-19 pandemic civilians in armed conflict at further risk. All parties should prioritize the interests of the people and take proactive measures to combat the virus. Unilateral sanctions severely undermine the capacity of vulnerable countries to respond to the pandemic, thereby exacerbating civilian suffering. We call on relevant countries to lift unilateral sanctions immediately and join global efforts to combat the virus, including by supporting the leading role of the World Health Organization. China has provided medical assistance and sent medical teams to countries in armed conflict in order to help them fight COVID-19. At the recently held World Health Assembly, President Xi Jinping announced five significant measures to boost international cooperation against the pandemic. We will continue to deliver support to countries in need. Fourthly, national Governments must bear the primary responsibility to protect their civilians. United Nations peacekeeping operations should work closely with Governments and strictly follow their mandate when fulfilling the responsibility to protect civilians. United Nations agencies and other humanitarian entities need to engage actively with affected Governments and respect their sovereignty so as to develop trust and facilitate humanitarian operations. The guiding principles of humanitarian emergency assistance, as set out in General Assembly resolution 46/182, must be respected and upheld. The International Committee of the Red Cross has served as a role model in that regard. Any violation of international humanitarian law, such as threats or attacks against civilians in armed conflict, should be investigated and punished in accordance with the law. Meanwhile, the international community should respect the national judicial system of countries concerned and not impose external measures. We should bear in mind that foreign occupation and interference, terrorist activities, unilateral sanctions and many other factors also lead to civilian suffering, and its perpetrators must be held accountable. The protection of civilians should not be politicized or used as an excuse for interference in internal affairs or even regime change. Those who invoke international law must also submit to it. The Security Council should adopt a consistent position in all situations on its agenda. Double standards or selective approaches will only damage the authority of the Council. A human life is of greater value than anything else. We must take a people- centred approach in dealing with any issue on the Council's agenda. It is the moral obligation of the international community to do whatever it can to take pragmatic and effective measures in order to ensure the safety and dignity of civilians in armed conflict.
