Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
Madam President, I should like to welcome you and
commend you on your country's presidency of the
Security Council and your leadership. I also welcome
the presence here of other Ministers, and I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I
also thank for their briefings the Chairs of the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and resolution 1373 (2001).

The threat posed by the Islamic State and the
Al-Nusra Front is constantly changing. These terrorist
groups are armed with increasingly sophisticated
weaponry and making significant territorial gains.
They also make use of the income drawn from the
illegal trade in oil, pillage and hostage-taking to fuel
their macabre activities. They recruit throughout the
world and spread their barbarous theology everywhere,
including in Africa.

Africa is also confronting terrorism and violent
extremism. As has been noted, it teems with groups
such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Ansar Al-Sharia, the Signers in Blood Battalion,
and Al-Shabaab. Despite their different geographic
locations, these terrorist groups constitute a well-
coordinated network in their actions across the globe.
That is why, on 2 September, important decisions were
taken at a summit meeting of the African Union Peace
and Security Council to strengthen the legal framework
of the fight against terrorism and to establish an
African arrest warrant for authors of and accomplices
to terrorist activities and a mechanism for halting
terrorist funding.

If we are to eradicate the phenomenon of foreign
fighters, we must attack its deep-rooted causes. The
emergence ofterrorism and violent extremism in Africa
is nourished by widespread poverty and despair, and
by youth unemployment in particular. Young people
are easy prey indeed for terrorist groups, which enjoy
significant resources from drug trafficking and other
illicit activities. If the international community is to
stop these activities, which seriously threaten security,
it must support the youth development programmes and
projects of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. To that end, Africa's partners must provide
ample technical and material assistance, in addition
to the assistance provided by such United Nations
entities as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. For its part, Chad is playing its role in the
fight against terrorism. Its resolute engagement in Mali,
where we have paid and continue to pay the highest
price, perfectly reflects our commitment.

To conclude, we commend the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, and hope that it
will help Member States to better implement resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).

