Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me to begin, Sir, by
addressing to you a warm welcome from my delegation and
our best wishes on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council today. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank your Government for having sent to
the United Nations such a fine and able diplomat,
Ambassador Karel Kovanda, who has presided so
efficiently and impartially over our deliberations since the
beginning of April.

The resolution adopted today by the Security
Council extends the suspension of certain - largely
symbolic - sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the areas of civil
aviation and cultural and sports events until 5 July 1995.

This resolution seems to us the logical and natural
consequence of the four reports by Co-Chairmen Owen
and Stoltenberg on the monitoring activity of the Mission
of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) along the border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past 100 days. All four
reports take note of the freedom of movement the Mission
has enjoyed in Yugoslav territory, the collaboration
offered by the Belgrade authorities and, above all, the fact
that the Belgrade Government has continued to honour its
commitment to keeping closed the border between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
and the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
currently controlled by the Bosnian Serbs.

That said, we cannot ignore the reports in recent
months of helicopter flights across the border. In this
regard, paragraph 8 of the resolution underlines the
important need for a thorough investigation of the matter
and requests the cooperation of the Belgrade authorities
and a report of the Secretary-General in this connection.

Neither can we ignore reports that goods could have
been diverted from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) to the Bosnian Serbs through the
Serb-controlled areas of Croatia. This is why in paragraph
13 the Secretary-General is asked to report whether the
Co-Chairmen of the ICFY have received substantiated
evidence of such diversions. Furthermore, paragraph 15
provides for an end to the suspension if that should be
proved to be the case. Frankly, we believe it is in the
interest of the Belgrade authorities that their good faith be
proved.

It is equally essential that the size and operative
capacity of the ICFY Mission be strengthened in order to
guarantee a more effective monitoring of the border, in
particular with regard to the possibility of illegal
helicopter crossings. A serious commitment by the
international community to reinforcing the Mission, which
is performing such an important, difficult and delicate
task, could thus help to remove the existing climate of
doubts and suspicions.

 

Finally, I should like to recall once more that in my
Government's opinion the role that the Belgrade
Government can play in the framework of the peace
process is important, because that Government can exert its
influence on the Bosnian Serbs, whose obstinate rejection
of the peace plan continues to be a major obstacle. In a
difficult period such as the present one, with so many
factors that are still unknown, and on the eve of the
expiration of the cease-fire agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we believe that Belgrade's role continues to
deserve encouragement and incentives.

I would be remiss if I concluded without echoing in
the Council the feeling of shock and horror provoked in
Italy by the cowardly terrorist attack perpetrated two days
ago in Oklahoma City. Through you, Mr. President, I wish
to extend sincere condolences and deep sympathy to our
American colleague, Ambassador Albright, and her
delegation.

