Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, my delegation
would like to express our appreciation for your
initiative, Mr. President, with regard to this discussion
of the importance of mine action for peacekeeping
operations. We have listened very attentively and
appreciatively to the statements made by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Ambassador
Dahinden. Pakistan is alarmed to see that there are still
200 million landmines stockpiled globally, almost half
of them scattered in about seventy countries,
completely unattended. Some l5,000-20,000 people
fall victim to the indiscriminate use of such landmines
every year. Seventy percent of the casualties are
civilians, a large proportion of them women and
children. Anti-personnel mines and unexploded
ordnance pose severe economic and social
consequences for the affected countries and place a
heavy burden on economic and social reconstruction.
Anti-personnel landmines also continue to prevent a
large number of refugees in post-conflict situations
from returning to their homes.

It would be useful to recall the substantive debate
held by the General Assembly last week on the issue of
assistance in mine action. The Secretary-General's
report on this subject contained in document A/56/260
and Add.l was most useful in that discussion. The
annual review of the United Nations mine strategy,
steered by the Secretary-General, also reflects a
positive response from the global community. In
particular, we have noted progress in implementation
of the six strategic goals and related objectives, that is,
increased information and improved information
technology to create awareness, improved capacity to
respond to emergencies, especially in the most affected
countries, such as Iraq and Afghanistan, sustained
efforts to build national mine-action capacity,
significant improvement in quality management and
coordination of mine-action activities, enhanced
resource mobilization from donor countries, and
increased advocacy in support of the relevant legal
instruments.

One principle that requires universal acceptance
and implementation is that of the responsibility of the
States that actually place landmines or leave other
unexploded ordnance behind in conflict situations.
Until this principle is acknowledged and countries that
are responsible for such actions are called upon to
assume their responsibilities, at least to clear up these
landmines, we believe that action will continue to be
inadequate and slow at the global level. We have noted
the priority issues, which Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno has identified in his statement to the Council
this morning, and we believe that this will provide a
very useful framework for the Council's action in the
future. We agree with the representative of Germany
that the Council's role is principally related to the
contribution that we can make in the context of conflict
situations or post-conflict situations and in
peacekeeping operations, where the Council obviously
has an important role to play in mine clearance, during
and after conflicts.

It is quite clear in the context of the situations in
which the Council is presently involved that we need to
include mine-laying prevention and mine clearance as
essential objectives in conflict situations, such as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in West Africa.
Prevention in this case, as usual, is better than the cure,
and it could be an objective that we could pursue in the
context of the peacekeeping operations that the Council
has presently under way.

Afghanistan presents a stark illustration of the
tragedy caused by landmines. In Afghanistan,
approximately 300 people are killed or injured every
month by landmines and unexploded ordnance, and this
has a history of over 20 years in that country.

According to the latest report of the Mine Action
Programme for Afghanistan,

"Mines and exploded ordnance are an
obstacle to the resettlement of the millions of
internally displaced persons and returning
refugees."

At the current pace of demining activities, the
report acknowledges that Afghanistan could be cleared
of landmines only after 10 years. Such an operation
would require approximately $500 million. Therefore,
we would urge the donor nations and agencies to
accelerate their pace so that the demining period in
Afghanistan could be shortened, paving the way for the
early rehabilitation of the Afghan people and the return
of the Afghan refugees to their country. Despite the
strain on Pakistan's medical facilities, hundreds of
Afghan mine victims are treated in hospitals and
rehabilitation centres every year.

It is obvious that the main constraints on action
by the international community is the paucity of funds;
secondly, the application of the latest technologies in
conflict situations and post-conflict situations for mine
clearance; and, thirdly, the absence of a clear strategy
for the rehabilitation of mine victims.

Being the largest troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, Pakistan has actively
contributed to the demining operations in several
affected countries in the past. We have participated in
the demining operations in Kuwait, Cambodia, Angola,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Western Sahara. We are
also helping in demining operations in Lebanon, Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Pakistan would be ready to provide training facilities to
mine-affected countries.

In conclusion, let me recall Pakistan's unique
record of clearing all mine fields after the three wars
that were fought in South Asia, as well as during the
recent military standoff with our eastern neighbour.
There has never been a humanitarian situation caused
by mines placed by Pakistan in the context of such
conflicts. We remain committed to ensuring that mines
in our military inventory will never become a cause for
civilian casualties in Pakistan or elsewhere in the
world.

