Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his detailed
briefing and for his presentation of the end of mandate
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(5/2005/310). I also wish to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, and to the rest of the UNMISET staff for
the remarkable work that they have accomplished
during the Mission's mandate.

In recent months, thanks to the efforts of the
Timorese Government and people and to UNMISET's
valuable assistance, Timor-Leste has continued to
make progress in various areas. We have noted with
satisfaction the accomplishments and progress
achieved during the final consolidation phase, amply
illustrated by the successful local elections and the
considerable strengthening of the country's public
institutions.

We are also pleased at the quality of the bilateral
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, which
have seen real improvement in recent months because
of the initiatives undertaken at the highest level by
Presidents Gusmao and Yudhoyono. We welcome that
positive development in the relations between the two
countries, and we congratulate them on the decision to
establish a Truth and Friendship Commission and on
the signing of the agreement covering 96 per cent of
the land border. We encourage both Governments to
continue to address the borders issue and other
outstanding bilateral issues.

In addition, we welcome the progress made in the
negotiations between Timor-Leste and Australia
concerning offshore oil deposits, whose exploitation
could greatly assist Timor-Leste's economic
development.

However, the progress made by the Timorese
needs to be consolidated. Assistance is needed in
certain key areas such as justice, human rights and
support for police and for other public services.
UNMISET's mandate ends on 20 May, and the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), established
by resolution 1599 (2005), will make it possible to
continue United Nations assistance in the areas of
institutional capacity-building and developing the rule
of law. Timor will also need financial support from the
international community and from multilateral and
bilateral donors so that it can attain the objectives of its
national development plan and to ensure long-term
stability.

We are confident that the Timorese people and
leaders will be successful in their nation-building effort
and in rebuilding their country's economy.

