The Secretary-General: I thank Ambassador
Li Baodong of China for convening this meeting and
for rallying the international community to the cause of
Somalia during this critical period. I wish him all the
best as President of the Security Council. I appreciate
his leadership.

I would also like to thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed of Somalia for
his participation in today's meeting. I would also like
to recognize the participation of His Excellency
Minister Henry Bellingham of the United Kingdom, as
well as that of Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special
Representative for Somalia of the Commission of the
African Union, whom I thank for all his contributions.

I am pleased that we are able to have this meeting
with the participation of my Special Representative,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, who is joining us by videolink
from Somalia. I am grateful for his contributions and
those of the staff of the United Nations Political Office
11-25831
for Somalia directed at keeping the political process
moving. I also thank our staff at the United Nations
Office in Nairobi and the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for working so tirelessly and for assisting
in the medical evacuation of troops, especially in the
past few weeks.

The situation in Somalia requires urgent attention.
The military gains of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and AMISOM. are fragile. The
humanitarian situation is dire, and violence continues
to rage. And given the calls for good governance and a
decent life in North Africa and the Middle East, public
expectations are likely to grow in Somalia, too. If we
act now, we can consolidate recent gains and set
Somalia on a more promising course.

In recent heavy fighting, dozens of brave
peacekeepers of AMISOM. from Burundi and Uganda
made the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace. There
are also rising numbers of civilian casualties. I have
spoken with Presidents Nkurunziza and Museveni to
express my gratitude for their continued commitment
to Somalia. I also offered my condolences to the
families of the victims.

The TFG and AMISOM. have succeeded in
expanding the line of control in Mogadishu. The TFG
and its ally, Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a, have opened
new fronts in southern Somalia and taken control of
major towns previously held by insurgent groups. We
must help them to sustain these gains in order to
restore security and deliver basic services,
humanitarian aid and support for recovery and
reconstruction. Such improvements for the people of
Somalia and the thousands of internally displaced
persons in zones controlled by the TFG are critical to
sustaining the hard-won military gains.

AMISOM. and the TFG forces are delivering on
the military front. AMISOM. would be even more
effective if it had more resources, including helicopters,
and support for intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance. The international community must
keep its end of the bargain. There are critical gaps in
the United Nations support package to AMISOM. and
significant shortfalls of military assets and equipment.
I appeal to Member States to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM. and to reimburse contingent-owned
equipment and troop-contributing countries.

11-2583]
We must also enable AMISOM. to reach its full
authorized strength. Building a viable force is as much
about troop numbers as it is about the assets that
support them. This would enable the TFG to establish
greater space under its control, foster direct links
between the Government and its citizens, and promote
political dialogue and reconciliation. It would also
make it possible for the United Nations to expand its
presence in Somalia.

At the same time, Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) have to rise to the challenge on the
political and governance fronts, and in achieving
stability. Clear political objectives must frame the
military objectives. The TFIs collectively have an
opportunity to consolidate their authority in the areas
under their control, but this opportunity may not last.
The TFIs must find unity of purpose. That spirit should
be the driving force behind the talks on the end of the
current transitional period and the next chapter for
Somalia. Disagreements on the transition could have a
negative impact on the security situation and
stabilization efforts, including the fate of newly trained
members of the Somalia forces.

Moreover, any extension of the transition period
must be earned. The focus should be on fulfilling
outstanding tasks for the transition, including the
constitutional process. Constitution-building is
paramount because it provides a platform for national
reconciliation. The process would finally allow
Somalis to choose their own fate, their own framework
for governance, and their own leaders. This exercise
should be open and inclusive. My Special
Representative, Mr. Mahiga, has been working to
facilitate consensus on these issues. He has also been
working closely with the various clan and religious
leaders to expand the reconciliation process, as
stipulated in the Djibouti Agreements.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a grave
and growing menace. The international community has
mobilized to stamp out piracy and bring the
perpetrators to justice. I welcome improved
information-sharing and coordination, as well as the
deployment of significant military and other assets. But
attacks are increasing in number, and the pirates are
expanding their geographic reach. The recent report
(S/2011/30, annex) of my Special Adviser on Legal
Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang, highlights the need for urgent action.
We must forge an integrated response based on three
pillars: deterrence, development, and security.

The United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the International Maritime Organization,
recently revitalized the Kampala process, a mechanism
for dialogue that brings together the TF G, Somaliland,
Puntland and other regional Somali authorities. I hope
this important forum will continue to meet throughout
the year.

I am also concerned about the drought unfolding
in Somalia. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reports that
drought has displaced some 50,000 people during the
past two months. Many are moving to urban areas in
search of help. In the Hiraan region of Central Somalia,
70 per cent of the population is in crisis. Food has not
been distributed there since the World Food
Programme was forced to suspend its operations there
in January 2010.

In addition to drought, hostilities are forcing
people to flee their homes and villages. According to
UNHCR, every week for the past few weeks some
2,500 Somalis have been registered in the overcrowded
Dadaab camps in Kenya. Before the fighting and
drought, that number was less than 400. Mogadishu
reached a terrible milestone last year when 7,600
people were reported to have weapons-related
injuries - the highest toll in more than a decade. That
disturbing trend has continued this year, with more
than 1,000 weapons-related injuries reported in the
city's hospitals since January.

This year's humanitarian appeal for Somalia
seeks $529 million for urgent needs. As of last month,
only one-quarter of that amount had been funded. The
United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator has
allocated $15 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund. An additional $50 million has been
allocated from pooled funding to respond to the
drought. But if the traditional long rains fail in April,
the situation will deteriorate even further. Inadequate
funding is not the only obstacle; we also lack access to
areas of conflict and insecurity where needs are
greatest.

Somalia urgently needs our help. It faces levels of
Violence, damaging weather conditions and insecurity
that would shake even strong countries. AMISOM. and
the TFG have made some progress, but they need more
support. If we reinforce the military gains, provide
humanitarian relief and achieve political progress, we
can set Somalia on course to greater stability and peace.
If we fail, we risk a growing humanitarian crisis, a
deteriorating security situation, and a worsening threat
to regional peace and stability.

I welcome the Security Council's decision to
authorize more troops for Somalia, as well as the
Council's focus on the situation today. But AMISOM
and the TFG need more than authorized troop levels.
They need actual troops, equipment and enhanced
capacity. And the Somali people need to see real,
tangible improvement. They need humanitarian
assistance, political stability and a constitutional
process that offers hope.

Let us do all we can to make that possible. By
working together and thinking ahead, we can establish
the conditions in which Somalis can steer their country
out of Violence and into a future free from want and
free from fear.

