I would like to commend the Nigerien presidency of the Security Council for its choice to hold this relevant open debate on the links between the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and peace and security. I would also like to thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, as well as the other speakers who followed, for the high quality of their interventions. The security risks resulting from environmental degradation are a major issue that has rightly been the focus of the Security Council's attention for more than 10 years. Notwithstanding the many subsequent initiatives of the Council and other relevant bodies of the Organization, these security risks are today more acute, as natural disasters have reached a particularly alarming level in recent years, with severe ecological and humanitarian effects on a large part of the planet. By way of proof, for the first time in 30 years forest fires ravaged approximately 8,000 square kilometres in California and produced 244 megatons of carbon dioxide between | January and 31 August, as compared with 181 megatons for the whole of 2019 in the Arctic Circle, according to Copernicus data. At the same time, floods on an unprecedented scale are wreaking enormous havoc across much of the globe, particularly in the Sahel. In the Sudan alone, they have damaged more than 100,000 homes, caused more than half a million people to be displaced and raised the level of the Nile to 17.57 metres - a record for more than 100 years, according to the Sudanese Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources. In addition, since 2015 the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has been sounding the alarm about the loss of thousands of hectares of arable land every year due to erosion, salinization, acidification and soil contamination, as well as its enormous impact on biodiversity. Such worrisome phenomena are compounded by the steady invasion of desert locusts in the Sahel, according to the latest updates of the FAO Locust Watch published in September. The potential harm caused by those insects will also have to be added to the damage caused by the grain-eating birds that are already invading the Senegal River valley. Natural disasters cause considerable loss of livelihoods and _ intensify competition and tensions over increasingly scarce arable land, grazing land and water resources. They also increase migration, create additional health problems and can lead to serious political, social and economic crises. They are therefore root causes or aggravating and recurring factors in conflicts. The peace and security risks associated with natural disasters are therefore by no means a scenario in the distant future. They are already a reality for millions of people around the world, and the examples of the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the Middle East, which are grappling with multifaceted crises, amply demonstrate that link. Indeed, the United Nations Environment Programme has indicated that at least 40 per cent of the intra-State conflicts over the past 60 years have been directly or indirectly linked to valuable natural resources, such as timber, diamonds, gold and oil, or to sometimes scarce resources, such as fertile land and water. Moreover, the fact that 8 of the 10 largest peace operations are deployed in countries in the Sahel and the Middle East, regions that are highly exposed to the impacts of climate change, is not surprising. It is also no coincidence that, according to the 17 July report of FAO and the World Food Programme, the majority of the 27 countries most threatened by a food crisis due to the coronavirus disease are hotbeds of tension that were already struggling with extreme weather conditions. These conclusions reinforce our conviction that environmental protection, in particular the fight against climate change, must be fully integrated into conflict prevention strategies, and therefore be at the top of the Security Council's agenda. Furthermore, strategies to preserve the environment for conflict prevention purposes should be combined with actions to combat the illicit exploitation of environmental resources in times of armed conflict, through which certain armed rebel and terrorist groups finance their activities. In that regard, it is important to improve the monitoring and protection of natural resources in times of conflict and to establish a regime of international sanctions against trade. However, to make such an approach effective, it is first important to ensure that peace and ceasefire agreements include clear commitments by the signatory parties to ensuring transparency, fairness and the protection of ownership rights in the exploitation of natural resources and to establishing principles for the fair distribution of revenue from such resources. Similarly, the inclusion of provisions on host country support for natural resource management in the mandates of certain peacekeeping missions, such as the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while welcome, should be mainstreamed and significantly strengthened, including through adequate financial and logistical resources and the appointment of environmental advisers. Furthermore, my delegation believes that it is important to develop a comprehensive and consistent approach, not only to align the work of the Security Council with that already undertaken in the context of the relevant international instruments, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity, among others, but also to take into account the various regional and national actions. In that regard, the establishment of an analytical and early-warning tool should also be considered to centralize data from the United Nations, regional organizations and States and various other partners on the effects of climate change and biodiversity degradation on peace and security. Such a tool could even be used by the Secretary-General to submit an annual report to the General Assembly and the Security Council that takes stock of the situation and makes useful recommendations on the issue. In conclusion, the first priority in addressing the issue that brings us together today is, without a doubt, to ensure the well-being of the environment in general and the climate in particular. In order to do so, climate financing must be fully operational, especially in the area of adaptation, as it is an effective means of maintaining and sustaining activities to combat climate change and, consequently, of preventing conflicts. Senegal calls once again on developed countries to implement the commitments made in favour of climate financing to replenish the Green Climate Fund after 2020, in order to enable developing countries to better adapt to climate change, with a view to building their resilience.
