Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank both
briefers for their comprehens, yet again very worrying,
updates. Like many others around the table, we share
a sense of urgency while talking about the current
developments in Syria, where the conflict is far from
its end. Allow me also to join others in expressing our
sincere condolences to the Russian Mission.

Let me today focus on two aspects of the
conflict - the internal and the external.

First, while talking about the internal dimension
of the conflict, we cannot acknowledge that things
are normalizing. Even though last Sunday - for the
first time since 2011 - local elections were held, we
have to underline that not everyone could participate in
them. We have to keep in mind the lack ofparticipation
by internally displaced persons (IDPs) and Syrian
refugees. Therefore, in our opinion, those elections
might not fully reflect the reality of Syria today.

As there is no military solution to the conflict, we
have always underlined that we should aim at reaching
an intra-Syrian framework for a political agreement on
a transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015). It is for
the Syrians themselves to negotiate, and that is why we
desperately need to revive the United Nations political
process in Geneva. Only a real, tangible political
process, which would ensure true representation of the
Syrian people, would provide the setting ofa timetable
and procedures for the drafting of a constitution
and conducting United Nations-supervised free and
fair elections.

In that context, let me express our strong support
for the Syrian-led inclusive constitutional committee
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva.
It should be implemented as a priority now. It requires
the full and constructive engagement of all parties
to the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities,
to participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions.

It is also important to note that a cessation
of hostilities may also give the peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva the
opportunity to gain momentum, so that a political
solution might be finally reached. For that reason, we
call upon all parties to fulfil their commitments to the
existing ceasefire agreements.

Secondly, with regard to the external dimension
of the crisis, we need to discuss the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria today, although
the military offensive in Syria continues. As a
consequence, human suffering is growing. Any action,
taken by anyone - but especially by the Astana
guarantors - even against terrorists, cannot justify the
attacks on innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including health facilities. All parties to the conflict
are obliged under international humanitarian law not to
attack civilians and civilian infrastructure and to take
all possible measures to protect civilians. There is a
special role for Russia, Turkey and Iran in that regard.

We are extremely worried about the escalation
of hostilities in the Idlib governorate. That region is
one of the de-escalation zones in Syria, which was
established and is overseen by the guarantors of the
Astana process with an aim to ensure the ceasefire and
humanitarian access.
We welcome the agreement reached between Russia
and Turkey in Sochi yesterday, which is thought to have
averted an all- out offensive by the Government forces to
retake the last remaining opposition stronghold in Idlib.
Considering it as a move in the right direction towards
avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe, we urge all
parties to the conflict to ensure the full implementation
of the agreement.

We are deeply concerned about the severe
situation of the most vulnerable victims of the
conflict - especially children, women and members
of religious minorities, as well as IDPs. Those groups
currently constitute half of the population of Idlib. If not
protected, we are risking a humanitarian catastrophe
that might also include a serious risk of sexual violence.
We call upon all to alleviate the suffering of civilians
by granting them free and safe access to humanitarian
assistance, including voluntary medical evacuation,
which should strictly be overseen by the United Nations
and the implementing partners, based only on medical
needs, in order to ensure the voluntary character of
the process.

In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining unity as well as the responsibility in
the Security Council on the question of the full
implementation of the humanitarian resolution
(resolution 2401 (2018)) across Syria. All parties to
the conflict should exercise restraint and prioritize the
protection of civilians. We call on all stakeholders with
influence on the ground, especially Russia, Turkey
and Iran, to take the necessary steps to ensure that the
fighting stops and the Syrian people are protected.

