Ms. Kalala (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, let me begin my
statement by telling you how pleased my delegation is
to see you presiding over the Security Council during
this month of July 2006, and to express the sense of
honour that I have in taking part in this important
debate, which I predict will be successful.

I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the essential nature of the report of the
activities of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflicts (see S/2006/497, annex),
which you, Mr. President, have the honour to direct,
and to thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), for their important statements.

My delegation welcomes the Security Council's
growing interest with respect to the tragic situation of
child soldiers. It supports the coalition that is intended
to put an end to the use of child soldiers, the Working
Group and the monitoring and reporting mechanism
whose aim is to protect children who are affected by
armed conflicts.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2006/389) objectively
describes the situation that has prevailed in my country
in recent years. Still, one needs to point out that the
violations highlighted in this report are mainly
perpetrated by elements of armed groups still active in
certain parts of the country, particularly in Ituri and the
North and South Kivus.

But as is known, considerable progress has been
made by the Government in the fight against the use of
children in armed conflicts, both in terms of prevention
and in terms of protection.

With respect to the prevention efforts, I should
point out that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has ratified and implemented many international and
regional legal instruments relating to protecting
children. Today one should acknowledge that since
1999 the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
ranked third among African countries that have a
national plan of action in this area, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution of the World
Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna in 1993.

Lastly, I would point out that all of this
legislative progress has been supported by a vast
outreach and awareness-raising campaign, by both the
Government and non-governmental human rights
organizations. This campaign, which is still under way,
targets officials entrusted with the implementation of
these laws, as well as parents and children.

The Government has spared no effort with respect
to protecting children who are recruited in violation of
the legal provisions that are in effect. In 1999, despite
a state of war, the Government organized in Kinshasa
an important forum on the demobilization of child
soldiers, which was attended by experts from a number
of countries of Africa, Europe, Asia and the Americas.
That forum provided new impetus to the perception of
the phenomenon of child soldiers in my country, and its
recommendations led to Law Decree number 066 of
9 June 2000, which had to do with the demobilization
and reintegration of vulnerable groups within
combatant forces.

In May 2004, continuing the process under way,
the Government developed the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Programme
(NDDRP), with the assistance of a number of partners,
including the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). This programme was financed by the World
Bank and the Multi-Country Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme. It deals with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of all
combatants who are not eligible to serve in the new
restructured and integrated army, including child
soldiers. It is implemented through a structure that has
been called the National Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission, whose acronym is
CONADER.

The implementation of the NDDRP has produced
encouraging results. Indeed, out of an estimated total
of 33,000 children associated with armed groups and
forces, 19,054, including 2,881 girls, have been
removed and placed in transitional support structures
that provide psychosocial care to help them make the
transition from military life to civilian life, with a view
to their social and economic reintegration.

As of 30 June 2006, of the 19,054 child soldiers
who had already been removed from their armed
groups and forces, 12,471 had been reunited with their
families. Of these 12,471 reunited children, 9,717 are
back in school while some 6,312 are being reintegrated
into the economy.

However, I do need to note that the
implementation of the NDDRP has met a number of
considerable constraints, particularly with respect to
difficulties related to, on the one hand, locating the

children's families in order to reunify them, and, on the
other hand, monitoring the situation of all child
soldiers who have been reunited and are being
provided reintegration support. Other constraints are
related to the shortfalls in funds allocated for their care
and in the ongoing hotspots of tensions in certain parts
of the country.

Strengthening the fight against the phenomenon
of child soldiers in my country requires that solutions
that are consonant with the constraints that I mentioned
be rapidly found.

From this standpoint, with respect to the shortfall
of resources allocated for care of children, I must point
out that the overall financing for the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Programme is approximately $200 million, out of
which only $5 million were allocated for children
associated with armed forces and groups. To date,
14,000 children still need to be removed from armed
groups and forces, while the moneys allocated for this
have already been totally spent. It is also necessary to
continue implementation of the Programme with
additional substantial support being provided to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With respect to the themes of this debate, within
the framework of the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1379 (2001), my delegation, which
intends to provide all its cooperation to the monitoring
and reporting mechanism that has been set up in
implementation of 1612 (2005), believes that the
mechanism of "naming and shaming" should also
cover all parties to a conflict who recruit and use child
soldiers, regardless of whether that situation is on the
Council's agenda or not.

I would be remiss if I were to conclude my
statement without expressing my gratitude to the
international community, which has unceasingly
supported the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
programme's implementation. My Government
welcomes the cooperation of the UNICEF office in
Kinshasa and commends its great interest in the
protection of children. It thanks the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Bretton Woods system and
UNDP for their active involvement in the
Government's efforts in the process of the
demobilization of child soldiers.

Lastly, in these difficult times, allow me to recall
that many children are living in situations in which there
has been a breach of international peace and security. I
am thinking in particular about the children of the
Palestinian Authority, of the State of Israel and of
Lebanon. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is fully
confident that the Council will soon find a solution to the
tragedy that is taking place in the Holy Land.

