Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on the
issue of children and armed conflict, which is a priority
for our country. We especially commend you for your
participation, Mr. Prime Minister, which serves to
highlight your country's commitment to this important
issue. We would also like express our appreciation
for the important briefings by Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Yenny
Londofio, representative of civil society. We also thank
Ms. Londofio for sharing her valuable insights.

Peru is a country committed to the agenda on
children in armed conflict. Children make up one
of the most vulnerable segments of any population,
and suffer in many ways from violence, devastation,
humanitarian crises and displacements forced by
contemporary conflicts. We condemn in the strongest
terms all forms of violence against minors in armed
conflicts, including sexual violence, and prioritize their
protection. That includes bringing those responsible
to justice and addressing the root causes that make
possible the commission of these atrocious crimes.

We deplore the magnitude and gravity of violations
of the rights of children in contemporary conflicts.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465)
provides an account of its increase in 2017 over the
previous year, with at least 6,000 cases attributed to
Government forces and more than 15,000 to non-State
armed groups.

The States Members and the Organization, as well
as the Council, have the responsibility to act effectively
to eradicate violence against children and allow them
to enjoy full lives, free of fear, of the loss of family
and friends and of traumas and injuries. To that end,
among other measures, we emphasize the importance
of working in close coordination with the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
and with UNICEF, to adhere to and fully implement
the relevant international instruments and to follow
the preventive approach provided by the concept of
sustaining peace.

I should like to mention that Peru recently signed
on to the Safe Schools Declaration, an instrument
that, in view of the deplorable increase in attacks on
schools, seeks to improve the protection provided to
students, staff and educational establishments during
conflicts. We also highlight the need to implement
the Paris Principles and Commitments, which provide
guidelines to protect children against recruitment and
use by armed forces or armed groups and to secure
their freedom and social reintegration. We consider
the reintegration and rehabilitation of girls and boys
to be of special importance, with a View to restoring
their dignity and hope and empowering them as future
promoters of sustainable peace.

We also want to point out the importance of
peacekeeping operations deployed by the Council
prioritizing the protection of children, including
training peacekeepers in that regard. Moreover, the
work of United Nations country teams and civil society
is key to that end.

There is undoubtedly much that remains to be
done on this issue, and we welcome, Mr. President,
the adoption of the important resolution 2427 (2018),
proposed and facilitated by the delegation of Sweden
and adopted today with Peru's sponsorship, which we
were honoured to provide.

Before I conclude, I should also like to express our
appreciation and support for the work of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
and to highlight the priority that the Secretary-
General attaches to this issue, in line with the need
to build sustainable peace. Peru will continue to work
constructively to promote the children-and-armed-
conflict agenda, which we believe should occupy a
central place in the work of the Council, which should
continue to encourage, support and monitor specific
commitments and plans for the prevention of violence
against children.

