Mr. Jallow: Since my last report to the Security
Council, on 15 December 2005 (see S/PV.5328), the
implementation of the completion strategy has
continued to progress satisfactorily at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The recent
developments are set out in the revised ICTR
completion strategy document which the President of
the Tribunal has submitted to the Security Council
following consultations with my Office and with the
Registry.

In the preceding six months, the Office of the
Prosecutor has started the Karera case, of which it has
since concluded the prosecution phase. The defence
phase is currently proceeding. During this period we
have concluded three other cases and are ready to
commence three new trials before the end of 2006. The
Office of the Prosecutor has, as well, successfully
negotiated and concluded one guilty plea, in the case of
Joseph Serugendo, as the Tribunal President has
indicated.

The ICTR continues to face challenges in
tracking and arresting the 18 indicted fugitives. In my
last report to the Council, I disclosed that the
intelligence available to my Office confirmed that
indicted fugitive Felicien Kabuga has continued to
reside in and carry on business in Kenya. He continues
to be at large. His arrest and trial remain a top priority
for the ICTR, and indeed for all of us. We have
maintained contact with the authorities in Kenya on
this issue, and they have promised to collaborate.
Nonetheless, he remains at large. I believe that the
Government of Kenya needs to be encouraged to fully
cooperate with the ICTR in this respect and to make
more intensive efforts to track and arrest Felicien
Kabuga and transfer him to the ICTR for trial.

The evasion of justice by Kabuga is a matter of
concern to all of us, as well as to many civil society
organizations both within and outside of Africa. In my
meetings with African non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in May 2006, some 60 NGOs signed a petition
calling upon the Government of the Republic of Kenya
to cooperate with the ICTR in this respect. Local
Kenyan NGOs have also indicated their willingness to
cooperate with the ICTR. These civil society
organizations are playing a valuable role as partners
with the ICTR in the pursuit of international justice.
They are to be commended and supported. We hope
that this partnership among the ICTR, civil society
groups, the United Nations and the Government of
Kenya, as well as other Governments, will yield
dividends.

The tracking and apprehension of the other 17
fugitives continues to rank as a high priority. We
therefore continue to emphasize the need for the
cooperation of Member States to ensure their arrest and
their eventual trial either at the ICTR or in countries
willing to accept cases on referral from the Tribunal.
Unfortunately, in the past six months we have not
registered any arrest or transfer of a fugitive to the
ICTR.

Referral of indictees under rule 11 bis of the rules
of procedure and evidence continues to be a slow and
challenging process. The first motion for transfer of a
case of an indictee to a national jurisdiction was
rejected by a Trial Chamber on 18 May 2006. That
ruling significantly limits the range of countries
available for referral and in that respect could impact
negatively on the referral strategy. However, a final
decision is now pending in the joint Appeals Chamber
of the Tribunals.

The Security Council has, in its resolution 1503
(2003), called on Member States to assist in developing
the capacity of those States willing to accept such
cases. However, there is a need for more concrete
assurances and indications of possible support for such
countries, including Rwanda, in order to encourage a
more positive response to ICTR requests for
acceptance of cases. Support should be provided to
national jurisdictions that are willing, but unable due to
resource constraints, to receive and prosecute indictees
on referral. While we recognize the cost to States, it is
absolutely necessary for more States which have the
jurisdiction and the capacity to try these cases to come
forward and to share this task with the ICTR in order to
promote the cause of an international criminal justice
system.

I have, since my last report to the Security
Council, met Government officials of some four
African countries and discussed with them the
possibility of referral of cases to those States for trial.
Their responses are awaited. While some countries are
willing in principle to accept these cases, inadequate
judicial capacity continues to be the main obstacle to
their effective collaboration.

Rwanda continues to be our major focus for
referral of cases of indictees for trial. In that respect, I
have received indications from the Government of
Rwanda that this year it intends to take the necessary
measures for eligibility to receive cases from the ICTR.
The eligibility of Rwanda could significantly advance
the Tribunal's transfer strategy.

Meanwhile, my Office has been making its own
contribution to capacity-building in the Rwandan legal
system in anticipation of this development. There are
currently seven Rwandan lawyers working in the
Office of the Prosecutor, as well as Rwandan
investigators and language assistants. We expect that
their experience will be useful to the Government of
Rwanda generally, and particularly in the handling of
referred cases. Furthermore, we have offered eight
places for Rwandan prosecutors for attachment to the
Office of the Prosecutor in Arusha as our contribution
in training Rwandan lawyers. Our staff in Kigali and
Arusha will also assist in training Rwandan
investigators.

Negotiations with other European States for
referral of cases also continue. We await responses in
respect of three cases of indictees which the Office of
the Prosecutor has identified for referral to Europe.

In a welcome new development, many countries
are now increasingly showing a commitment to
prosecuting genocidaires residing in their territory who
have not been indicted by the ICTR. We have been
collaborating with such countries by providing them
with the evidence at our disposal to enable them
successfully to prosecute such genocidaires. This
commitment by States will further contribute to
ensuring that there are no safe havens even for persons
who may not have been indicted by the ICTR. We
strongly encourage other States to adopt such a policy.
Our focus will continue to be the prosecution of
the cases currently on trial, the preparation of the cases
of the remaining 14 detainees and at most six of the 18
cases of those who are at large, the implementation of a
more effective tracking and arrest strategy for fugitives
and the continuation of referral proceedings to national
jurisdictions in respect of indictees. I propose to
request the referral of the cases of some detainees as
well as the cases of most of the 18 who remain at large.

We remain confident that the ICTR can conclude
the cases of all those indictees currently in detention -
either on trial or awaiting trial - by the 2008 deadline
of the completion strategy. In my last report to the
Council, however, I drew attention to two challenges
that we face: the arrest of the fugitives and the referral
of cases. Those challenges remain.

We propose to prosecute at the ICTR at most six
of these persons at large, including Mr. Kabuga. In
accordance with Security Council resolution 1503
(2003), we propose to transfer the remaining cases to
national jurisdictions for prosecution. Ideally, all these
fugitives should first be arrested and transferred to the
ICTR and then proceed to be dealt with, either by trial
at the ICTR or by referral. Where they remain at large,
their cases could still be referred to another country.
But the need for arrest in order to enable the case to
proceed in the referee country will remain.
International cooperation in the arrest and transfer of
fugitives to the ICTR or to the referee countries thus
remains imperative.

In the event that for any reason the cases
earmarked for referral - currently numbering at least
17 and possibly rising to 20 - cannot be transferred to
national jurisdictions, the burden of prosecuting those
cases will fall back on the ICTR. That will constitute a
substantial increase in our workload and present a real
challenge to the completion strategy.

Meanwhile, internally, we have continued to
develop and implement internal strategies to facilitate
the speedy trial of cases, including the improvement of
management of the Office of the Prosecutor and the use
of technological tools. One such improvement is the
electronic disclosure system, a computer-based
information management system containing all the
non-confidential evidence and other information held
by my Office. That store of information, which is
available to the defense on application via the Internet,
enables defense counsels to access our information
database from anywhere in the world 24 hours a day
and seven days a week. The most important benefit of
the system is that it facilitates compliance by the
Office of the Prosecutor with its disclosure obligations
under the rules of procedure and evidence and speeds
up the trial process.

Others tools have also been adopted, such as the
Intranet and the CaseMap systems, as set out in greater
detail in the completion strategy document. We are at
the moment also in the process of formulating best
practices and standards in various aspects of the
investigation and trial process, as well as developing
manuals and procedures to ensure adherence to those
practices and standards.

All of those tools are designed to inject greater
efficiency into the Office of the Prosecutor in the
discharge of its prosecutorial mandate and to accelerate
and expedite the prosecution of cases. We are
continuously engaged in the process of reviewing our
working methods and strategies to that end. In March
2006, we held our second major strategic review,
which gave us the opportunity to identify the measures
which we need to take to ensure the success of the
completion strategy. Out of that process we have
developed a strategic plan, which we hope will be
useful in guiding us for the remaining years of the
mandate.

Whilst all of those internal measures taken at the
Office of the Prosecutor, together with others instituted
in the Registry and the Chambers, will enhance greater
efficiency, the two challenges of arrests and referrals of
cases remain the most pressing issues for the Tribunal.

I would like to seize this opportunity to thank
you, Madam, and the Security Council, the Secretariat
and Member States, which continue to actively support
the Tribunal towards the successful implementation
and completion of its mandate.

