Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): Today's debate is
important, especially considering the close relationship
that exists between this Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. I gladly take this opportunity to share our
views on the Peacebuilding Commission two years
after it first became operational. I do so while
expressing my thanks for the leadership of so many:
Ambassador Takasu, the Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission; his predecessor, the
representative of Angola; Carolyn McAskie, who
headed up the Peacebuilding Support Office so well;
Jane Holl Lute, who has started so energetically in the
same function; and, above all, the Governments of the
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and more specifically, the Government of
Sierra Leone, represented here by the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs.

From the outset, allow me to state that I align
myself with the statement of France on behalf of the
European Union.

The Peacebuilding Commission has invested
considerable time and effort over the past two years in
implementing its mandate through the development of
the appropriate strategic approach and implementation
mechanisms. The result has been the conclusion of
Peacebuilding Cooperation Frameworks for three
countries on its agenda - Burundi, Siena Leone and,
recently, Guinea-Bissau - based on an extensive
mapping of peacebuilding gaps in those countries.
Those efforts, which the Commission has had to
undertake while operating in largely uncharted waters,
have involved the active participation of all relevant
stakeholders, ranging from the Governments in the
countries concerned and the Peacebuilding
Commission's members to the various stakeholders on
the ground.

While those in themselves are important
achievements from which the Peacebuilding
Commission should draw confidence, they are only a
stepping stone towards the ultimate goal of the
Commission. That goal is and must remain making a
positive difference in the countries on its agenda by
ensuring that the identified peacebuilding gaps are
effectively addressed. That is, as has been reiterated
many times before, the most effective way to prevent a
relapse into conflict in countries that have been
struggling to strengthen their stability and democracy
since their conflict ended.

That is therefore where the added valued of the
Peacebuilding Commission ultimately lies, and that is
the basis on which the Commission should be assessed.
Taking that as our yardstick, and recognizing the
considerable achievements that have been made both
by the Governments of the countries on its agenda and
by the Commission itself, we can fairly say that we are
not there yet.

What is needed at this point in time - and this
should guide the Peacebuilding Commission's
activities in the coming months - is concrete support
from both existing and new donors to address the
peacebuilding gaps that have been identified in the
countries on the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda.
We have so far done the strategic work for Burundi, for
Sierra Leone and for Guinea-Bissau. We have
committed to ensuring that the identified gaps will be
addressed. It is now time to translate our commitments
into concrete engagements.

To do that, support from the United Nations on
the ground will be crucial. In that context, I welcome
the establishment of the first-ever United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and the fact that UNIPSIL is mandated to
work closely with the Peacebuilding Commission and
support the implementation of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework and the Peacebuilding Fund's
projects.

Such a continued integrated United Nations
presence in Sierra Leone is needed to consolidate the
gains made thus far and provide coherent and
coordinated support to the Government of Sierra Leone
in its peace consolidation efforts. UNIPSIL needs to be
fully staffed and operational as soon as possible.

I welcome the commendable efforts of the Acting
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
express the hope that a permanent appointment will be
made as soon as possible. Effective and continued
leadership of the Office is of paramount importance.
We cannot afford another gap in the leadership of that
Office at such a crucial time.

Sierra Leone offers a number of lessons on
integration and collaboration between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council.
Those lessons should be applied in the upcoming
Council discussions on strengthening the United
Nations political missions in Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic. In particular, the Guinea-
Bissau Peacebuilding Strategic Framework should be
used to guide the mandate renewal process for United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau in the same way as the mandate for UNIPSIL
took into account the peacebuilding priorities identified
in the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework for Sierra
Leone.

There is unwavering support for the
Peacebuilding Commission's original mandate and a
consensus that the Commission is on the right track.
We are all anxious to see the Commission succeed,
which in practice means that the countries on its
agenda succeed. However, the Commission's success,
unfortunately, is not determined by our vocal support
or our endorsement of its mandate; it is determined by
our readiness to make a contribution in the country
concerned. When the time comes to thoroughly
evaluate the Commission in the light of its original
mandate - and that time will come - we must be

confident that every effort was made to make it work.

The time to make the Commission work is now.
We have before us sufficient strategic documents to
determine where our support is needed the most. Let us
not waver, and let us offer whatever expertise or funds
we can muster to ensure that the four countries on the
Peacebuilding Commission's agenda will be
irreversibly on track towards consolidated peace and
stability.

