Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
fully support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Cuba reiterates its deepest rejection and
condemnation of all acts, methods and practices
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations; by
whomever, against whomsoever and wherever they may
occur; and whatever their motivations, including cases
in which States are directly or indirectly involved. The
fight against terrorism must include prevention, direct
confrontation and the implementation of concrete
actions against its root causes. Cuba is a party to 16
international conventions on terrorism, and strictly
fulfils its obligations under resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

My country reiterates its support for the adoption of
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
that would close existing loopholes. It also favours
the convening of an international conference under
United Nations auspices for a coordinated response
of the international community against terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. Unfortunately, the
opposition of a small number of States has made all
such action impossible.

On 30 April, the Department of State of the
United States of America issued its Country Reports on
Terrorism 2013, in which, for the thrity-second time, it
maintained its absurb designation of Cuba as a State
sponsor of terrorism. Including Cuba on this list is
yet another excuse to continue to justify the blockage
against us that has been in place for more than 50 years
and which has been overwhelmingly repudiated by the
international community.

For decades Cuba has suffered the consequences of
terrorist acts organized, financed and carried out from
United States territory and resulting in 3,478 people
killed and 2,099 disabled, only because they tried to
defend their independence, sovereignty and dignity as
Cubans.

We reject the double standards of the United
States Government's policy by which it refuses to try
and allows to remain free the perpetrators of terrorist
acts against Cuba, including Luis Posada Carriles, the
mastermind of the first terrorist attack against civil
aviation in the Western hemisphere, which led to the
explosion in mid-flight of a Cubana de Aviacion plane
off the Barbados coast on 6 October 1976, killing its
73 passengers. Paradoxically, it continues its prolonged
and unjust incarceration of our Cuban counter-terrorism
fighters, Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon Labafiino and
Antonio Guerrero, who were tried for crimes that they
had not committed.

Cuba firmly rejects the manipulation of an issue as
delicate as international terrorism to use it as political
tool against Cuba and demands that Cuba be definitely
expunged from that spurious unilateral and arbitrary
list, which is also an affront to the people of Cuba
and a discredit to the United States Government and
its proclaimed commitment to fighting international
terrorism.

The international community should not accept
that certain States should commit acts of aggression,
directly or indirectly, against sovereign peoples under
the pretext that they are fighting terrorism. We are
convinced that an effective fight against terrorism will
not be possible if we limit ourselves to condemning
only some terrorist acts while silently tolerating or
justifying others in seeking to promote our own political
and economic interests.

We reaffirm our commitment to continuing to work
to strengthen the central role of the United Nations
in adopting measures and devising a comprehensive
legal framework to tackle international terrorism. We
support multilateral and bilateral cooperation to that
end. Cuba is a victim of this scourge, and we are firmly
committed to continuing to cooperate with all countries
to prevent and punish acts of terrorism.

