Mr. De Mistura: I would like to thank the
Council for the opportunity to brief it at a crucial point
for Iraq in its empowerment to handle its own affairs.
Over the past few months, the eyes of the international
community have been turned towards a country
immersed in pre-electoral activity as Iraqis prepared to
cast their votes in the first governorate elections in four
years. This undoubtedly has been the most significant
political event of this reporting period.

The end of 2008 witnessed an acceleration of
electoral activities and increased preparedness by the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq, with
all aspects of the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) completely
geared for that period towards the electoral process.

Two months into 2009, Iraq has emerged
sovereign and is rising to expectations. It successfully
went through the first test by delivering the first fully
Iraqi-led and owned elections. On 31 January, as
planned, provincial elections were conducted in 14
governorates, with 42,000 polling stations, with a
striking lack of violence. That marks a remarkable
event in a country that has suffered through so much
conflict in recent years. It is a tribute to the growing
effectiveness of the Iraqi security forces and attests to
the increased stability in the country.

With the Independent High Electoral Commission
in the lead, Iraqis have demonstrated the capacity to
run their own elections in what has been a daunting
logistical and operational undertaking. Just look at the
figures: 7.5 million Iraqis turned out to cast ballots,
and 14,000 candidates, representing 400 political
entities, vied for 440 seats. I am glad to say that there
were 3,900 women among the 14,000 candidates.

These first polls which can have a direct impact
on the day-to-day lives of Iraqis can, in fact, make a
major difference with respect to the new local
representatives, because they are directly accountable
to their own voters: it was an open list. Furthermore,
they sought to rectify a problem we had in the past,
namely, the sectarian imbalance in local councils. This
time there was no boycott whatsoever by any
significant component of the Iraqi populace.

The Independent High Electoral Commission
should be commended for its highly professional
09-24991
efforts, both in the effective preparations in the lead-up
to the elections and during their ultimately smooth
conduct. Much should be attributed to the rigorous and
professional field structure in place. Resisting political
pressures, the Commission remained vigilant in
carrying through with the procedures, from polling day
to the announcement of final results three weeks later.

With constant and intensive assistance from
UNAMI, the Iraqi Electoral Commission overcame
every hurdle, every time; met operational timelines;
came out of a rather complicated and contentious
parliamentary debate some time ago over critical
electoral legislation; regulated a complex formula for
the allocation of seats and the representation of
minorities and women; and concluded the adjudication
of formal complaints, of which there have been as
many as 2,000 to date.

Following the release of provisional results on
5 February, final results were announced on
19 February, based on all valid ballots cast, including
special-needs votes and those of internally displaced
persons and, where appropriate, adjusted for
complaints. We are now looking at the possible final
certification of results, after the short appeals period,
before the second week of March. But we more or less
know where we are. After that the challenge will be the
formation of councils, and then the nomination of
governors.

While it remains up to Iraqis to interpret the
results of these elections, it is heartening how all this
moved along smoothly, including the fact - which I
must mention again, because it is something
noteworthy - that there were about 110 women among
the 440 new council members nominated.

The elections were recognized as credible and
transparent, both by an impressive domestic
observation effort of 490,000 local, national
observers - almost as many as the Iraqi army - and
413 international monitors from 25 entities,
coordinated by a European Union-sponsored adviser.
These elections should increase the confidence of
Iraqis in their own local institutions. I would like to say
mabrouk - congratulations - to the Iraqi
Ambassador, as we said to the Prime Minister the other
day: this was something that would have been a
challenge in any country.

But much will now depend on the elected leaders.
They need to work within their own selected electoral
09-24991

system. They need to prove they are capable of
promoting inclusive political dialogue, striking
compromises and working in coalitions. In this regard,
statements by a number of Iraqi political leaders,
indicating their willingness to play a part in this
process and to allow others to do so, are indeed very
encouraging.

Elections have undoubtedly been the flagship of
our mandate during this period, dominating our efforts
in recent months. The year 2009 foresees continued
electoral activities, with several possible electoral
events in the coming months. These could include
elections for the Kurdish National Assembly set for
this summer - where we have already been asked to
be involved - as well as possible sub-district
elections, culminating in the national parliamentary
elections towards the end of this year.

UNAMI will continue to provide a significant
degree of technical assistance to the Independent High
Electoral Commission, as mandated by the Council and
as requested by the Government and political parties of
Iraq. It will also, as requested, support the
Government's commitment to holding a census, which
is long overdue. But UNAMI assistance, with the
Council's approval, will not stop there. It will adjust to
what Iraq requires at the next step of its transition.

One of these requirements is, obviously, national
reconciliation. Iraq now needs to embrace this
opportunity, to rise above sectarian interests and to be
open to compromise and consensus. A country cannot
truly attain sovereignty or achieve a lasting peace
unless it instils confidence in its own institutions with
respect to the rule of law and a unifying constitution,
and unless it delivers basic needs. This implies a great
deal of effort, and it is in this next stage that UNAMI is
committed to fully support the Government of Iraq in
this exercise of its own sovereignty and its assumption
of accountability.

A particular concern, of which we are all aware,
remains the lingering potential for tensions between the
Arab and Kurdish sides in Iraq, which has had an
impact on almost every aspect of Iraq's political life.
This has been the cause of the lack of real progress on
the vital oil law, revenue sharing and constitutional
review, as well of the potential for tensions, such as the
recent clashes in Khanaqin between the armed forces
of the central Government and of the Kurdish region.
3
As we work as an honest broker, we try to
promote a spirit of dialogue. UNAMI activities will see
a particular shift after this electoral period and an
emphasis on our initiative on the disputed internal
boundaries and work on Kirkuk, including through the
committee set up under article 23 of the provincial
elections law. That committee is tasked by the Council
of Representatives with finding a power-sharing
formula for the provincial elections in Kirkuk,
assessing property disputes and demographic issues.

Work in these areas, rightly a priority, is viewed
as a means to contributing to lowering these sorts of
tensions, in Kirkuk and elsewhere, and exploring new
solutions for some of these most pressing issues.
During my recent visit to Kirkuk this past December to
engage with the wider community on the ground, I,
frankly, detected a good momentum for Kirkukis to
explore locally generated options regarding the
administrative future of Kirkuk. I truly left encouraged
that Kirkukis have a growing understanding of
kefaya - enough that there is a need now to reach a
compromise acceptable to all communities living there.

Part of my trip was to discuss the work of the
article 23 committee, an important committee created
in connection with electoral law and a very good body
for introducing constructive proposals for finding a
formula for the future of this area. The article 23
committee has been criticized as getting off to a slow
start, so we conveyed to them the expectations and
willingness of the local community to wake up and
move on this, so that the committee could become
more active. We have since contributed to removing
some of the obstacles to its work. On 2 February, my
political deputy facilitated and accompanied the
committee's first visit to Kirkuk where they finally
went and started working. We provided logistical,
transport, security and organizational support.

We also offered secretariat support and, in fact,
UNAMI has actively served as the de facto secretariat
of the committee. The committee has now begun
meeting, both in Bagdad and in Kirkuk. We have
further offered UNAMI assistance in areas of technical
expertise, and two consultants are just about to be
deployed. Mediation potential will be available in case
of disagreement.

UNAMI has been working in parallel on a
comprehensive review of the so-called disputed areas
in the governorates of Kirkuk, Salahaddin, Diyala and
Ninawa, in line with its Security Council mandate and
the consent given last year by the Iraqi leadership.
Members will recall that the first reports came out last
June. We have delayed submission of the remaining 11
reports, as we felt that we did not wish to take any
initiatives in the weeks leading up to the elections. This
was decided in consultation with the Prime Minister.
We remain in consultation with the Iraqi Government
and all concerned parties, to carefully determine the
appropriate timing and process for the finalization of
the whole package of analytical reports on these
internally disputed areas.

We hope and believe that this package of reports
will constitute probably the most in-depth and
comprehensive analysis so far presented on these areas.
They will examine different factors specific to the
areas, including socio-economic indices, the electoral
results of 2005 and 2009, injustices of past regimes,
administrative history, and the post-2003 situation on
the ground including demographics and security
conditions. All of these make up a series of indicators
that will be taken into consideration in these studies
and analysis. But the ultimate responsibility for making
any kind of decisions will continue to lie, first and
foremost, with the Government of Iraq, the parties
represented in the areas concerned, and the Kurdish
regional leadership.

At the same time, the Iraqi leadership should be
encouraged to advance on other fundamental issues on
which we know they are interested in following up.
These are at the core of tensions among the various
communities. These issues include federalism,
revenue-sharing and the sharing of Iraq's considerable
resources, all within the framework of the
constitutional review. UNAMI is available and ready to
assist the Government in following up on these
matters.

UNAMI will also remain committed to
supporting the establishment of independent bodies,
the most significant development being the legislation
that has been passed providing for the creation of the
Independent Human Rights Commission in Iraq.

As for international partnership, the United
Nations will continue to assist the country in its
standing in the international community through the
International Compact for Iraq, Security Council
mandates and relations with its neighbours.
09-24991
On the regional front, recent months have seen
the opening of embassies by Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman,
the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, the Arab League and
Syria. This is a very hopeful sign of the strengthened
engagement with and within the region.

UNAMI will continue its involvement in this area
according to its mandate, including through
confidence-building bilateral initiatives and technical
assistance to a support mechanism for regional
cooperation based in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Iraq. We remain in frequent contact with regional
players and are committed to assisting Iraq's efforts to
improve relations with its immediate neighbours. One
important example has been the important relationship
with Kuwait. We are hoping to be increasingly
involved in helping on a number of tracks, including,
for example, border maintenance, the question of
missing archives and missing Kuwaitis, as well as
compensation.

Most recently, we have pushed for a training
project to build the capacity of Iraq's Ministry of
Human Rights in the area of exhumations in order to
address a pending issue, and we are facilitating the
transfer of a certain number of identified tapes from
Iraq to Kuwait, which will be witnessed by my friend
and very active colleague Ambassador Tarasov in the
coming days.

With regard to Iran, we welcome the announced
establishment of a joint committee among Iraq, Iran
and the United Nations to work with the Organization
on demining and drug-trafficking control along the
Iranian border. The committee is a tangible example of
how we can facilitate concrete cooperation with regard
to the border. We hope that it will soon become
operational and eventually link up with the Abadan
committee. We welcome the very constructive progress
being made in Iraq's relations with Turkey, Jordan and,
recently, Syria.

Iraq continues to make progress towards
economic and social recovery. It needs to be
congratulated - again, mabroak - on the reforms that
led to the recent cancellation of the Paris Club debt.
This proves that achievement of the benchmarks of the
Compact can yield immediate and positive results. It is
now critical to translate those gains into concrete
improvements in the lives of everyone in Iraq.
As Iraq assumes the full responsibilities of a
sovereign State, its citizens will - like those of

countries throughout the world - look to their leaders
to provide better schools, jobs, electricity supplies and
health services. Elections have proved that that is the
platform on which they were overwhelmingly elected.
The Iraqi people will increasingly consider
improvements in those areas as the chief indicators of
recovery and restored trust.

Social services and a market economy must
recover from a quarter-century of hardship and
conflict. For example, nearly one third of Iraq's young
people are still unemployed. Many Iraqi children still
attend schools with substandard classrooms, and safe
water reaches only 40 per cent of Iraqi homes. There is
a challenge. We know that the Iraqi Government is
determined to meet that challenge, and we should help
them.

Furthermore, low oil prices will make it even
more important to appropriately prioritize strategies for
development. Iraq's 2009 budget, now before the
Council of Representatives, is 21 per cent lower than
originally planned. Its capital investment portion has
been cut by 38 per cent. This type of challenge is
obviously being faced throughout the world, but Iraq is
facing it in the context of a very delicate transitional
period. That requires that investments be directed
where they are most needed and can make the greatest
impact on recovery and on the lives of everyone in
Iraq.

These challenges can be met through a more
efficient and transparent public sector and a stronger
private sector. The United Nations will work with the
Government to improve performance in those areas as
required.

In the area of humanitarian assistance, where
needs are more acute, the United Nations will continue
to provide such assistance through the consolidated
appeal for Iraq and the subregion. However, the appeal
recognizes that the improvements in Iraq's
humanitarian conditions have been substantial. Indeed,
that is why we have reduced our humanitarian
assistance: because Iraq has been taking many
humanitarian emergencies into its own hands. The
appeal also seeks to reduce the worst effects of poverty
and conflict and to promote conditions conducive to
the return of Iraq's displaced persons and refugees.

The International Reconstruction Fund Facility
for Iraq, to which all members have contributed, will
be coming to a close by 31 December, which will be a
historic date. I remember when it was created as a trust
fund intended to keep Iraq alive. It has seen
$1.3 billion channelled through it since its inception.
As a result of the generous contributions of all
members, in particular Japan and the European
Union- to which we pay tribute - it has been an
invaluable tool for promoting coordinated strategic
assistance inside Iraq. I am also pleased to note that, at
the recent meeting on the Fund held in Naples on
18 February, both the Government of Iraq and the
donors welcomed the proposal by the Deputy Special
Representative for Humanitarian, Reconstruction and
Development Affairs that a post-Fund mechanism be
established - so that we do not lose a mechanism that
has been useful - to make the Compact a more
effective driver of Iraq's internal development and
international partnership.

United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
will also now review their own assistance frameworks
in Iraq in order to promote greater compliance with the
Paris Declaration, to align our work more closely with
the newly prioritized Compact and to increase their
presence in Baghdad to meet the challenges ahead. The
International Compact for Iraq, jointly chaired by the
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and our colleague and
friend Ambassador Gambari, could be the primary
vehicle for all such Iraq initiatives. Following the very
successful Stockholm conference, Prime Minister
Al-Maliki's initiative to review and reprioritize the
Compact benchmarks has the potential to make the
Compact an effective driver of further follow-up in this
area.

In conclusion, we have grounds for optimism,
and in this Chamber it is good to feel that way
sometimes. I believe that all of us should be proud of
that fact - particularly the representative of Iraq, on
behalf of the Iraqi people. The Government of Iraq is
clearly signalling that it recognizes that this is the year
to demonstrate its ability to administer a State that
enjoys broad support and intends to deliver basic
services and security guarantees with the support of
credible and independent institutions.

Security has improved, and Iraq has asserted its
sovereignty; this is a year in which that has been
clearly seen. With more sovereignty comes more
responsibility - responsibility to each of Iraq's
communities. This is the time to build on what has
been achieved since the recent provincial elections,
which were the first to have been fully led by Iraq.

After prolonged suffering, Iraqis have made some
substantially encouraging steps. It is now up to the
Iraqis themselves to heal the wounds of the past and
move ahead with a common vision. Trust among the
people will increase through concrete, commonly
shared steps, including a federal framework, the
distribution of wealth, a viable revenue sharing system,
the deft handling of Kirkuk and a formula for resolving
the issue of disputed internal boundaries.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the members
of the Security Council have consistently supported
UNAMI in being proactive and results-oriented. We
will continue those efforts. However, it is ultimately up
to Iraqi leaders to make sound choices, and the
international community should encourage and support
them in that regard.

