Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Madam President,
for convening today's urgent meeting. We also thank
Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing.

The Dominican Republic rejects and totally
condemns the attack on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Regrettably, today's
attack in the neighbourhood of Al-Hawari, in the city
of Benghazi, claimed the lives of at least three of the
Mission's staffmembers and injured several others, some
seriously. We extend our condolences to the relatives
of those who lost their lives and to UNSMIL, through
Mr. Ghassan Salame. We hope that the approximately
12 people, including children, who were injured in the
cowardly attack will make a speedy recovery. We urge
the authorities to conduct an in-depth investigation into
the attack and bring those responsible to justice.

In June, we were shaken to the core by the bombing
of a detention centre in Tajoura. Dozens of innocent
people lost their lives in an instant. This week, we
again learned of the harrowing events that occurred
in the district of Qalaa, in the town of Murzuq, which
claimed more than 100 victims - 42 dead and more
than 60 injured - and was the result of not one, not
two, but three consecutive attacks targeting a meeting
in that community.
As we have warned since May, attacks and clashes
are resulting in an ever-increasing number of fatalities
because ofa surge in the military capacity ofthe parties
involved. External aid, in clear violation of the arms
embargo, only exacerbates the crisis and fuels the
conflict week after week. The Council must act to end
those violations.

For the good of the Libyan people and their
interests, we call on all parties to respect the sanctity of
Bid Al-Adha, allow the festivities to take place and not
interfere with the safe return of pilgrims. We remain
hopeful that the ceasefire brokered by UNSMIL and to
which the parties committed until the end of the Bid
Al-Adha festivities will serve as a forum for reflection
and the re-evaluation of their strategies.

The Dominican Republic demands that the
ceasefire be upheld and a return to United Nations-
facilitated political dialogue. What we have seen since
the beginning oprril confirms that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Libya and the parties must
recognize that fact. We call on the aggressors to commit
to protecting civilians and civilian infrastructure and to
allow, without discrimination, access for humanitarian
aid into areas affected by the conflict.

In conclusion, we call for respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.

