Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having organized
this timely debate and commend you, Sir, on your
presidency. We thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation and express our full support to his efforts
to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping. Our thanks also go to the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Director of the Groupe de recherche, d'etude et de
formation femme-action for their contributions.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the European Union and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.

For my country, a discussion on this specific topic
in the Security Council is first and foremost a reminder
of our obligation to reiterate our utmost appreciation
and to pay tribute to the United Nations, the Security
Council and the countries that have contributed troops
and resources to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). As a country that has
relied on United Nations peacekeeping, we are all the
more conscious of our responsibility to do our share in
the collective effort to give the Blue Helmets the means
to effectively deliver the mandates entrusted to them by
the Security Council.

Even if the term "peacekeeping" is not explicitly
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations, it
should not escape our attention that its foundations are
enshrined in Chapters VI and VII of the Charter. That
is vital, given the fact that we sometimes run the risk
of losing sight of the actual purpose that peacekeeping
should serve.

Peacekeeping operations must have sound, realistic
and robust mandates. When a peacekeeping operation
has been deployed after the Security Council has
established the existence of a threat to international
peace and security, that peacekeeping operation ought
to have the support necessary to be able to respond to
that challenge for as long as the abnormality continuous.
That is the very essence ofpeacekeeping.

Peacekeeping operations should continuously
undergo modernization and renewal in order to
adjust to contemporary needs and challenges. While
acknowledging the wider need to undertake reviews
of the peacekeeping operations, we have to take into
consideration the specificities faced by each operation.
It is of paramount importance that the strategic reviews
are rigorous, evidence based and conducted in close
consultation with the host country, as was recently the
case with UNFICYP.

In conclusion, let me highlight that peacekeeping
plays an indispensable and catalytic role in ensuring the
necessary stability and security on the ground, which,
in turn, enables and facilitates the political process.
Peacekeeping operations are in place to contribute
to the creation of conditions that are conducive to
political processes, which could lead to viable solutions
that would address the root causes of the conflict by
restoring law and order, based on international law.

That said, peacekeeping operations should not be
used as leverage in any peace process, since they are
meant to serve as the means through which the United
Nations and the international community persevere
in their efforts aimed at preventing the outbreak of
conflicts and ensuring stability, even more so in
the absence of a political process. We have a shared
responsibility to remain committed and to ensure that,
in the name of peace, our collective efforts will be put
on the right track.

