Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame' and
Ambassador Orrenius Skau for their comprehensive
updates on the situation in Libya and the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, respectively. We fully support
the view that the solution to the situation in Libya must
be solely a peaceful one and that the Libyans themselves
must have ownership over the political process. The
Libyan Political Agreement remains the only viable
framework throughout the transitional period to end the
protracted political crisis. However, we need to move
from the transitional phase to permanent stability in
Libya, and we believe that the following steps should
be undertaken.

First, a referendum should be held to approve a new
constitution, as the Supreme Court of Libya ruled in
favour of the draft constitution on 14 February, thereby
removing all legal obstacles.
Secondly, free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections should be held, which would mark
the end of the transitional period. We fully support the
observations made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report on Libya (S/2019/140) that it is essential to
enjoy broad political consensus concerning the elections
and to encourage both participation and acceptance of
the results. It is also critical that the appropriate legal
framework be in place.

Thirdly, priority shouldbe placed onthe development
agenda. We commend the efforts of the of the United
Nations development system in drafting a strategic
framework for Libya for the period from 2019 to 2020
with the active participation of humanitarian agencies,
Libyan officials and civil society representatives.

Fourthly, issues concerning impunity related
to migrants, the violation of their human rights and
their humanitarian plight and dire situation should be
addressed properly.

Moreover, we believe that international initiatives
to advance political reconciliation in Libya should be
consolidated under the leadership of United Nations-
led efforts. It is important that the Security Council
maintain unity and support the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame and
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. In that
regard, Kazakhstan commends the active efforts of
the Special Representative and encourages him to
continue his engagement with a wide range of actors
so as to broaden support and their commitments to the
political process.

Lastly, concerning the sanctions regime, it is
vital that Libya's oil resources be used for the benefit
of Libyans. The smuggling of fuel continues to be a
prosperous activity and generates a significant flow of
income to boost local armed groups and cross-border
criminal networks. In that regard, strict compliance
with the embargo on the supply of arms to Libya must
be reinforced.

