The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
the Executive Director of United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Fedotov, for their
briefings. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of the Government
and people of Afghanistan, and with the support of
the international community, recently there has been
positive progress in the situation in Afghanistan.
China supports continued adherence to the principle of
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned activities in promoting
the Kabul process so as to achieve lasting peace,
stability and development.

I wish to stress the following points. First, China
supports the reconciliation and reintegration process
led by the Afghan Government and welcomes the
appointment of the new Chair, Mr. Rabbani, to the
High Peace Council. We hope that the relevant parties
in Afghanistan will remain committed to an inclusive
political dialogue and peace process so as to achieve
national reconciliation. It is of vital importance that the
next general election in Afghanistan be held smoothly.
China welcomes the preparation carried out by the
Afghan Government in that regard.

Secondly, China notes the recent decline in the
number of security incidents in Afghanistan and the
increased response capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces. We welcome the fact that the handover
of security responsibilities from the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to the Afghan
National Security Forces has entered the third tranche.
At the same time, we hope that, in implementing the
drawdown plans, the relevant parties will take into full
consideration the need to maintain security and stability
in Afghanistan, and that the drawdown will be carried
out in a smooth and orderly manner.

Thirdly, we have witnessed incidents recently that
have claimed heavy civilian casualties. We note that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has expressed its concern about the civilian
casualties caused by air strikes. All parties to armed
conflict should abide by international humanitarian
law and relevant international law and fulfil their
obligations to protect civilians.

Fourthly, narcotics are toxic to the reconstruction
and peace process in Afghanistan. China appreciates
the efforts of the Afghan Government in combating
illicit drugs and welcomes the continued cooperation
between UNODC and the Afghan authorities in support
of the implementation of the country's national drug
control plan.

Fifthly, the reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan require the continued attention and
support of the international community. The potential
negative impact of the transition period on the
country's economic and social development deserves
our keen attention. China hopes that the recent spate of
international conferences on Afghanistan will help to
encourage the international community to make good
on its commitments and to develop a long-term strategy
to support Afghanistan.

Last but not least, China commends the United
Nations for its role in facilitating the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan, and supports UNAMA's
central coordinating role in facilitating the international
community's assistance to the peaceful reconstruction
of Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA will continue
to strengthen its communication, coordination and
cooperation with the Afghan authority.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Prior to giving the floor to the representatives of
non-Council members, I wish to request that they limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

I now give the floor the representative of Australia.

