The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Ms. Gurung for having been kind enough to
share her experience with us. I would also like to note
the courage of this young girl, who has described very
clearly today the tragedy of the situation of children in
armed conflict. I believe that this should be a source
for inspiration to all us to continue to strengthen the
work of the United Nations in this area.

With the Council's permission, I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Mexico.

I am grateful for this opportunity to reaffirm the
commitment of my country to the full respect of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Mexico
today reaffirms its commitment to ensuring the full
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, in particular
women and children.

Mexico is convinced that we have made
substantive progress in the Security Council's
treatment of the promotion and protection of children
affected by armed conflict. The adoption of resolution
1882 (2009), which strengthens and broadens the
United Nations mechanisms for protecting minors in
cases of armed conflict, is an example of this progress.

In thanking Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for
presenting the annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2010/181), I note
that this year the annexes to the report include the
names not only of those who recruit or use children in
armed conflict, but also of those who commit criminal
acts against them. While these are important steps,
there is still much to do if we truly want to spare
children from being the principal victims of the spiral
of violence generated by armed conflicts around the
world.

In the past two decades alone, more than
2 million children in areas of armed conflict have died,
another six million have been disabled, more than a
quarter of a million young people have been exploited
as child soldiers in different regions of the world, and
thousands more have been victims of sexual
exploitation, rape and prostitution.

These figures are heartbreaking, but they say very
little about the personal and direct suffering of the
children involved. That is why, very personally but also
on behalf of Mexico and the Security Council, I should
like to commend the courage and testimony of Manju
10-40745
Gurung, this former child soldier who has urged us to
act decisively for children in situations of armed
conflict.

Mexico also appeals to the Security Council to
continue, within the framework of its competences, to
address the repercussions of armed conflicts on
children, and to promote concrete action to comply
with the recommendations of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

My country vigorously defends the principle of
the higher interests of children, and believes that we
must step up our efforts as a community to provide
broad and effective protection to children. Crimes
committed against children cannot be stopped if their
perpetrators remain unpunished. Serious violations of
fundamental principles and norms of international
humanitarian law are war crimes, and Members States
have the primary obligation to investigate and
prosecute those responsible for such violations. We
support the recommendation contained in the report of
the Secretary-General that the Council consider
stronger measures against those who persist in
violating the rights of children in armed conflict.

Transparency and accountability in the protection
of children in armed conflict have become crucial
priorities. In cases where States have neither the
capacity nor the willingness to prosecute those
presumed responsible for these crimes, the
International Criminal Court has the power to
recognize those crimes that are stipulated in the Rome
Statute.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, Mexico has
resolutely joined the campaign for ratification of the
Protocols. We call upon States that have not already
done so to ratify those and other instruments designed
to ensure the greatest protection for those who today
are affected by the scourge of war, exploitation and
violence. Mexico will continue to guide the work of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
inclusively and with determination and transparency
until the end of its mandate as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.

We would like to focus on five aspects: first,
strengthening the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to guarantee the provision of objective and verifiable
information that will permit timely action by the
United Nations system and follow-up to the
10-40745
recommendations of the Working Group; secondly,
promoting the implementation of action plans aimed at
ending the recruitment and use of children and crimes
perpetrated against them; thirdly, improving the impact
of our decisions on the comprehensive protection of
children, including open meetings for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to present her
reports; fourthly, ensuring that our recommendations
promote full respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights by all parties to a conflict; and
finally, supporting the establishment of comprehensive
programmes to rehabilitate and reintegrate children in
the ranks of armed groups into their families and
communities, as well as preventing new violations and
abuses against them.

Close international cooperation on all these issues
is crucial to providing comprehensive and sustainable
solutions that meet the needs of children in situations
of Violence and armed conflict. This task requires the
commitment of us all, as well as our coordinated
efforts with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF, United Nations agencies
and programmes, and civil society organizations.
Protecting the most vulnerable is not only an ethical
imperative; today, protecting our children, who should
never take any part in any armed conflict, is also
protecting our nations, whose strengths, deepest values
and hopes are embodied in those children. I thank the
Council for its support in favour of a better world for
the children of our planet.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

