Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
warmly welcome the briefing from the acting
Emergency Relief Coordinator, which was a very good,
very clear and, in some of its aspects, quite depressing
briefing. I want to go back to one or two points of
detail.

It is very good to hear that there is excellent
coordination with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team, which is the kind of
coordination that we need to see in the most difficult
and complex situations - particularly in Africa, as we
pointed out in the report of our mission to Sierra
Leone. That is good news.

I do not want to get into the detail of the politics
of what we face in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We shall discuss that on later occasions - with
the troop contributors this week and when we consider
the roll-over of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). In addition to the humanitarian
situation, the general situation is depressing, because
Lusaka is not being implemented as it should have
been implemented by the parties. They virtually all
bear some responsibility for that in their several ways.

We in the Council all know that the Congo is
perhaps the greatest challenge we have to face with
respect to Africa in the Security Council, and we have
got to get it right. It is a more serious and complex
situation even than Sierra Leone, and we must give it
the same effort and the same intensity. I hope that
somewhere we will find some leadership for addressing
the problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
both from within the region and from outside. But we
will come to the details of that in due course when we
address the rollovers and when we have an account of
the meetings that have taken place in Maputo and that
are to take place later in Lusaka.

The first indications of the second Maputo
meeting are that there is increasing weariness with
continuing the conflict, increasing impatience from the
parties within the region - those that are not
contributing to the early implementation of Lusaka, or
whatever they can agree between them to substantiate
Lusaka - and there is, I think, an interesting
indication from Kinshasa that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is willing to work
with MONUC and with the international agencies to try
to make things operate better on the ground. In meeting
the objectives that we have set ourselves, that would all
be good news if it were confirmed, but there is an
enormous amount to do.

I pay particular tribute to the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and to that of the agencies and the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on the ground. I think that they
are facing the most awful conditions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Not only is there sometimes
almost complete insecurity for them as operators, but
there is also a dire lack of proper infrastructure and
proper support. It is vital for their security and for their
ability to do their job that they get help on the ground
from everybody concerned.

I am therefore quite interested to hear more
details from the Coordinator ad interim on the present
state of the relationship of the agencies with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and with the factions that operate in the areas where
they find themselves. The Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie-Mouvement de liberation
(RCD-ML) is in Kisangani and Goma, and the
Mouvement de liberation (MLC) is in Equateur
province. I would just like a bit more detail on the
actual state of relations now- what kind of help is
being provided, what kind of obstructions are there,
where the Coordinator ad interim feels the greatest
insecurities are, and what we are going to need to talk
about when we look at the primary tasks for the
deployment of MONUC, if and when we come to that.

We would also be interested to know whether the
agencies are developing with the NGOs a coordinated
aid strategy that responds to the humanitarian situation
and where the lacunae are in that particular process, if
any, or whether that coordination picture is also quite
good. Generally, we would like also to know what the
current obstacles are to humanitarian access, which we
ought to be addressing at the same time as we look at
MONUC rollover.

I think that it is quite important to use this
briefing to try to specify the actual points which may
be remediable with a huge amount of effort and a bit of
goodwill, to be differentiated from those where it is
fairly hopeless to expect any real improvement in the
near future.

My delegation takes note of what the Coordinator
ad interim said about funding, in particular the
regrettable focus only on food as opposed to non-food
aid. I think part of the reason may be the sense of
helplessness over the Congo, that one does not invest
one's aid into those things that need programmes
extending over time, whereas one does invest in food,
because food is a daily need that has to be delivered
into mouths day by day, and it can go on as best as one
can handle it. But disease, transport and other aspects
that the Coordinator ad interim has mentioned are
programmes for which confidence, stability and
continuity are required, and that may be part of the
problem. But we have taken note of where the
deficiencies are.

With those points and questions and in more
detail, I am looking forward to some further remarks
from the Coordinator ad interim later. I think I will stop
there.

