Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
As I am speaking for the first time in an open meeting of
the Council during your presidency, Sir, allow me warmly
to thank you for China's very efficient tenure of the
presidency. I wish to congratulate you and your very
competent team on the excellent manner in which you are
leading the Council's deliberations. It is a pleasure to
work under your presidency.

I also wish to thank you for having convened an
open debate on this question at a particularly complex
moment in the development of political and social events
in Liberia. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation and for the efforts he has made to
surmount the deep political crisis in Liberia. We agree
with his proposal that the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) should be
extended under the conditions described in his report.

We also wish to thank Mr. James Jonah for his
activities in the field and all of the personnel of the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations who
continue to work despite the difficult situation in which
they find themselves. Our gratitude also goes to the
Government of the United States for its humanitarian
work.

The horror of the violence that has been taking place
in Monrovia is confirmed by the report we have before
us. The vile acts committed, especially the attacks on
civilians and humanitarian assistance institutions, show
utter contempt for human life.

The political crisis that arose at the end of March
has once again undone all the political efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the United Nations since the beginning
of this decade.

Particularly unacceptable is the faction leaders'
disregard for the Liberian people's aspirations for peace.
There has also been an obvious lack of respect for and
abuse of the United Nations, ECOWAS, the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and the international
community.

Among the measures to be taken should be those
intended to ensure that the crimes committed against

 

civilians and human rights Violations are investigated. The
investigations should be aimed at determining the criminal
and civil responsibilities of the perpetrators and at
compensating the Victims for damages. Abuses against
governmental and non-governmental organizations should
also be investigated, identifying the responsibilities borne
by the various factions and leaders. We deem it essential to
act firmly and to demand the perpetrators to assume
responsibility. The impunity with which the same groups
have engaged in earlier misdeeds encourages the recurrence
of these types of actions. We do not want a culture of
impunity to continue to develop in Liberia.

The first time we made a formal statement on the
activities of the United Nations Observer Mission, last
January, we highlighted the importance we attach to the
process of peace and reconstruction in Liberia. We also
emphasized that this United Nations operation was a
support activity for a regional initiative for the restoration
of peace. This effort at the African level seemed to be a
new and expeditious way to deal with the problems of
threats to peace, and we think that it needs to be successful,
because of its twofold implications: for overcoming the
problems of Liberia and for promoting the regional role in
conflict resolution.

As a result of the absolute lack of cooperation by the
faction leaders in Liberia, there is the risk that the
ECOWAS countries may decide to put an end to the work
of ECOMOG in that country, which would bring about the
end of the operations of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UN OMIL). The possible consequences
for the civilian population lead us to request that all
possible efforts be undertaken to prevent this from
occurring.

It is obvious that ECOWAS has serious difficulties in
financing ECOMOG operations and that lack of
international support jeopardizes their continuation. An
appeal by the Council to the international community for
this purpose does not seem to be enough to overcome the
problem. It may be necessary to consider forms of
financing under the support plans of the Bretton Woods
institutions for Liberia, or to link the development of the
programmes of the United Nations system in Liberia to the
fulfilment of the objectives of a cease-fire and political
agreements, as provided for in the special initiative for
Africa, launched by the Secretary-General only a few
months ago. We should also consider the possibility of
signing commitments of future reimbursements to be paid
to a fund for peace in Africa. In any event, the matter of
financing requires an innovative approach.

It is also essential to achieve a cease-fire as soon as
possible and to implement the Abuja Agreement. It is

 

impossible to mobilize international support for a country
whose leaders, at the expense of the enormous suffering
of its civilian population, maintain a position of utter
disregard for peace and for the international organizations
committed to the work of achieving it. This explains the
lack of contributions to the Liberian Trust Fund, as
mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report. There
can be no enthusiasm for supporting initiatives for peace
if those who should take the lead in promoting them are
the very ones who thwart them at every turn.

The situation in Liberia is a serious test for the
Security Council. Even when leaders do not want peace,
the Security Council cannot abdicate its humanitarian
responsibilities. Even if the leaders do not care about their
own people, we, the international community, cannot
simply wash our hands and look the other way. When
there are no local structures to guarantee the safety of
persons, of families and of the communities in which
persons and families live, it is the international
community that acquires what we might term
supplementary humanitarian responsibility to fill that void.
Thus, we must give strong backing to the humanitarian
organizations of the United Nations, as well as to those of
the private sector. The United Nations cannot abandon the
people of Liberia to its fate.

Furthermore, it should be clearly stated that many
countries will not recognize anyone who might prevail by
force in that country.

Another scandalous aspect is the continued flow of
weapons to Liberia. The practical result of the embargo
is that weapons cost more, not that they no longer reach
Liberia. Who is responsible for this? Without a doubt, it
is once again the faction leaders, who prefer to devote
resources to the war and not to the development of their
people; without a doubt, it is the arms merchants, who
epitomize immorality by profiting from people's
suffering; but it is also the main weapons-producing
countries, many of them seated here in the Security
Council, and they must implement much stricter and more
effective mechanisms to make the arms embargo a real
one.

In conclusion, we must express our great concern
over the prospect of the elections being postponed
because of all this. We believe the elections are an
important and fundamental step to overcome the political
and ethical crisis afflicting Liberia. The absence of
legitimate authority will always be a destabilizing element
that must be rectified. Once control of the situation in
Monrovia is restored, the highest priority should be
attached to the holding of the scheduled elections so that
the Liberian people itself can point the way and so that

 

the international community can then offer its fullest
support. Chile wishes to express its full solidarity with the
people and the civil society of Liberia, and we consider this
a moral imperative and a political responsibility of Chilean
democracy.

