Ms. Ghelani: I am pleased to deliver this statement
on behalf of the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Mr. Mark Lowcock.

We very much welcome today's discussion and
adoption of resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons
in armed conflict. Importantly, the resolution affirms
the obligation of parties to conflict to prevent persons
from going missing and to clarify their fate if they do
go missing. It comes not a moment too soon. Alarming
numbers of persons go missing in armed conflicts.
They might be captured by warring parties and held
incommunicado in secret locations, where they may
ultimately die. They might be victims of extrajudicial
executions, their bodies hidden in unmarked graves.
Sometimes they are civilians merely fleeing violence
for their own safety, girls and boys who become
separated from their families, and elderly persons or
persons with disabilities who are unable to flee or are
left behind. They might be civilians or combatants,
killed during fighting, and their remains improperly
managed or disposed of.

Whatever the circumstances, the families of the
missing are left in a state of absolute despair, not
knowing the fate or whereabouts of their loved ones.
When the missing person is also the breadwinner, the
impact on families can be economically devastating.
In some situations, the relatives of missing persons
find it hard to remarry, claim their inheritance, receive
benefits and rebuild their lives in the face of legal
and administrative obstacles. Moreover, the anguish
and uncertainty can jeopardize the prospects for
reconstructing the social fabric of conflict-affected
communities and societies.

There is no comprehensive figure for those missing
in conflict, but what we do know is that the situation
is dire. For example - as the Council will hear from
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) - more than 10,000 cases of missing
persons have been opened by the ICRC in relation to
the Syrian conflict. The organization has also received
13,000 requests for support in finding missing relatives
from families in Nigeria. In Myanmar, South Sudan
and Yemen, United Nations bodies have reported cases
of enforced disappearance of persons deprived of their
liberty, along with many other persons reported to be
missing. Meanwhile, cases of missing persons that
occurred years and even decades ago in the Balkans,
Lebanon, Nepal and Sri Lanka, for example, are still
pending clarification.

What we need, as the Secretary-General noted
in his report last month on the protection of civilians
(S/20l9/373), is for parties to conflict to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law as it
relates to missing persons. The law prohibits enforced
disappearance. It requires that parties take all feasible
measures to account for those reported missing as a
result of armed conflict. It enshrines the right of the
families of the missing to receive information on their
fate and whereabouts. In turn, this entails putting in
place appropriate domestic laws and policies, including
mechanisms to search for the missing and respond to
the needs of their relatives. These mechanisms should
entail the collection, management and protection of
information on missing persons; the establishment of
necessary forensic and other processes for managing
human remains; and the provision of psychological,
legal and financial support needed by the families of
the missing.

The resolution adopted by the Council today is
rightly ambitious. It calls upon States and parties
to conflict to put in place these and other specific
measures. We would encourage parties to conflict and
States to avail themselves of the support of the ICRC
and other key actors in establishing the necessary legal
and policy frameworks related to missing persons and
the needs of their families.

As the resolution rightly stresses, strengthening the
role and capacity of relevant existing national, regional
and international mechanisms to provide advice and
support to Member States will be essential. We would
also encourage Member States to engage in networking,
exchange of experience, best practices and other means
of cooperation on the issue of missing persons as a
result of armed conflict.

In that regard, we welcome the launch this year of
the ICRC Missing Persons Project, which will build
a community of practice; bring together experts and
practitioners to work with families, Member States,
international organizations and other actors to help
stop people from going missing; find those who have
gone missing and support their families.

The scale ofthe problem can and must be addressed,
principally by respecting and ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law. For the sake of those
missing now and who may be in the future, and for the
families that suffer so much as they wait for news, it is
incumbent upon us all to take action.

