Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her sober briefing and for the
thorough report on the situation in Darfur.

This year marks a truly sad milestone. It has been
10 years since the Security Council first condemned
reports of large-scale attacks on civilians, sexual
violence and force displacement in Darfur, and urged
the Government to seek a peaceful political resolution
to the conflict and bring the perpetrators of such crimes
to justice. When the Sudanese Government failed to do
that, the Council took the historic step of referring the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in March 2005. The ICC has sought to bring
justice to the victims of Darfur, and we continue to
believe that it is essential to pursue accountability for
those most responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity there.

In the decade that has passed since it Security
Council first addressed Darfur, the international
community has made enormous strides to bring those
responsible for atrocity crimes to justice in other parts
of the world. From Charles Taylor in Liberia, to the
most senior surviving members of the Khmer Rouge
regime and to Congolese warlord Thomas Lubanga,
the world has shown that it will combat impunity for
atrocities perpetrated against civilians, yet the progress
that has occurred elsewhere in the world has cruelly
bypassed Darfur.

The same crimes that the commission of
inquiry uncovered and the Security Council
denounced - involving the widespread killing of
civilians, torture, kidnapping, forced disappearances,
rape, pillaging, forced displacement and destruction
of villages - have been committed and continue to
be committed by Government forces, rebel groups and
Government-aligned militia. Indeed, the Rapid Support
Forces that are now active in Darfur employ the same
tactics as the Janj aweed and are, as the Prosecutor notes,
funded, trained, equipped and administered by the
Government of the Sudan's National Intelligence and
Security Services and commanded by the Government
of the Sudan's Armed Forces during military operations.
Further, the scorched-earth tactics that the Sudanese
Government has pursued in Darfur were precursors to
conflicts in Blue Nile and South Kordofan states, where
the Rapid Support Forces have also terrorized civilians.

The ICC's task is not an easy one. The Government
of the Sudan's lack of cooperation and its disregard for
the Security Council's decision to refer the situation in
Darfur to the ICC, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
is so profound that the Prosecutor's report recounts that
a cooperation request with respect to Abdallah Banda
Abakaer Nourain was simply returned to the Court
by the Government of the Sudan, with the envelope
unopened. As Prosecutor Bensouda's report indicates,
recent developments remain deeply concerning. We are
particularly concerned about recent reports of mass
rapes in Thabit, North Darfur, which have not yet been
fully investigated. The limited interviews of villagers
in Thabit to investigate this alleged mass rape were
done in the presence of the Government of the Sudan's
military intelligence and soldiers, some of whom were
recording the interviews. This does not count as an
investigation. It is only intimidation.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has a responsibility
to investigate. It has a mandate to investigate, and
the Government of the Sudan has an obligation to
stop interfering. We again call upon the Sudanese
Government to remove immediately all obstacles to
UNAMID's full and proper discharge of its mandate,
including to its freedom of movement in areas where it
is operating in accordance with the mandate the Council
has given it. For its part, UNAMID has played a critical
role in monitoring, investigating and reporting on the
facts on the ground and must remain on the ground
without obstruction in order to fulfil its role ofprotecting
civilians. In that regard, however, it is important to
note, as other colleagues have, that on 29 October the
Secretary-General informed the Security Council of the
results of a review of UNAMID reporting, following
allegations of UNAMID underreporting that had been
brought to the attention of the ICC Prosecutor, to which
she referred in her briefing today.

The review found that in approximately one-third
of the incidents that were the subject of the allegations,
UNAMID did not provide a full accounting of the facts
and, curiously, the details that were omitted were usually
details that identified the Government of the Sudan
or Government proxies as perpetrators. The review
team recommended that the practice of the Mission's
"censoring itselfin its reporting to Headquarters needs
to be addressed immediately". These findings should
be deeply concerning to every member of the Council.
The Security Council was recently briefed by the head
investigator, and the United States urges immediate
action to address the abuses uncovered in this
investigation. Accordingly, we welcome the Secretary-
General's commitment to taking all necessary steps
to ensure that UNAMID's reporting is full, accurate
and timely and that the Mission's engagement with the
public is open, forthcoming and not manipulated.

Justice cannot alone bring back the lives lost
or undo the damage caused by the killings, rape and
destruction of homes and livelihoods. But it serves as an
important foundation for healing so that survivors can
rebuild their lives, fully participate in the restoration
of their communities, and lay a foundation for the
rule of law. We cannot abandon the people of Darfur
to a Government complicit in and indifferent to their
suffering. We must continue to find ways to provide
some measure ofjustice to people who have waited far
too long to see the crimes against them punished, and
we continue to call on the Government of the Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Court, as required
by resolution 1593 (2005).

The Prosecutor's words today were clear and
candid and her warnings concerning. She has spoken
of the danger of investigations going into hibernation
due to continued lack of cooperation, obstruction,
intimidation - all amid ongoing attacks on civilians.
The danger of these cases going into hibernation
must be a wake-up call. She has spoken of the lack
of progress, and that, simply put, virtually nothing is
happening to advance justice for the people of Darfur.
This is a travesty. If these cases are in danger of going
into hibernation, we must collectively and urgently
wake from our slumber.

