Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express our
condolences to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for the terrible events that took place this week.

We are grateful for the organization of this
open debate and for the two documents presented
this morning.

One year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which reminds the parties to
armed conflict oftheir obligations to protect the civilian
population and all health and humanitarian personnel
dedicated exclusively to medical missions, their
means of transport and equipment, hospitals and other
health facilities. Those obligations emanate directly
from international law, international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and the various
resolutions of the Council.

However, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/4l4) and the briefing we received this morning
from Mr. Stagno Ugarte clearly reflect a bleak reality,
namely, the horrors suffered by millions of people as
a result of armed conflicts, as well as their trials and
tribulations as they attempt to escape war and confront
the indifference and cruelty with which human life and
dignity are treated.

All parties to armed conflict have the international
obligation to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law, namely to ensure that the wounded
and sick receive, in accordance with basic ethical
principles, the medical care that they need to safeguard
their lives, and also that the personnel carrying out
medical missions receive protection. Barriers posed to
the provision of humanitarian and medical assistance to
the civilian population represent a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, and deliberate attacks
on health personnel, medical facilities and places where
the injured and the sick are held are war crimes under
international law. They also have an immediate impact
on the civilian population and the availability of basic
health-care services in areas of conflict, exacerbating
their also appalling living conditions. It is unacceptable
that the parties to an armed conflict should interrupt
the supply of drinking water, electricity, gas, food,
medication or humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population. They must stop using civilian populations
as cannon fodder to achieve their political and military
aims. The parties must stop locating military targets in
medical facilities, move away from major urban centres
and refrain from using explosive weapons in cities and
other populated areas.

Costa Rica supports the recommendations of
the Secretary- General and the appeals made by
International Committee of the Red Cross to avoid the
use of explosives within or close to densely populated
areas and or explosive weapons with wide-ranging
effects. We reiterate our support for international
efforts aimed at putting an end to explosive weapons in
densely populated areas. This is an essential obligation
for us.

The international community must assist displaced
persons and civilian victims. However, we also have to
put an end to the prevailing generalized impunity. In
this spirit, it is vital, in Syria in particular, to support the
efforts of the General Assembly in the establishment of
an independent and impartial international mechanism
to assist in the investigation and bring to justice those
responsible for the most serious crimes committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. It is vital
also that the Council refer to the International Criminal
Court the most urgent cases in order for the relevant
investigations to be completed and the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes to be brought to justice.
The Organization must also provide the Court with
the economic resources necessary to fully discharge
its mandate.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
best way to protect the civilian population and health
workers in the long run is prevention and institutional
strengthening. It is key to strengthen the rule of law
and institutions. We all need to help States ensure that
the rule of law prevails in the framework of respect for
human rights and the norms of international law.

Finally, we agree with the presidency that as long as
the international arms trade continues to fuel conflicts
and the air forces of the States involved continue to be
supplied with weapons and planes through this trade we
will continue not to be able to properly protect civilian
populations. The terrible consequences of war will
continue to ravage the civilian population until their
root causes are dealt with.

