Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: I am honoured to briefthe
Council today for the very first time in current capacity.

As Council members know, the collaborative spirit
between the leading parliamentary blocs four months
ago allowed the consensual nomination of Mr. Adil Abd
al-Mahdi as the Prime Minister-designate. However,
to date the Government of Iraq remains incomplete.
Four ministerial positions are still vacant, with three
of them - Interior, Defence and Justice - being
subject to fierce disagreements among political parties
and political blocs. Within this context, multiple
parliamentary sessions have been adjourned, interrupted
or boycotted, and as a result the implementation of the
Government programme has made little headway. As
we speak, the Iraqi Parliament is in a one-month recess
and will reconvene only in early March.

Long Government formation processes are not new
or unique to Iraq. However, in the Iraq context there is
a real sense of urgency to complete the process without
delay and to focus on rebuilding the country after
years of conflict. Therefore, I would like to call upon
the political actors once again to overcome political
infighting and to demonstrate that political compromise
can prevail in the greater interests of the Iraqi people.
And in doing so, I would also like to remind them that
there are excellent and experienced Iraqi women who
are well-qualified to perform the job.

Ultimately, the people of Iraq are bearing the
brunt of the political stalemate - bearing the brunt
at a time when it is critical to address their needs and
demands for better services at a time when the Iraqi
citizens ought to be able to rely on strong democratic
governance and viable state institutions. So yes, it is
high time to shift focus from factional politics and to
invest efforts in addressing the immediate needs of
Iraqi citizens, as further delays could give space to
significant repercussions on the stability of the country.

On a more positive note, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the 2019 federal budget law was approved
by Parliament on 23 January. Prior consultations, as
well as effective cooperation, made this achievement
possible. The good news is that it demonstrates
that space for constructive political dialogue and
partnership is out there, and I truly hope that we will see
lots more of it in the months to come. The 2019 budget
allocations for some key development sectors, such as
electricity, reflect the Government's efforts to improve
the delivery of basic services. But still, allocations for
reconstruction in liberated areas are far less than the
actual needs. Moreover, Iraq's State finances remain
strongly reliant on oil-sector revenues and thus very
vulnerable to fluctuations in oil prices.

Another positive step was last week's decision of
the Council of Ministers to convert the Government
programme into an implementation plan. This will
allow for close monitoring of progress, as well as
accountability. Additionally, I would like to welcome
the steps taken by the Government to address corruption
by putting in place preventive measures. Within the
past month, the Prime Minister has Chaired three
meetings of the Supreme Anti-Corruption Council with
a view to unifying efforts to combat corruption by any
party or person, regardless of their post or position.
The fight against corruption will not be an easy one,
but it is a much-needed one as corruption is vast and
pervasive at all levels in Iraq. It is a much-needed fight
in order to revive public-trust. During our meeting in
Najaf last Wednesday, Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani also
underlined once again, among others, the urgent need
to show progress in fighting corruption.

Turning to relations between Baghdad and Erbil,
I would like to welcome the agreement reached on
16 January to unify customs duties. The speedy
implementation of that agreement should now be a
priority for both sides. Moreover, the finalization of
the 2019 federal budget guaranteed federal funding for
salary payments to the Kurdistan region civil servants
and Peshmerga forces. I would like to call upon both
Baghdad and Erbil to capitalize on this positive
momentum and to overcome their differences.

At this very moment, there is little to report on the
Government formation within the Kurdistan region,
as to date negotiations continue. In my meetings with
Kurdish leaders, both in Erbil and Sulaymaniyah,
I emphasized the need to expedite Government
formation in order to serve the needs of the people
of the Kurdistan region as soon as possible. Some
developments seem to be unfolding, however, with a
possible session of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament
to be held on 18 February.

During the reporting period, Iraq's leadership
made significant efforts in recalibrating its external
relationships, reaching out to many international,
regional and neighbouring partners. That is important,
as strength abroad and strength at home are a package
deal indeed. During this period, Iraq has also received
high-level international delegations seeking to engage
with the new Iraqi leadership, and I truly hope that
support for sustainable stability in Iraq will continue
to be on top of the regional and international agenda,
building upon mutual interests and in accordance with
the principles of respect for Iraq's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

Security remains a concern. Although terrorist
activity has decreased, during the past month attacks
have been carried out against both civilians and the Iraqi
security forces. In short, despite its military defeat, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to
pose a security threat to Iraq and the region.

Another concern relates to armed groups operating
out of State control and/or expanding their economic
and social control in Iraqi daily life. Regardless of
their affiliation, the Government needs to take quick
measures to reform its security sector and act resolutely
against these groups and their activities.

As council members are also aware, Turkish
military airstrikes near the Iraqi-Turkish border in
northern Iraq have been condemned by the authorities
of Iraq as violations of its sovereignty. Turkey maintains
that these airstrikes are against targets linked to the
Kurdistan Workers' Party. I regret the loss of civilian
lives and livelihoods during these operations. It is
important that the Governments of both Turkey and
Iraq accelerate their efforts to resolve this through
bilateral dialogue.

With respect to election, the Independent High
Electoral Commission has formally recommended
that Iraq's provincial council elections take place
on 16 November. UNAMI will continue to provide
technical assistance and support to the Commission.
However, in preparation for these elections a number of
steps will need to be taken urgently by the Government
of Iraq and the relevant institutions.

In speaking of human rights accountability, I would
like to emphasize that promoting a more consistent
adherence to international standards of due process and
fair trial is of the greatest importance, as an impartial
and transparent process of judicial accountability
for the gross violations of human rights committed
by ISIL will prove crucial in rebuilding peaceful
coexistence and social cohesion. Equally important
is the need to strengthen community cohesion and
to counter collective community blame. Moreover,
the marginalization of one group over another leaves
communities vulnerable to extremist messaging.

As part of UNAMI's efforts to advance equal
opportunities, on 24 January I launched the Women's
Advisory Group on Reconciliation and Politics. With
that in mind, I would like to renew UNAMI's call on
political leaders to fulfil the many pledges made during
the time of the elections, and therefore appoint women
to senior decision-making positions.

The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
have finalized the 2019 humanitarian needs overview
for Iraq and will soon launch the humanitarian response
plan, in close cooperation with the Government of Iraq
and the Kurdistan Regional Government. This year
the humanitarian community will focus on meeting
the needs of 1.75 million vulnerable Iraqis, including
internally displaced persons, living both in and out of
camp settings, returnees in areas of severe need as well
as host communities that have been strained by several
years of armed conflict. The needs are vast indeed. The
2019 humanitarian response plan seeks $700 million
from donors and includes specialized programming
to address protection needs. Of course, humanitarian
programming will be implemented alongside recovery
and stabilization efforts.

While significant efforts are under way to rebuild
infrastructure and restore basic services, it will take
many years and billions of dollars to rebuild the
country. Iraq will undoubtedly need the continued
attention of the international community to make the
transition successful and sustainable. Thanks to the
generous support of the international community, the
United Nations Development Programme Funding
Facility for Stabilization exceeded $1 billion at the end
of 2018; however, a gap of $338 million still exists. In
other words, additional funds are needed, including
contributions by the Government of Iraq - which, by
the way, acknowledges the quick impact and efficiency
of the programme.

It goes without saying that the United Nations
country team continues to assist the Government of
Iraq in meeting the needs of its citizens. I could give
many examples, but some from the past few months
include the provision of medical kits and supplies to
save lives, the digitization of Iraq's largest social safety
net, the provision of food entitlements, the clearance
of explosives, and, importantly, the finalization of
a reconstruction plan for Mosul. The United Nations
system also continues to support the Government of
Iraq in the implementation of some key reforms, such
as in the security sector. During my visit to Mosul,
a couple of weeks ago, I witnessed the important
contribution of the country team in assisting the
Government in the rehabilitation of houses and the
restoration of water plants, both of which are essential
needs for the return of life to that war-torn city. As
the Council knows, mine action organizations manage
the threat of improvised explosive devices on a daily
basis. That is of great importance. However, it has to be
said that further action is required by the Government
of Iraq to overcome certain challenges in facilitating
those activities.

Since the Kuwait International Conference for
Reconstruction of Iraq in February 2018, the Iraq
Recovery and Resilience Programme has been rolled
out. With its national coverage, the Programme has a
two-year budget of $1 billion. Resource mobilization
efforts are ongoing, with over $300 million pledged so
far for projects. I would like to encourage other donors
to contribute.

With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to turn now to the twenty-first report (S/2019/78) of the
Secretary-General on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. First of all, let me
emphasize my determination to engage on this issue.
I emphasized that once again during my first official
visit to Kuwait, 10 days ago. While UNAMI continues
to assist the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait on this
important humanitarian issue, I would like to call
upon Member States to strengthen their support - for
example, through the procurement of field equipment,
the provision of forensics and capacity-building
for Iraqi and Kuwaiti technical teams. The return
of valuable Kuwaiti property last November was a
positive and long-awaited step. I encourage the Iraqi
Government to continue its search for the still missing
national archives.

I would like to underline that, yes, the atmosphere
of despair during the period of ISIL's occupation has
given way somewhat towards hope and optimism for the
future in Iraq. However, one cannot shy away from the
fact that the road to well-deserved long-term stability
will be long and far from easy. Realism and great
determination will be necessary in facing the challenges
ahead, including on our side. Obvious ownership and
engagement by all Iraqi components will prove crucial,
political will be a precondition and taking pride in a
shared history and a common future will be a necessity.
And, yes, continued support from the international
community will be of paramount importance.

Finally, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to UNAMI and the staff of the United
Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment. I am truly delighted to be working with
them. I look forward to reporting back to the Council
on - I hope - some substantive achievements over
coming months.

