Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
delighted, Sir, to see you presiding over the Council
today.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia 4 and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country members of the European
Economic Area - Iceland - align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union (EU) wishes to express its
appreciation to the Norwegian presidency for having
convened this public debate on the report of the
Security Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea. We
welcome the report and the opportunity it provides for
Member States to share their assessments as we enter
this crucial period of the ongoing peace process
between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The European Union reiterates its full support for
the Peace Agreement signed in Algiers on 12
December 2000 as well for as the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities signed in Algiers on 18 June of
the same year. In this context, we look forward to the
border delimitation determination by the Boundary
Commission. The EU welcomes recent statements by
the parties reaffirming that the decision of the
Boundary Commission is final and binding, and the
commitment of each to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the other party, in accordance
with the Algiers Agreement.

The announcement by the Boundary Commission
of its decision in the next few weeks will complete the
first phase of the ongoing peace process. The EU
expects the parties to ensure that the process of
implementation of the demarcation of the Ethiopian-
Eritrean border will commence immediately and
proceed expeditiously, in a coordinated manner, while
stability is maintained in all areas affected by the
decision.

The EU expresses its full support for the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and
for the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Legwaila. Next week
the Security Council will consider the extension of
UNMEE's mandate. We look forward in this regard to
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, with a
view to providing an overall framework for the
implementation phase and for the appropriate role of
UNMEE. We would recall the pivotal role to be played
by the United Nations, as set out in the Algiers
Agreement, in implementing the decision of the
Boundary Commission, and we urge the parties to
cooperate fully with UNMEE in implementing that
decision and to keep communications open with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General during
this crucial period.
The EU shares the view of the Security Council
mission that, in order to facilitate the implementation
phase, the institutional framework for the peace
process will need to be developed further, particularly
through appropriate strengthening of the Military
Coordination Commission, as well as through other
mechanisms based on dialogue between the parties and
their full cooperation with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. The EU stands ready to offer
what assistance it can.

The EU wishes to emphasize that, according to
the Algiers agreements, the mandate of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission will end when the
process of delimitation and demarcation of the
Ethiopian-Eritrean border has been completed.
Accordingly, we attach the utmost importance to the
continuation of the arrangements for the separation of
the forces, as achieved by the establishment of the
Temporary Security Zone. It is equally important that,
in order to maintain stability, the parties refrain from
any unilateral actions, including movements of
population and troops.

Demarcation is a physical process that must
necessarily take place on the ground. The border region
involved in the dispute remains heavily mined, which
poses a major threat to the population and to the United
Nations personnel operating in the area. Demining is an
essential preliminary step to border demarcation. In
this regard, the EU reminds the parties of their primary
responsibility and urges them to cooperate fully to
ensure expeditious demining. UNMEE's mandate
should be adjusted, as necessary, to allow it to play a
full and appropriate role in the demarcation process.

In the context of confidence-building measures,
we call on the parties immediately to release and return
unconditionally all the remaining prisoners of war and
all those detained as a result of the armed conflict. It is
also important to ensure a sustainable reintegration of
refugees, internally displaced persons and demobilized
soldiers. The EU calls on the parties urgently to resolve
all other outstanding issues, including the full freedom
of movement of UNMEE.

The demarcation of the border and the
implementation of confidence-building measures are
key steps towards the normalization of relations
between these neighbouring countries. The overall
objective of the peace process is reconciliation,
reconstruction and development, for the benefit of their
peoples. The EU calls on the Governments of Ethiopia
and Eritrea to move towards normalization and lasting
reconciliation.
We are encouraged by the joint meetings of
religious leaders held on 14 and 15 February in Asmara
and Addis Ababa. We stress the particular importance
of promoting cross-border contacts at the local level,
rebuilding community relations, and the role that
women can play in this regard.

The consolidation of peace between both
countries will contribute to relaunching the process of
regional cooperation and integration. Regional
cooperation is of vital importance for stable and
sustainable development in the Horn of Africa, which
remains an area of particular concern for the EU. We
note in this regard the signing of the protocol on the
establishment of an early warning and early response
mechanism for conflicts at the ninth Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development Summit, held
on 11 January.

To conclude, the European Union, as a witness
and co-signatory of the Algiers Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, remains committed to continuing its
support of the peace process, particularly through the
Special Representative of the Presidency, Senator Serri.
We will continue to provide assistance to the
populations affected by the conflict and by other
humanitarian disasters, such as the current drought.
With continued progress in the peace process, the
European Union wishes to support peace-building,
reconstruction and development and to contribute to
the launching of a dialogue on confidence-building
measures and efforts towards normalization,
cooperation on all aspects of mutual interest and lasting
reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

