Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to take part in today's meeting of the
Security Council on Guinea-Bissau and to address
members on the most recent developments in my
country.

Allow me to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Mr. Mauro Vieira,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I also welcome the recent
appointment of Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, whom we wish
every success in conducting her mission in this phase of
transition for the Office in the country.

Today's Council meeting is being held as Guinea-
Bissau is firmly committed to completing the electoral
cycle with the holding of presidential elections on
24 November. That election deadline will be an
opportunity for the people of Guinea-Bissau to reaffirm
the legitimacy of the institutions of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, which was already begun with
parliamentary elections held on 10 March, in which 102
new Members of Parliament were elected.

Following the elections and under the proposal
of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde, the majority party in the National
People's Assembly, the President of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau reappointed Mr. Aristides Gomes as
Prime Minister on 22 June. Under the Prime Minister's
proposal, a Government was formed on 3 July,
comprising 11 women out ofa total of 31 members.

I stress the importance of the decisions taken at
the most recent summit of the Economic Community
of West African States, held in Abuja, to defuse the
continuing crisis among national political actors.

In a few days, the Government will submit its
governance instruments, including its programme and
budget, to the National Assembly for assessment and
possible approval, which will enable the Government to
implement its programme. The Government is resolutely
committed to preparing for the presidential elections to
be held on 24 November. To that end, in consultation
with other electoral institutions, it launched a voter
register correction process on 16 August. It should be
noted that this process initiated by the Government does
not enjoy the unanimous approval of political actors or
civil society, but we hope that with dialogue, the parties
concerned will agree on the process.

The current political environment is marked by
the seizure on 2 September by the Judicial Police
of Guinea-Bissau of an unprecedented quantity of
narcotics - approximately two tons of cocaine.
That fact once again illustrates the extent to which
our territory remains attractive for transnational
organized crime networks, due not only to our
geographical vulnerability but also to the weakness of
our institutions. It is also proof of the determination
of the Bissau-Guinean authorities to fight tirelessly
against this scourge, which has no other objective
than to undermine our integrity as a sovereign State.
This operation, known as Operation Navarra, led to
the arrest of a dozen suspects, constituting a heavy
blow to this criminal network. It would not have been
successful without the support of our various partners,
to whom I wish to pay tribute.

I would also draw the Security Council's attention
to the need to strengthen cooperation in the fight against
drug trafficking between the Government of Guinea-
Bissau and the United Nations Office Against Drugs
and Crime, without prejudice to the fulfilment of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau set out in resolution 2458
(2019). Among other things, that would bolster the
capacity of the national institutions involved in this
area, which, as the Council is aware, are operating in
extremely precarious conditions.

To conclude, allow me to reiterate my country's
gratitude for the support it receives from the Security
Council as well as from regional and subregional
organizations, particularly the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
European Union.

The meeting rose at 4.50pm.
