Mr. Aboul Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council today meets as usual in a new
emergency meeting in order that all members of the
international community may condemn the Israeli
military incursion into Gaza and demand the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the areas of the
Palestinian Jabaliya refugee camp that it invaded more
than six days ago, claiming more than eighty dead and
inflicting injuries on hundreds of women and children
and other defenceless Palestinian civilians.

We wish on this occasion to reaffirm our firm
position rejecting the targeting of civilians by any side.
Intimidating the innocent can only abet those who seek
to fan the conflict and hinders Egypt's ongoing efforts
to restore stability to the region and to reach a
permanent and just settlement guaranteeing the dignity
and security of Palestinians and Israelis alike. Current
developments threaten to dash any hope for achieving
that objective. Many victims have fallen, and much
destruction is being suffered daily by Palestinian
civilians in heavily populated camps throughout Gaza
that are home to numerous women and children.

Egypt has made strenuous efforts to break the
stalemate in the current peace process and to build
bridges of trust. It has also tried to bring the views of
Palestinians and Israelis into closer accord and to
provide guarantees for a full and successful Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza. We are sad and angry today,
however, as yet another opportunity for peace has been
lost and the seeds of hatred and grief are being sown.

Egypt calls for an immediate withdrawal of all
Israeli forces from the J abaliya camp and all areas that
have been overrun since 28 September. It demands that
Israel, the occupying authority, abide by all the rules of
international law and the provisions of the Geneva
Conventions and international humanitarian law, in
addition to relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. We were grieved to learn of
Israel's intention to continue the incursion for weeks to
come, giving rise to the question: How many innocent
civilians must fall victim to such practices before the
international community raises its voice? How many
families must be displaced or lose their breadwinners
before the Security Council assumes its responsibility
and forces the occupying power to respect the law and
protect the lives of civilians?
The latest operation in Gaza is known as "Days
of Penitence". We would have liked one of those days
to be a day of hope - the hope that Palestinians and
Israelis will return to the negotiating table; the hope
that the suffering of the Palestinian people will be
alleviated; the hope that the siege imposed on the
Palestinian people and its leadership will be lifted; and
the hope for a full Israeli withdrawal from Gaza, in
accordance with the approach endorsed by the
international community in its road map.

Egypt once again demands an immediate end to
the Israeli attacks on Gaza. It urges the Security
Council to adopt a unified position opposing the
incursions and promoting the return of the Israeli
forces to their original positions, as well as respect for
the rule of international humanitarian law and the
Geneva Conventions in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Finally, neither international nor regional efforts
to achieve a political settlement can be made in a
vacuum or independently of developments on the
ground. There is no doubt that Israel's widening
incursion into the Gaza Strip, in contravention of
international legitimacy, and its destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure will have an effect opposite
to that intended and cannot lead to a successful or
secure withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. It will further
aggravate the human, security, political, and economic
situation in the occupied territories and in Israel itself.

In that context, Egypt affirms the need to
conclude a ceasefire agreement; for swift and
successive measures to restore confidence between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides; and to move swiftly
towards a full and faithful implementation of the road
map.

