Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal is deeply
disappointed that the Security Council was not able to
remain united in support of the six-point plan and the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy. The purpose of the
draft resolution S/2012/538, which we co-sponsored,
was to reinforce the Council's commitment to the
Annan plan in a manner that could ensure its immediate
and effective implementation and to stop the violence
and the systematic violations of human rights taking
place in Syria.

We very much regret that, despite the flexibility
demonstrated by the sponsors, the Council failed to heed
the reiterated calls of the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Envoy for united, sustained and effective
pressure in order to implement its decisions and send a
message to all that there will be serious consequences
for continued non-compliance. We have indeed tried
our utmost to preserve the unity of the Council.

On 21 April the Council mandated the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) to
monitor a ceasefire and support implementation of
the six-point plan. UNSMIS was devised as a means
to an end, namely, the creation, through the full
implementation of the six-point plan, of a conducive
environment for the political process and the Syrian-led
transition to democracy in conformity with the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

Since then, the situation on the ground has only
worsened, and the level of violence has increased
daily to unfathomable levels. Eighteen months into
this persistent conflict, the country continues to slip
into civil war and chaos, destabilizing neighbouring
countries and threatening the integrity of Syria itself,
with grave risks for regional peace and security.

Three months after the adoption of resolution 2043
(2012), the six-point plan has yet to be implemented.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the armed
conflict. The Syrian armed forces persist in their
indiscriminate use of tanks, heavy artillery and
helicopters to systematically shell populated areas in
blatant violation of the Council's resolutions. UNSMIS
operations remain suspended owing to the security
conditions on the ground.

Events in Damascus over the past days have
dramatically underlined the urgent need for concerted
action by the Security Council to enforce Joint
Special Envoy Annan's plan. The draft resolution (see S/2012/53 8) vetoed by the Russian Federation and China
sought precisely that, namely by placing the six-point
plan and the political conditions set out by the Action
Group in Geneva on 30 June 2012, under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. It also sought to
ensure an immediate end to all violence and to promote
a permissive environment on the ground, without which
a reconfigured UNSMIS will not be able to undertake
its mandated task effectively and safely.

Contrary to what some have argued, the
imposition of sanctions in the eventuality of continued
noncompliance would not be automatic. It would
require another Security Council resolution. Moreover,
by restricting eventual coercive action to measures
under Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the text clearly excluded any possibility of a military
intervention.

Portugal firmly believes that to be effective, to be
credible and to fulfil its responsibilities, the Council
must exert united, sustained and effective pressure on
all sides, and on the Syrian authorities in particular, in
light of their primary responsibility under the six-point
plan to put an end to the violence. We very much regret
that, once again, this was not possible, with all the
dire consequences that failure entails. Nevertheless,
Portugal remains ready to continue engaging with all
members of the Council to provide meaningful and
effective support to the efforts of the Joint Special
Envoy Annan.

Finally, Mr. President, allow me a special word of
appreciation for Major-General Robert Mood, Chief
of UNSMIS, and his able leadership, as well as for all
the personnel of UNSMIS. We thank them greatly for
their courage, commitment and professionalism in such
challenging and perilous circumstances.

