Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and in thanking him for his
comprehensive briefing on developments in East
Timor.

Since the last briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, we have faced
the tragic deaths of peacekeepers as well as the brutal
murder of staff of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in West
Timor. We again call for the perpetrators of those
murders to be brought to justice.

The murder of United Nations staff strikes at the
heart of the work of this Organization, for without staff
willing to leave their homes and families to venture out
to assist those in need, there will be little work for this
Organization to do. My delegation therefore reiterates
its call for the disarmament of the militias in West
Timor by the Government of Indonesia.

We were deeply disappointed to learn of the
paltry yield of weapons in the just-completed
disarmament exercise and the continued hostile actions
of the militias and their supporters. We recall the
briefing given by Special Envoy Minister Yudhoyono,
and we expect to receive further information from the
Indonesian Government about the disarmament
process.

We also continue to believe that a mission by the
Security Council, with the cooperation and support of
the Indonesian Government, will yield positive results,
because it will send a direct signal to the militias and
those who seek to harm United Nations personnel that
the international community has not turned a blind eye.

The recent events in West Timor have also raised
concern about the fate of the East Timorese refugees
since the withdrawal of the humanitarian agencies from
the refugee camps. The safe passage of refugees to
their places of origin is critical, and with the pattern of
recent events this may prove difficult in the face of
threats, harassment and intimidation by the militias. We
support the view expressed by the Special
Representative that only when the problem of militias
has been effectively addressed will the plight of the
East Timorese refugees be resolved.

We recognize that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is putting
contingency planning arrangements in place, and we
welcome the establishment of a joint operations centre
by the UNHCR in Dili.

But while the security situation in East Timor is
itself generally calm, the recent killing of an armed
militiaman near the border points to continued efforts
to infiltrate East Timor. In this context, we have noted
the plans announced by the Cabinet for the creation of
an East Timor defence force.

My delegation would not like to see reversals of
any of the gains made in the reconstruction of East
Timor. Progress has been incremental, but in examining
the events of the past year we must commend UNTAET
for the achievements made in involving the people of
East Timor in the creation and building of institutions
of governance and public administration. We note,
however, that there continues to be an acute shortage of
qualified, experienced personnel in both the public and
private sectors and that many well-qualified East
Timorese remain in exile and have been slow to return.

My delegation therefore welcomes the decision to
develop a Transfer of Knowledge through Expatriate
Nationals (TOKTEN) programme with the assistance
of the United Nations Development Programme and
United Nations volunteers.

We would also wish to highlight another area of
continued concern, specifically the high unemployment
rate despite the ongoing efforts to create short-term,
quick-impact projects.

In conclusion my delegation wishes to again
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the men and women of UNTAET for their
dedicated and dynamic service.

