Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First, I want to thank all of today's briefers for
elucidating the current situation in Ukraine, especially
eastern Ukraine.

The situation in eastern Ukraine remains of great
concern to the international community in general and
to the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in particular. The
parties involved in the conflict have various means at
their disposal that could help to facilitate the path towards
a peaceful solution to the crisis. Mechanisms such as
the Normandy format, the Trilateral Contact Group and
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, signed four years ago and endorsed
in resolution 2202 (2015), demonstrate the efforts
and commitment of the international community to
supporting the parties in their search for a sustainable
solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine.

We regretfully note that the process of mediating
the crisis in Ukraine is currently stalled. We are
therefore of the view that the complete readiness of
the parties and their determined political will are the
missing components that are key to ending this conflict.

We congratulate Ukraine on the outcome of its
recent elections and hope they will help to galvanize
the negotiations in a transformational and positive way.
In that regard, we appeal to the parties to show greater
political will and to do everything necessary to reduce
tensions and achieve a comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the crisis.
We continue to witness with deep concern the
negative impact that the violence and instability of this
protracted conflict continues to have on the population,
as well as its detrimental effect on the lives of some
5.2 million people, 3.5 million of whom require urgent
humanitarian assistance and protection. Humanitarian
conditions on the ground continue to worsen. In 2018,
landmines and explosives accounted for more than 40
percent of civilian casualties. In that regard, access for
humanitarian personnel to the affected areas is crucial
to alleviating people's suffering and improving their
living conditions. It is in that context of humanitarian
assistance that we should commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the aid
it is providing and the humanitarian actors on the
ground for their commitment. We urge the parties to
ensure the protection and safeguard the security of
all those affected by the crisis, with special attention
to the most vulnerable, including women, children,
the elderly and people with disabilities, and to ensure
the protection of infrastructure for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the delegation of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for its work on the ground and
its efforts to facilitate dialogue and maintain stability
in the region. We hope that their efforts, together with
the political will of the parties, can help to put an end
to this crisis.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the only possible
solution to the crisis in the region is a peaceful
one achieved through direct, frank and inclusive
negotiations, which should focus on reaching a final
and just solution that will help strengthen harmonious
relations and foster stability in Ukraine and the region.

