Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane for today's
important update.

Countering violent extremism and terror across
the globe is very important for us all. As others have
noted today, the recent attacks in Burkina Faso and
Mali clearly serve to drive that point home. The United
States understands the seriousness of the threats in
the Sahel region and we were proud to extend a strong
message of support from the Security Council to the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force - a
noble and important regional effort - by co-sponsoring
resolution 2359 (2017) in June.

We also recognize the fundamental importance of
achieving political solutions to long-lasting conflicts
in order to better guarantee peace and security in the
region, especially in Mali, where signatory parties are
not keeping their end of the bargain. We commend the
G-5 Sahel countries for their sacrifices in countering
terrorism in the Sahel and we thank France for its
continued leadership on this vital work and for its
own sacrifices. We believe that deeper cooperation
among the G-5 Sahel countries has the potential to
improve their security and complement the efforts of the
peacekeeping Mission in Mali. To that end, the United
States will continue its long-standing bilateral support
for developing and building the capacity of the G-5
Sahel members' security forces. We will work closely
with our partners to find ways to help the G-5 Sahel
joint force be effective, well coordinated with other
counter-terrorism efforts in the region and, ultimately,
sustainable.

The United States is eager to take advantage of
other opportunities to further coordinate with other
donors in the countries of the Sahel. We look forward
to the holding of a donors' planning conference, at
which we hope to identify, coordinate and synchronize
assistance aimed at operationalizing the joint force.
We believe that approach will result in greater security
and, ultimately, the freedom from terror sought by the
peoples of the region. The United States will continue
to work closely with regional stakeholders and partners
to make sure that the combined international response
to this threat is the right one.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong
support for the G-5 Sahel countries' undertaking. We
will continue to stand with them.
