Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me to
express my Government's appreciation to the Argentine
presidency for putting the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on the agenda for this open debate.
Those caught up in conflicts need our attention. They
need the attention of our Governments, and they need
the attention of the United Nations.

I align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General and the representatives of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and International Committee of the
Red Cross for their valuable briefings.

Yesterday I spent some time on Roosevelt Island,
across the water from the United Nations Building. In
Roosevelt Park, which is visible from the delegates'
lounge down the hall, I saw the famous "four
freedoms" speech of President Roosevelt's memorial.
President Roosevelt at the time looked forward to
a world based on four crucial freedoms, including
the freedom of speech, of worship and freedom from
want. Importantly for today, the fourth freedom was
freedom from fear, anywhere in the world. That vision
should inspire our deliberations today. The essence of
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is that
it should lead to freedom from fear for the civilians
involved. My Government sees three key elements in
realizing that ambition, namely, prevention, protection
and prosecution.

Let me begin with prevention. For my Government,
the international rule of law is the basis for international
relations. As my Minister recently said, the promotion
of the international legal order is enshrined in the
Dutch Constitution. Therefore, Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. on the pacific settlement
of disputes, is paramount for us. Next week, we will
celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of the Peace
Palace in The Hague, the legal capital of the world.
We will then commemorate the significant ways in
which the International Court of Justice contributes to
international peace and stability through the peaceful
settlement of conflicts.

In our view, the implementation of international
human rights instruments, both legal and other, must
be strengthened. We welcome the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States.

To make prevention truly effective, national
judicial institutions should be strong enough to have
a preventive effect. More States must support the
international mechanisms and institutions that offer
protection to civilians. With the knowledge that their
acts will not go unpunished, hopefully those capable
of the worst crimes will be deterred from committing
atrocities.

If prevention fails, we must put the protection of
civilians in armed conflict into practice. That is the
duty of all parties involved, primarily the State and
the warring factions, but also of the peacekeeping
forces. Peacekeeping operations should focus more
on the situation of civilians in armed conflicts, and
Security Council resolutions that establish mandates
for peacekeeping operations should reflect that moral
imperative.

We must increase our efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), in order to protect vulnerable
women in armed conflict. In building peace, we must
take women seriously. We must include their views
and interests in political agreements and peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the progress that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has made in
that regard, and encourage further cooperation with
UN-Women. All such actions should help to protect
women and contribute to combating sexual and gender-
based violence in areas of conflict.

The Netherlands continues to champion the global
principle of the responsibility to protect, and we call
on all Member States to support that worthy cause. We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
subject for 2013 (S/2013/399).

prrevention and protection fail, accountability and
prosecution shouldcome intoplay. Information-gathering
during conflicts is therefore an essential element of
prevention, since it creates a basis for prosecution.
Statistics and data on lives lost, women raped, children
killed and schools burned make for horrible reading,
but they also create a basis for accountability and for
bringing perpetrators to justice, either at the national
or international level. For that reason, the Netherlands
is co-funding a centre for civilians in armed conflict,
aimed at developing guidelines for peacekeepers in the
field on preventing harm to civilians and setting up
civilian-harm tracking mechanisms in Mali.

I would also like to reiterate the concern voiced by
the observer of the European Union about the situation
in Syria. Those responsible for the crimes committed
in that country should be held accountable and brought
before a court. We renew our call on the Syrian
authorities to allow full and unfettered access to the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. The Netherlands
is honoured to host the Syria Justice and Accountability
Centre in The Hague. That important institution is
funded by more than 40 States and organizations. It
takes a non-partisan approach, reaches out to many
Syrian individuals, communities and organizations
and works closely with many international actors. Such
data-gathering creates a basis for accountability and is
therefore crucial long-term work for the protection of
civilians. Finally, in specific cases, the International
Criminal Court can bring justice to civilians harmed
by armed conflict.

To sum up, the protection of civilians is closely
related to prevention and prosecution. Let us work
closely together in applying those three aspects in a
comprehensive approach. Together we can achieve
freedom from fear for civilians in areas of conflict, and
let our common endeavours be inspired by the view
across the East River of the Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Park.

