Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I would like to join
previous speakers in warmly welcoming Senator Biden
and in thanking him for his encouraging remarks on
future cooperation between the United States and the
United Nations.

I would also like to thank Mr. Klein for his very
comprehensive briefing. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on this subject.

The day after tomorrow will mark five years
since the signing in Paris of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, which, to a large extent, remains
a blueprint for lasting peace and a better future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Over the past years, the
people of that country, assisted by the international
community, has come a long way towards
reconciliation, the creation of a common democratic
State and economic reconstruction. Despite the
undeniable positive changes in that country, much has
yet to be done to ensure the realization of the goals set
forth in Dayton and Paris.

My country is of the view that the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
continues to make a vital contribution to the overall
efforts of the people of Bosnia and the international
community aimed at the full implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Accords. Against this background,
my delegation remains supportive of the activities of
the Mission, conducted jointly with other bodies and
agencies ofthe United Nations system on the ground.

We recognize the special role of the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) as the core part of the
Mission in establishing effective law enforcement
agencies in accordance with the best international
standards. The professionalism of the IPTF staff, who
continue to discharge their mandate under the difficult
circumstances of the reduction of the authorized

S/PV.4245

 

strength, which is mainly due to the additional
requirements for Kosovo, should be acknowledged.

My delegation is satisfied with the results of the
Mission's activities for the past six months and
commends Mr. Klein and his staff for a number of
important achievements made over this period.
Specifically, we welcome the elaboration of a
comprehensive Mandate Implementation Plan with a
proposed timetable of December 2002 for the
completion of the core mandate of UNMIBH. In our
view, the division of the Mission's work into six core
programmes is a correct and efficient approach to
accomplishing the existing mandate.

In the context of the police reform, we recognize
the importance of the United Nations Mission project
on the establishment of a transparent Law Enforcement
Personnel Registry, and encourage it to pursue its
efforts in this direction. As regards the police
restructuring, of particular significance in our view are
all steps by the United Nations Mission to change the
ethnic composition of the police forces in the country
so that they better reflect the society they serve and are
of a multi-ethnic character.

In the field of cooperation between the police and
the criminal justice system, my delegation believes that
more attention should be paid by the Mission to the
establishment of a court police service in order to
provide adequate court and judicial security, as well as
mechanisms for the protection ofjudges and witnesses.

My country is concerned at the increase in illegal
migration and human trafficking through Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This problem can be addressed through
the expansion of the State Border Service, provided
there is sufficient funding. We note the support
provided to Bosnia and Herzegovina in this regard by
the international donors, and encourage them to
continue their contributions.

My delegation views also as a real achievement
the deployment in East Timor of the first United
Nations civilian police contingent from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In conclusion, let me say a few words about the
general situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in a
broader context. We share the view that Bosnia and
Herzegovina today is at an important crossroads in its
history, five years since Dayton and after the third
general elections, held on 11 November, the first in a
new political environment brought about by the
positive democratic changes in Croatia and Yugoslavia.

In these conditions, it is critically important for
the new leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to, so to
speak, catch the winds of change and set the country on
the right course for its future in Europe - to become a
part of all regional processes of Euro-integration and to
have its bilateral relations with its neighbours
normalized. In this respect, we welcome the
Declaration of the European Union-Western Balkans
Summit held recently in Zagreb.

My country is encouraged by the decision of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency to establish
diplomatic relations with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. This decision is obviously an important
step towards reaching the objectives of the Dayton
Agreement and strengthening the democratic changes
in Yugoslavia. We also note with satisfaction the
further development of constructive bilateral relations
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
basis of their commitments to the fulfilment of the
Dayton Accords, mutual respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

For its part, the international community, with the
United Nations Mission at the forefront, should
continue its assistance to the people of Bosnia to create
and assume their full responsibility for their own
sovereign and multi-ethnic State. As an IPTF
contributor and member of the Peace Implementation
Council, Ukraine remains fully committed to that task.

