The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative. I
welcome this opportunity to discuss the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The United Nations effort in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of our largest and most
complex operations. With the help of many partners,
the Congolese people are rebuilding their country. The
2
United Nations remains committed to fully supporting
these efforts.

Allow me to briefly address the four topics under
discussion today.

First, with respect to security and the protection
of civilians, security has improved in most of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the east, there
has been progress in the dismantling of foreign and
Congolese armed groups. That is the result of a
combination of factors: military operations conducted
in accordance with the conditionality policy of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
effective programmes to disarm, demobilize and
repatriate foreign ex-combatants, efforts to extend
State authority and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's improved relations with neighbouring Great
Lakes countries.

All of these achievements must be sustained.

Foreign and Congolese armed groups continue to
pose significant threats. The humanitarian situation
remains serious, with 1.7 million people displaced.
And, of course, human rights violations, including
murder, sexual violence, and the looting and burning of
villages continue to have large-scale humanitarian
consequences.

(spoke in English)

The second topic I wish to address is that of
elections.

Properly conducted, transparent elections can
ease tensions and build transparent and accountable
institutions. But they also entail risks, especially in
societies divided by or recovering from conflict.

The presidential and National Assembly elections
scheduled for 28 November, to be followed by
provincial and local elections, can help to further
consolidate peace and stability. Those elections must
be timely, transparent, credible, peaceful and secure,
offering all Congolese a full opportunity to participate
freely without fear of harassment or violence. We must
do our utmost to ensure that violence does not break
out before, during or after the elections. We have
invested much, and there is much to lose. This is
critical to ensuring the country's continued progress. I
urge all Congolese stakeholders to work together to
ensure that the elections meet these basic conditions.
11-34509
MONUSCO is expected to continue to provide
logistical and technical support, for which the Mission
will require additional resources. The Mission also
stands ready to support the work of national and
international election observers. In addition, it will be
critical to provide the necessary equipment to the
Congolese police units that are being trained on
electoral security by MONUSCO, France and the
Government.

Third are the rule of law, governance and
institution-building. Long-term peace, stability and
development will require strong national institutions,
accessible to all, that can provide basic services and,
most fundamentally, security and rule of law. I
welcome the increased leadership of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government in addressing
sexual violence, including the fight against impunity.
This has included strengthening the military justice
system and prosecuting some of those accused of
sexual and gender-based violence and other crimes.
Other advances include steps to establish special
chambers to investigate and prosecute serious human
rights violations.

However, I remain deeply troubled by ongoing
reports of widespread sexual violence across the
country. I once again urge the Congolese authorities to
do more to put an end to such crimes. The
consequences of sexual violence are profound and far-
reaching. In addition to its untold harm to victims, such
violence deepens conflicts and worsens already dire
conditions. This is especially true when perpetrators go
unpunished. I urge international partners to provide
necessary support for the Congolese national police,
army and justice system, and to make identifying and
prosecuting the perpetrators a priority.

At the same time, we must ensure that the victims
of sexual violence receive proper attention and care.
Pursuant to resolution 1888 (2009), we have deployed
a team of experts that is working with national
authorities to strengthen the rule of law. The
professionalization of the national security services and
the strengthening of the judiciary are essential to
human rights, humanitarian access and the protection
of civilians. The cycle of impunity must end.

(spoke in French)

Fourth and finally is economic development.
There cannot be lasting stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo without economic recovery,
11-34509

reconstruction and development. I am encouraged by
emerging efforts to combat the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, for example through such regional
initiatives as the Lusaka summit convened by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Such steps can help the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to prevent acts that drive conflict and deprive
the country of vital revenues.

The Congolese people should be proud of the
gains of the past decade, but the situation remains
fragile. The challenges loom large. The successful
conduct of credible elections will be a milestone on the
road to stability. I encourage the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, national
stakeholders and the international community to jointly
identify the priorities of the next phase and the nature
of the United Nations support. The United Nations
remains committed to working closely with all partners
to provide all possible support.

