Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I am very gratified at your presence
in the Security Council, and I would like to take this
opportunity to express my country's congratulations
and commendation to the United Kingdom for the
extraordinarily generous and responsible effort that it
has made in the Mano River region, and in Sierra
Leone in particular.

This event presents an opportunity to reflect upon
lessons learned, and the very focus of this seminar is
already a lesson learned. For my country, the key to the
peace process in the Mano River region is the regional
approach. All national efforts that we may make to
promote peace must have a regional dimension. No
country acting alone in the Mano River region can
create the conditions necessary to guarantee peace,
security, stability and development.

Accordingly, what is needed is an international
regional effort. The increasingly violent situation in
Liberia demonstrates this fact. If the international
community fails to give proper attention to the
humanitarian situation and the violence in Liberia, then
the efforts that we may make in other countries of the
region, particularly in Sierra Leone, may well prove to
be reversible.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea, much
better than any of us, has described the regional
dimension of the problems of peace, security, economic
development, protection of the environment and social
security in the Mano River region. For this reason, my
country feels that the Rabat process is a key factor in
fostering mutual trust among the countries of the
region. However difficult the situation may be when it
comes to building trust among the countries of the
Mano River region, we would appeal for a firm
commitment on the part of the three Governments to
carry out the practical measures agreed at the summit
meeting held under the auspices of the King of
Morocco and in the subsequent technical meetings
mainly devoted to security.

Another key factor for the Mano River region is
institutionalizing the political processes through the
strengthening of democratic institutions and the
creation of modes of representation to enable the
various political actors to find the right channels
through which to act on the political scene -
particularly during elections, because this is where the
power struggle should be acted out. A large national
and international effort is needed to guarantee freedom
of expression, freedom of the press, political parties,
non-governmental organizations and the force of public
opinion.

In Sierra Leone we have precisely the
combination of will and factors. We have the United
Nations plus these factors: the United Kingdom, as a
fundamental ally of Sierra Leone and the United
Nations in seeking peace in the region; the
neighbouring countries, some of which have made a
significant contribution to achieving that peace; the
international community as a whole; and, no less
important, the far-reaching role of Sierra Leone
society, its non-governmental organizations and civil
organizations and - let us state very clearly - the
women of Sierra Leone, who have been a decisive
factor in making this process fruitful.

In Mexico, we agree on the factors for success, as
already described by Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno. The factors of success to be learned from
the situation in Sierra Leone are in the first place
certainly the clarity of the objectives. The main
objective has been dismantling the structures of
violence and restoring a new constitutional political
order. With regard to his goal, there has been great
intensity in establishing the major commitments of the
United Nations and of the international community on
a scale commensurate with the objectives. The
resources applied were also consonant with the scale of
those objectives.
The continuity of these endeavours is now the
next lesson to learn in order to be certain that the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) is
really a success story. The Security Council must
proceed to a gradual and orderly withdrawal of the
Mission, while at the same time ensuring that the
Government of Sierra Leone is in a position to control
effectively its territory and to assure its physical
integrity, internal and external defence and social
security.

The integrated nature of efforts in Sierra Leone's
political, security, humanitarian assistance and
economic and social development areas are central
factors in its success. The international community's
support has focused not only on advances made in the
political process, but also on meeting the population's
basic needs, as well as on the demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants and on the humanitarian
situation of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Here we should definitely take into account
Mr. Guehenno 's recommendations concerning
sustained efforts to reintegrate ex-combatants and the
recommendations concerning the need to continue
working hard to combat persistent sexual abuse,
exploitation and violence, which, as we have seen,
have been major features of the war in Sierra Leone.

One central aspect of the lessons learned is the
coordination and integration of efforts among all the
agencies concerned.

I would like to note that, in the particular case of
Sierra Leone, we have seen quite clearly that the
Security Council must pay much greater interest and
attention in its communications with the personnel of
United Nations agencies working in the field. The
Secretary-General's reports fully comply with their
purpose, but the Views, appraisals and comments of the
personnel in daily contact with the region's problems
might assist the Council in better understanding the
decision-making process on the basic issues that face
us.

I would like to refer briefly to some of the lessons
learned with respect to the sanctions applied in Sierra
Leone by the Committee which I chair. First, the
population must perceive the sanctions as mechanisms
for contributing to peace and security and not as acts of
reprisal or of political reprimand. It is very important
to have the support of the population if the sanctions
are to be effective. An additional effort by the United
Nations is required to explain to the population the
nature of the sanctions imposed. In the specific case of
Liberia, in the Mano River region, the population
perceives the sanctions to be unjust and not a means of
bringing about change in the behaviour of its political
leaders and rebel groups.

Secondly, in the case of Sierra Leone, the arms
embargo has had a limited impact, because the actual
presence of UNAMSIL forces and the successful
disarmament process have, in fact, led to the
eradication of the circulation of weapons in the
country.

The sanctions are not - and will not be - a
guarantee that weapons do not pass back into Sierra
Leone. Accordingly, compliance with the sanctions by
third parties must be emphasized, so that weapons do
not get back into the hands of former combatants or
those who might wish to use them to disrupt order.
Thus, an additional effort is needed on the part of the
community of nations to identify the origin of the
weapons circulating in the Mano River region and to
put an end to the trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. None of the countries of the subregion has
the capacity in itself to curb these illicit flows. The
commitment by the States of the region and outside of
the region is necessary in order to enforce the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) moratorium and effectively to apply the
national, regional and international measures provided
for in the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

Sanctions regimes have the objective and
temporary function of achieving the peace objectives
set by the Council. In the case of the arms embargoes
in the Mano river region, it is necessary to establish the
appropriate mechanisms, beyond sanctions, to
institutionalize the prohibition of illicit flows of
weapons. Those mechanisms should possess the means
to ensure their observance, even after the ending of
sanctions.

The lesson learned from the diamond embargoes
in the Mano river region is that the embargoes cannot
in themselves necessarily have the desired
consequences and that they have yielded mixed results.
In some aspects these are positive, while in others they
are limited and even counterproductive. Given the
nature of diamonds, which are easily traded and which
easily evade controls, embargoes must be only the
starting point for a regional and international effort to
create certification systems that will regulate the
diamond industry to the benefit of the economic
development of peoples, sparing them from the
fomenting of violence. If there is no regional system
for the certification of origin for diamonds, they will
continue to flow from one country to another, escaping
controls. Such a system must also be part of the efforts
carried out through the Kimberly Process. In the
diamond-trading sector, it is necessary to strengthen
government monitoring structures to eradicate
corruption.

Guided by national criteria and norms, the
international community should increase capital
investment in modern methods of diamond production,
creating employment opportunities for local
populations. The gradual eradication of traditional
diamond mining methods - taking into account the
circumstances in each country - should be pursued to
favour the rational economic exploitation of those
resources.

A review and updating of the lists of individuals
subject to travel restrictions under Security Council
sanctions should be carried out to stimulate political
processes in the countries of the Mano river region. In
the case of Sierra Leone, former combatants from rebel
groups who have disarmed, joined political
organizations, taken part in recent elections and
accepted the election results should benefit from the
process. Their participation in Sierra Leone's political
life and their commitment not to take up arms again are
factors that should be taken into account by the
members of the Security Council in implementing such
sanctions.

I wish to conclude by saying, as Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno has said, that much remains to be
done in Sierra Leone. But the international effort made
so far is a guarantee that in Sierra Leone and in the rest
of the Mano river region, with the participation of the
international community and the active participation of
the societies of those three countries, it will be possible
to establish an order of peace, security and sustainable
development.

