Mr. Koffi Diby (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
am very pleased and honoured to address this gathering
on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
current Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), who sends his fraternal
greetings. In my capacity as current Chairman of
the ECOWAS Council of Ministers, I express our
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for December, and thank you for taking the initiative
of convening this important meeting on the situation in
the Sahel, which demands a rapid response in the areas
of peace and security, humanitarian assistance, human
rights and development.

Today's meeting follows up on the high-level
meeting on the Sahel held in New York on 26 September
at the initiative of the Secretary-General, which
enabled broad consensus on the part of the international
community on two points: first, the urgent need to
support a United Nations integrated regional strategy
for the Sahel on the issues of governance, security,
humanitarian action, human rights and sustainable
development, in accordance with resolution 2056
(2012); and, secondly, the urgent need for international
intervention in Mali in the framework of our collective
security.

With regard to the United Nations integrated
regional strategy for the Sahel that the whole world
expects to see in the next few weeks, it is important
to note that particular emphasis should be placed
on strengthening intraregional, interregional and
international cooperation and coordination with a
view to better addressing, together, the complex,
multidimensional and transnational problems the Sahel
region is facing. Those problems are the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons; trafficking in arms,
drugs and other banned goods; trafficking in persons,
hostage-taking and the recruitment of child soldiers;
the forced displacement of populations, whether
because of changes in grazing areas or armed conflict
and natural disasters that create refugees and internally
displaced persons; the impoverishment of populations
due to extreme weather conditions; violation of human
rights and desecration of sacred places, including some
recognized by UNESCO as World Heritage sites; and,
to top it all, the presence of ever more rapidly growing,
highly dangerous terrorist groups with large quantities
of sophisticated weapons from the arsenals of the
former Libyan regime.

In the face of all those threats, it is important that
the integrated strategy be developed as soon as possible,
endorsed by all and implemented - not only for the
benefit of the people of the Sahel countries, of course,
but also for the welfare ofAfrican peoples in general and
people around the world who suffer in various ways as
a consequence of those evils. In that regard, I welcome
the appointment of the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for the Sahel, former Prime Minister Romano
Prodi. He has already set to work, paying a preliminary
visit to many heads of State in the Sahel region and
holding a meeting in Rome on 7 December to identify
the essential concrete and coordinated actions needed
to resolve the crisis in the region.

Regarding the multidimensional crisis in Mali,
which represents a synthesis and culmination of the
threats and ills afflicting the Sahel - a region that,
it should be stressed, includes several ECOWAS
countries - I would like to reiterate here and now the
urgency and diligence with which the Security Council
should be authorizing the deployment of an African-led
international support mission to Mali and the necessary
logistical and financial support for it. I wish to recall that
the request to deploy an international support mission
such as the Council is currently considering was made
by the entire African continent, speaking in one voice,
including the Government of Mali, ECOWAS, which I
represent, and the African Union.

Northern Mali is gradually being transformed into
a sanctuary for terrorist groups engaged, with total
impunity, in the worst possible abuses and massive
violations of human rights. That terrorist presence
threatens every State in West Africa and the Sahel,
but also those of the Maghreb and beyond. We are
talking about a real danger to international peace and
security, which therefore demands a comprehensive and
determined response on the part of the international
community. That is why we believe that the deployment
of an international support mission is so vital to help
restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali
and to end the terrorist presence in our lands. For that
to happen, it is essential that the Security Council adopt
a resolution authorizing the deployment of a support
mission in the next few days. We must act urgently and
now, because any further delay in its adoption is likely
to strengthen the terrorists' position, and the price of
their removal will be even higher for us all.

