Mr. Essonghe (Gabon)(spoke in French): Like others
who spoke before me, I would like to express my
appreciation and thanks to the Secretary-General for the
very relevant recommendations contained in his report now
before us dealing with this issue of great importance, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I welcome here the presence of the Secretary-General,
and I am grateful also to you, Sir, for the excellent
initiative in bringing this item to the agenda of the Security
Council.

During the many discussions which the Security
Council has held on matters relating to humanitarian
protection and respect for human rights, my delegation has
stressed the need for all States Members of the United
Nations to sign and ratify the main instruments of
humanitarian law, law on refugees and all other human
rights laws. I can never overemphasize this point - and
this is a point also made by the Secretary-General in his
recommendations - that there is a need for everybody to
implement the provisions of the relevant conventions on the
protection and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.

In this area, everybody has to cooperate, particularly
in refusing to take in those responsible for violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law and in
surrendering such persons to the international legal bodies
established for that purpose, namely, the International
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and soon
the International Criminal Court in Rome.

My delegation agrees with all the measures proposed
by the Secretary-General regarding preventing conflicts
which are the source of such unspeakable suffering and
give rise to such serious violations of human rights.

We also agree that the emphasis must be placed on
establishing early warning systems or mechanisms. Not
only States would be involved in this, but humanitarian and
human rights organizations and study groups should also
contribute, so that any early indications of possible
situations of armed conflict could be identified. It is our
firm belief that preventing conflicts would mean people
could be spared useless suffering and would assist in
making available considerable resources which could be
used for development.

It is our View that the United Nations, while
developing its early warning system, should also help in the
establishment and strengthening of similar mechanisms at
the regional and subregional levels, as indicated in
Security Council resolution 1197 (1998), adopted pursuant
to the work of the working group set up in resolution
1170 (1998).

We are in favour of negotiating humanitarian
corridors with the parties to a conflict in order to enable
humanitarian organizations to reach and assist populations
in need in combat areas. In this connection, we stress the
non-discriminatory and neutral character of humanitarian
assistance, the necessity of cooperation by all involved,
including States neighbouring conflict zones, and the fact
that no party should consider the actions of humanitarian
organizations as a hostile or partisan act.

Sanctions do make sense as a deterrent against those
who violate human rights and international humanitarian
law. But they must be judiciously targeted and respected.
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the existence of
Security Council sanctions committees, whose goals are
to insure respect for sanctions.

In this connection, we support the initiative taken by
the Chairman of the Sanctions Committee on the situation
in Angola to investigate violations of sanctions imposed
on UNITA, given the length of time that the conflict has
been taking place in that country and the fact that it has
already produced numerous victims and has caused a
grave humanitarian catastrophe to drag on.

My delegation also supports the pressing need for
arms embargoes against armed rebel movements and
groups, given the impact of small-calibre arms on the
security of populations and therefore of States. But the
effectiveness of these measures has to be strengthened.
This was a matter dealt with by the group of experts
established pursuant to resolution 1170 (1998), which
prepared a draft resolution which the Council adopted as
resolution 1196 (1998). We must ensure the
implementation of that resolution - and, indeed, of all
others - if we truly want to protect the rights of civilians
and ensure security and neutrality in refugee camps.

This leads me to speak of recommendations on
integrating human rights and humanitarian concerns with
peacekeeping activities. We agree with the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that operations
should be multidisciplinary so as to include activities
related to civilian police, humanitarian assistance,
disarmament and demobilization, combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and, of
course, human rights. This need to take a comprehensive

 

approach to peacekeeping presupposes a clear and
unambiguous definition of the tasks set forth in the mandate
for any peacekeeping operation. in order that it can ensure
the protection of civilians and support humanitarian
organizations in their assistance and aid work.

Finally. the populations that have suffered horribly
from armed conflicts will judge the commitment of the
Security Council and of the iutemational community to
their plight by the ability of the Council and the
international community to settle and, especially, prevent
conflict. mobilize resources for actual operations on the
ground and implement their own measures. We also
believe that unless there is a realistic policy to reduce the
causes of conflict, any action, even assistance, will remain
only a superficial measure. We therefore call for equitable
treatment by the United Nations of all conflict situations
throughout the world.

In conclusion, let me say that my delegation has no
objection to supporting the draft resolution before us.

