Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
we would like to welcome the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard
She Okitundu, and to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

Peru is especially concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in the eastern part of the
country, and the presence of armed groups in the Kasai
region. We are concerned about the vulnerability of
civilians and the increase in displaced persons and
refugees. We are compelled to condemn the ongoing
human rights violations, including numerous cases of
sexual violence. We are also compelled to condemn
the attacks suffered by peacekeepers, and offer our
condolences and solidarity over the deaths of Tanzanian
and Pakistani peacekeepers.

We are concerned about the Mission's security
failures and vulnerabilities, which have been revealed
by the special investigation team led by Mr. Dimitry
Titov, Assistant Secretary-General for the Rule of
Law and Security Institutions. We believe it important
to follow his recommendations to strengthen staff
security.

We reject acts of intimidation against MONUSCO
personnel attributed to the security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The latter must
cooperate with the Mission in its functions of monitoring
and protecting civilians, mandated by the Council. That
includes civilian access to detention centres, hospitals
and other public spaces.

We stress the importance of successfully holding
the postponed presidential, legislative and provincial
elections. We believe that MONUSCO should continue
to provide the logistical support required to that end.
However, the Government has the responsibility to lead
the process and guarantee free and fair elections. In that
regard, we welcome the Government's announcement
that President is not eligible for re-election under the
country's Constitution. That should promote a better
climate for the due development of the electoral process,
which should inspire confidence and mass participation
of citizens and political groups in the country.

To that end, we must protect and promote
human rights, including the rights of expression and
association. We consider it important to promote in
particular the participation of women and young people
in the process. It is also necessary to investigate and
prosecute those responsible for the numerous and
systematic violations that have been recorded.

We must also address the alarming humanitarian
situation of thousands of citizens. Particularly worrisome
is the ongoing flow of refugees to neighbouring
countries that we have seen since the beginning of the
year, and the new outbreak of cholera caused by limited
access to potable water, which requires an urgent
response from the international community.

Given the situation and the problems observed, we
conclude by expressing our support for MONUSCO,
which we believe remains crucial for the protection
of civilians, the defence of human rights, stability, the
fight against impunity and the building of sustainable
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

