Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): Let me also thank
Mr. Simonovie for his briefing today. Ukraine values
his important contribution and that of his team.

The mission's latest report reveals the true nature of
the criminal organizations that are committing terrible
abuses against our citizens. Entire towns and villages are
being used as human shields. Gunmen are kidnapping
civilians for the purpose of ransom, exchange or use as
labour force; others, they are torturing and murdering.

How do those crimes help the people they
claim to represent? Their tactics are nothing more
than terrorism, threatening the lives, health, well-
being of our compatriots. It is the obligation of the
Government to protect its own citizens. That is the
paramount objective of Ukraine's operation against the
terrorists - terrorists who have refused to enter into a
political dialogue, terrorists who are led by foreigners
who are working for the secret service of the Russian
Federation.
The monitoring mission's report also clearly
demonstrates that the Russian occupation of Crimea
has led to harassment and discrimination against ethnic
Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars, members of religious
minorities and activists who are opposed to the
so-called Crimean referendum of 16 March. Even now,
people continue to disappear. Ukrainian and Crimean
Tatar newspapers are under threat of being shut down.
We are deeply concerned with the violations. We
underline that as the occupying Power, it is Russia's
responsibility to ensure the observance of human rights
and freedoms of the population of Crimea. On our part,
the Government of Ukraine will take all feasible efforts
to protect our compatriots' rights and freedoms in the
occupied territories.

Ukraine will not tolerate politically motivated
cases against Nadia Savchenko and five other members
of the military, which are vivid examples of Russia's
negligence of human rights standards. Allegations
brought against our citizens have no legal grounds and
are used as instruments of political manipulation and
pressure.
There is no humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.
However the growing number of internally displaced
persons from Crimea and the Luhansk and Donetsk
regions is disturbing. At the same time, the credibility
of the information on the huge number of refugees
from Ukraine to Russia presented by the Russian
authorities is very doubtful and needs to be assessed by
international experts.

The Government of Ukraine accepts the
recommendations contained in the monitoring mission's
report. Ukraine is ready to further develop and deepen
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in order to ensure the
protection of human rights, taking into account all the
needs of the population of every region of our country.

We fully acknowledge that there is still a lot to be
done to strengthen the rule of law and democracy in
our country. Yesterday in his speech at the Constituent
Assembly of the National Council of Reforms,
President Petro Poroshencko said that a war could not
be an excuse for the lack of reform. We see the recently
signed Association Agreement with the European Union
as integral document that provides the framework for
reform in Ukraine.

The successful investigation of high-profile cases,
such as human rights violations during the protests
in Independence Square and the tragedy in Odessa.
is a matter of honour to the leadership of honour to
the leadership of Ukraine and remains a top priority.
Ukraine's law enforcement agency will cooperate fully
with the United Nations mission in monitoring the
process of that investigation.

The downing of Flight MH-17 is a tragedy that may
constitute a grave violation of international law that
may amount to war crimes. The Government of Ukraine
is making every effort to ensure a fair international
investigation of the incident, in accordance with
resolution 2166 (2014). We reiterate our call to Russia
to use its influence on the illegal armed groups in order
to make them grant it full and unimpeded access to the
crash site for the international investigation team.

We have conclusive evidence that Flight MH-17
was downed by Russian-backed terrorists with a Buk
missile system, which was fired by a crew and which
had been delivered from Russia. That was confirmed by
our intelligence - intercepted telephone conversations
of the terrorists and satellite images.

In conclusion, I would like to just say that the
situation on the Ukrainian/Russian border remains
extremely tense. Russia continues to build up its
military along the border with Ukraine and to shell
settlements and positions of the counter-terrorism
forces of Ukraine located near the border.

Russian military aircraft and drones violate
Ukraine's air space daily. There are serious grounds
to expect a large-scale and open invasion of Russian
troops into Ukraine, under the guise of peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we want to state that no
Russian forces can enter the territory of Ukraine
without the consent of Ukrainian authorities. Any
Russian troops entering the territory of Ukraine will be
regarded as aggressors and treated accordingly.

