Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation is very
grateful to Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Stephen O'Brien and
Mr. Muhannad Hadi of the World Food Programme for
their briefings.

Malaysia is gravely concerned about the very
bleak picture of the situation on the ground, with
the escalation in violence, the attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, the threat of famine, the
collapse of the health system and the threat of a cholera
outbreak. Regrettaby, unlike other crises in the region,
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen has remained largely
under the radar. Last week, a side event on Yemen
was held at the United Nations where we were shown
a documentary by the BBC on the threat of famine
in the country. While the international community's
attention is focused on deaths due to ongoing fighting,
we have largely overlooked the slow but widespread
deaths brought about by starvation and lack of medical
treatment. Mothers have had to watch their children
and babies wither away before their very eyes due to
the lack of milk, food and medicine. Even bringing
their children to the hospital did little to improve their
situation due to the collapse of the country's health
system and the dire lack of food, fuel and medicine.
That situation is simply unacceptable.

As we have heard today, a staggering 14 million
people in Yemen are suffering from hunger and
malnutrition, over 3 million have been driven from
their homes and 21 million people are in need of
humanitarian aid. We call on all parties to agree to a
lasting and permanent ceasefire that would facilitate
the flow of desperately needed food, fuel and medical
supplies into the country. We also urge the parties to
open up Yemeni air space to commercial aircraft and to
evacuate those in need of urgent medical treatment. We
join others in condemning all attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Yemen, including the
recent attacks on the marketplace, a water well and a
funeral ceremony. We also condemn attacks on Saudi
territory by the Houthi militias, particularly the recent
targeting of the Holy City of Makka Al-Mukarama.

We support calls by the Secretary-General for
full and independent inquiries to investigate gross
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law so as to ensure justice and accountability.

The continuing conflict has also led to a marked
increase in the number of children being recruited by
parties to the conflict. About 2 million children are
currently out of school due to the ongoing fighting
and insecurity and are being deprived of their right
to education. That situation has been exploited by our
militias that are actively going to villages to recruit
children. Some have estimated that up to one third of
fighters in armed groups are children. Many of them
are guarding checkpoints, but they are also on the front
line fighting. Malaysia urges all parties to the conflict
to adhere to their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. All parties must make every effort
to protect children, civilians and civilian objects,
including in ensuring immediate and unimpeded
humanitarian access.

With the breakdown in the talks in Kuwait, the
conflicting parties in Yemen seem further and further
away from the promising steps they had taken towards
peace several months ago. The recent cessation of
hostilities, as we have seen, is far from sufficient to
address the humanitarian disaster in Yemen. We fully
concur with the assessment by Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien that the best humanitarian relief is
to end the conflict. Malaysia echoes the view held by
the international community that there is no military
solution to the conflict. However, the conflicting
parties themselves need to believe in the need for a
political solution. Prolonging the violence will not
benefit either side. Terrorist groups will only exploit
the violence, which will lead to a further catastrophic
humanitarian situation.

A peaceful resolution of the conflict in Yemen
hinges on the political will of the conflicting parties
themselves, but the Security Council has an important
role to play in bringing about the desired outcome by
exerting its authority and its influence on the relevant
parties and by utilizing the various tools at its disposal.
The Council must send a clear signal to the conflicting
parties on the need to cease fighting and to return to
the negotiating table in order to protect civilians and
civilian objects, to ensure immediate and unimpeded
humanitarian access and to adhere to their obligations
under international law. We need to continue to
support the tireless efforts of Special Envoy Ahmed to
secure peace in Yemen. We urge all parties to engage
constructively in negotiating the road map proposed by
Mr. Ahmed, with the aim of ending the conflict and
reaching a political agreement for the sake of peace and
stability in Yemen and the region.

