Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our two briefers and commend all the work that
their teams are doing on the ground.

I think that we have heard a very wide-ranging
description of what is going on the ground at the moment.
There are some very good parts, as Mr. Lowcock
said, but also some things that we need to watch very
carefully. I will speak to those points in a moment.

Iwanttobeginbyexpressing supportforourprogress
to date with regard to the political process. Martin's
plan to move forward, with political consultations
in parallel, with the ongoing implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement is very welcome. We obviously
support that action as quickly as possible. We welcome
the presence of Lieutenant General Guha, and we will
have a chance to hear from him in consultations. But
in the meantime, the reduction in violations of the
Stockholm Agreement is very welcome.

The United Kingdom was also pleased that during
the General Assembly high-level week we were able to
have meetings with a number of colleagues and with
Martin to support his efforts. We are also pleased that
on 29 August the Security Council issued a presidential
statement on Yemen (S/PRST/2019/9). As we have
heard from both Mark and Mr. Griffiths, now really is
the time to make one last big effort in order to get some
of these things over the line.

Staying with the humanitarian situation, I think

Mark was absolutely right to remind us that despite the
good news - and I agree that the news about the fuel
ships is very good - we still have some underlying
matters that could tip the situation back towards famine
or some other risks. Thirteen people dying per day
is clearly too many and that is degrading the whole
situation on the ground. I understand what Mr. Lowcock
said about the need for foreign exchange and also what
all these factors, including the provision of fuel, mean
in terms of their knock-on effect on the ability of the
people of Yemen to have access to food. I think there is
a vicious cycle here that we need to watch out for.

Turning to the political side, we have been very
worried about the increased intensity of Houthi
attacks on Saudi Arabia over recent months. But the
announcement on 20 September that the Houthis would
cease strikes on Saudi Arabia and the welcoming
remarks issued by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have
been an important step towards de-escalation and we
hope that further positive action can now happen on
the ground.

With respect to what Martin has been saying about
signs of hope, I think we all want those to crystallize
and develop. Again, it is clear that we are close to an
agreement, though not quite there. I believe that, from
the Security Council, we should appeal to all parties to
give this one last push to get it across the line. I think
that is really important, and we can talk more about that.

When it comes to the south, I believe that inclusivity
is the key to stability. We want a deal that brings southern
representatives into the Yemeni Government and that,
in turn, would hopefully be a self-sustaining, virtuous
cycle. We commend the Saudis and others for the talks
that have taken place and the Yemeni Government for all
its work with the Southern Transitional Council. What
Martin said about the unilateral release of detainees on
30 September by the Houthis was, obviously, positive,
and I am very pleased to see that the International
Committee of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
is taking part in that. We hope that there will be more
such measures as we work towards a peaceful solution
to the conflict in Yemen.

I want to draw attention to two specific points.

The first is about the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
As Mark has made very clear several times in this
Chamber, a rupture or explosion would mean over a
million barrels of oil leaking into the Red Sea. It is
critical to do something about this in order to protect
the fisheries and livelihoods of ordinary Yemenis, as
well as to prevent environmental impacts.

We need more efforts on humanitarian access,
which is deteriorating across the country, as Mark
said. We call on all parties to immediately comply with
resolution 2451 (2018).

Secondly, the issue of funding and disbursements
has been raised. Developments during the high-level
week on this front were most welcome. We commend the
Governments of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait for their very generous disbursements,
which in total came to around at $800 million, which
is very significant and demonstrates real international
leadership. We therefore express our gratitude to those
countries. However, we note that the response remains
underfunded by $1.5 billion, and therefore encourage
all donors to consider providing further funding to
the United Nations appeal. The United Kingdom has
brought forward funding from our nearly $300-million
pledge and provided 87 per cent of the funding we
pledged to United Nations this year.

In conclusion, I wanted to raise the case of the
Baha'i. The Baha'i are being persecuted for their
religious beliefs in areas under Houthi control. We
condemn such mistreatment and believe that the
continued persecution of the Baha'i is a matter to which
the Council should devote continued attention.

