Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Resolution
2325 (2016), adopted today, is a most significant and
historic resolution, co-sponsored by more than 60
United Nations States Members, including my country,
and is the most noteworthy follow-up to resolution 1540
(2004). We commend the immense progress achieved,
but acknowledge the many strides still to be made. We
find that countries vary in their response and ability to
adhere to the resolution's expectations. My delegation
therefore proposes the following measures.

First of all, we must exercise strict control over the
implementation of national commitments, since not all
States execute evenly the commitments.

Secondly, we must strengthen our close and
continuous interaction with both the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) as well as with wider United Nations membership,
through sharing technologies and experiences that are
not only positive but also negative, so that we may
avoid repetition in other countries or regions. There
is an obvious need for greater outreach by the 1540
Committee and its experts to not only support its
implementation but also to enhance capacity-building
to enable countries to formulate their long-term national
action plans for achieving the aims of resolution 1540
(2004) with enhanced domestic legislation, compliance
with other related non-proliferation regimes and
counter-terrorism instruments. Focus should also be
placed on related trade controls; illicit trafficking,
non-proliferation and disarmament; and international
counter-terrorism instruments. We therefore support
the idea of developing inter-agency coordination with
proper frameworks and mechanisms.

Thirdly, it is evident that we will also need to
work closely with national points of contact in each
county, as well as focus on strengthening a network
of such contacts. As funding for travel will be
limited, innovative strategies will have to be adapted.
Since scientific achievements in the nuclear field are
accelerating rapidly, I wish to highlight Kazhakstani
President Nursultan Nazarbayev's initiative to establish
a United Nations register of scientific developments
leading to the creation and advancement of weapons
of mass destruction, which would track those negative
scientific discoveries. Much progress can also be
achieved through the creation of online training
modules, to be offered on the 1540 Committee website
and available in various languages for different
categories of Government personnel, such as law-
makers, executives, law enforcement officials, border
control agents and criminal prosecutors.

Fourthly, the 2016 review process has proved the
need for identifying and articulating assistance for
country-specific needs. Hence, we recommend greater
outreach in Africa, the Asia-Pacific region, the Middle
East and Latin America, in a true spirit ofunderstanding
and partnership among countries.

Fifthly, such collective action would also imply
working closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and other control, monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms, such as the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other entities.
As incoming Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, we
are ready to substantively implement provisions on
enhancing ongoing cooperation among the 1540
Committee, the 1267 Committee and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

In conclusion, we call for multilateral confidence
and trust in order to create a powerful, global
anti-nuclear movement and prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We need to rise above our
national interests when it comes to the common good
for all people and the planet.

