Mr. Begec (Turkey): We thank China for organizing
today's meeting.

Africa plays an important role in maintaining
peace and promoting development. However, serious
challenges to lasting peace and security in the
continent persist. Sustaining peace and security in
Africa requires strong cooperation and coordination
among local, national and international actors. That
is essential for ensuring collective security. In that
regard, we take note of resolution 2320 (2016) and the
Security Council's intention to take further steps to
enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). Likewise, we welcome
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed in April.

Turkey believes that peace and security are
instrumental for development. In that vein, Turkey
supports the African strategy to end all wars in the
continent by 2020 as outlined in the Silence the Guns
initiative. Furthermore, we value the central role of the
African Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Structure in promoting peace, security
and stability. African Union-led peace operations are
critical initiatives to address crises in Africa. Turkey
contributes to the efforts of those operations, such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. As a strategic partner of the continent since
2008, Turkey has tried to assist its African friends in
their quest for ensuring peace, security and stability.
While doing so, we have attached importance to
regional ownership.

In line with the principle of African solutions
to African problems, Turkey has contributed to the
development of the security capacities of African
countries, based on the needs and requests ofits partners.
We pursue a comprehensive and holistic approach that
takes into account peacebuilding, development, and
humanitarian dimensions of international assistance,
including through our diplomatic network of
approximately 40 embassies across the continent.

In the peace and security sector, Turkey's
assistance and partnership with the African Union and
African States are manifold. Turkey has been providing
financial assistance to the African Union, including
in the field of security, since 2009. In the past decade,
Turkey provided over $4 million to AMISOM, the
East African Standby Force and the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

The Turkish National Police helps to build
structural and operational capacities of security
institutions through bilateral programs. As a co-Chair
of the Horn of Africa Working Group of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, Turkey has led a series
of bilateral efforts aimed at capacity-building in the
field of security and counter-terrorism in the region.
In Somalia, we have been carrying out a large-scale
project since 2014 in Mogadishu for the reconstruction
of the Somali National Army. The Anatolia-Somalia
Joint Military Training Centre is expected to become
operational by September.

Conflict prevention and mediation are also
important aspects of Turkey's engagement with Africa.
In our efforts to address the root causes of conflicts,
Turkey has been collaborating with the African Union
Commission and African partners to realize projects
in the fields of trade, rural development, rule of law,
infrastructure, health and education. In our approach,
we recognize that stabilization and development
efforts in Africa cannot succeed if women and youth
lack security and access to political, economic, social
and judicial resources. In that context, we promote
increased political and social partnership, as well as the
economic empowerment of women and youth.

In response to recent waves of drought and climate
events in sub-Saharan Africa, we have launched
nation-wide donation campaigns for assistance. As
the Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Summit, we took the initiative to raise awareness for
development and humanitarian assistance efforts for
East Africa. Implementing the "New Way or Working",
which aligns with Turkey's development-oriented
humanitarian assistance, is vital in order to reach
collective outcomes, while also building resilience and
ending need.

Turkey will continue to do its utmost to contribute to
peace and security in Africa. We will also constructively
participate in the international and regional initiatives
to that end.

