The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Benin, Canada, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire,
Egypt, Germany, Ghana, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mexico, Myanmar, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Rwanda, Somalia,
San Marino, Sri Lanka, Uganda and Uruguay, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mullet,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), and Ms. Kathleen Hunt, Chair of the
2
International Steering Committee, Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict.

It is so decided.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the Council
members to document S/2008/455, which contains a
letter from the Permanent Representative of France
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the report of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

I should also like to draw attention to document
S/2008/442, which contains a letter dated 7 July 2008
from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Viet Nam.

First of all, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his participation in this open
debate of the Security Council. I look forward to
listening to his insight into the important issue of
children and armed conflict. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF, the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the representative of the Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict for their presence and for
the briefings they are going to present to the Council.

Being one of the first countries to ratify the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,
a country where generations of children have suffered
immensely from war, Viet Nam is committed to
defending and promoting the best interests of children.
Our concerns for children affected by armed conflict
go beyond conventional reasoning. Viet Nam, as
President of the Security Council for this month, has
taken the initiative to organize this open debate to
strengthen the commitment and efforts of the Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community at large towards achieving a long-term and
sustained solution to these issues. I thank all members
of the Council for sharing the interest.
08-42706
Since the adoption of its first resolution on
children and armed conflict in 1999, the actions taken
by the Security Council have produced tangible
progress. Formal and informal action plans have been
concluded between parties to conflict to identify and
release children from fighting forces and to prevent
further recruitment. Thousands of children associated
with armed groups have thus been released. Specific
provisions have been included in peace processes and
agreements. Child protection provisions have been
incorporated in the mandates of a number of United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions. Regular
reviews and reports to the Council by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as well as its
valuable recommendations to the Council and country
Visits by the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, along with the work done by UNICEF,
have contributed to those achievements.

However, we have to admit that what has been
achieved remains too modest. The overall situation of
children affected by armed conflict continues to be of
serious concern. The international community
continues to witness the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict. The killing and maiming,
sexual Violence against and abduction of children and
attacks against schools and hospitals continue. We
condemn those acts and urge all parties concerned to
put an end to them.

The Security Council, in its presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/6) last February, outlined a
number of important measures to move forward its
agenda on children and armed conflict. Viet Nam
attaches great importance to a strategy aimed at
preventing armed conflict by addressing its root cause
and enhancing the protection of children.

The successful implementation of such a
comprehensive strategy requires not only participation
but also cooperation among the parties concerned and
other stakeholders, including Member States, regional
organizations, the Secretariat, specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). To ensure
effective participation and cooperation, in addition to a
commitment to providing adequate resources and
funding from development agencies and donor
countries, it is important to promote mutual confidence
and trust in a spirit of partnership, as was emphasized
by the Council in its presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/6) of last February.
08-42706

The consideration of country reports has very
often been a difficult process, leading to the erosion of
such mutual trust and spirit of partnership. National
Governments should be fully consulted in order to
avoid such situations and ensure the quality, reliability
and objectivity of those reports.

Resolution 1612 (2005) should continue to serve
as the basis for improving the reporting and monitoring
mechanisms, as well as the activities of the Working
Group. We look forward to contributing to the
continued improvement of the Group's methods of
work.

As a party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, we join others
in calling upon those countries that have not done so to
accede to the Protocol.

Finally, I am deeply convinced that, with genuine
concern and a spirit of partnership on the part of its
members, the Security Council - with the support of
and in close coordination with other United Nations
agencies, NGOs and countries concerned - can fulfil
its commitment to addressing the widespread impact of
armed conflict on children.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting and
invite him to take the floor.


