Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We are
honoured as CentralAmericans toparticipate inthis open
debate under Guatemala's presidency of the Security
Council on the promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We value the full content of the report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/749), which provides updates
and makes important recommendations on the matter,
and in particular proposes mechanisms to strengthen
the rule of law at the national and international levels
through actions aimed at building a fair, secure and
peaceful world.

We recall the commitment we made as States
through the Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (resolution 67/1), by adopting
a series of measures that will allow us to complement
our agendas with a view to ensuring the prevalence of
the law, justice, full respect for human rights, and the
fight against impunity.

To the extent that all nations within the system, big
or small, can secure our ability to guarantee our citizens
their individual and collective rights and freedoms in
an inclusive context of tolerance and participation, in
conformity with international law, we will undoubtedly
help sustain the delicate responsibility of the Security
Council in seeking to provide global peace and security.

Since their inception, in addition to the regional
instances for conflict resolution, Honduras has
accepted the jurisdictions of the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Court. We urge
other nations that have yet not done so to adhere to
these bodies without reservation. Those responsible for
the most serious violations must be held accountable so
as to achieve peace and reconciliation in societies that
have suffered internal conflicts.

We appreciate the difficult task of the Security
Council in promoting and implementing the rule of
law in domestic jurisdictions in the context of the
powers and limitations of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the Organization itself. It is from that
legal framework that the Council derives its authority
to require Member States to abide by its decisions,
especially in situations in which international peace
and security are threatened. Judicial bodies have played
a fundamental role in strengthening the rule of law and
in the promotion of stability and reconciliation within
societies.
Thus, the relationship between the Council and
other United Nations derived bodies should always be
constructive and transparent. There must be an ongoing
dialogue that allows resort to preventive diplomacy
and to specific and effective mechanisms that serve
as deterrents where hostility and violence prevail.
Similarly, those judicial bodies should work with
Member States in providing exhaustive information
regarding the reports and ongoing investigations in
order to ensure accuracy and objectivity. In specific
cases, domestic capacities should be strengthened,
but judicial power should be applied with respect for
domestic laws and national sovereignty. In that way, we
value the role played by the ICC in the fight against
impunity and in strengthening the rule of law within
individual nations.

Our region has also been severely shaken by vicious
and painful armed conflicts. Thanks to the mercy of
God, we have survived the tempests, and from the
tears of loss and bloodshed we began to build towards
redemption. Amidst tribulation, the light of national
and international law has illuminated our democratic
path. While unrest divided us in the past, today we
are making efforts to work together, united in peace
and harmony, as sister nations should. We bring the
power of the whole to face our shared problems and to
overcome the challenges of our common destinies.

We must not forget, however, that institutional
stability and progress in the rule of law depend on
national capabilities to generate collective well-being
and on the capacity of Governments to respond to
the people's needs, especially the huge needs of the
most vulnerable sectors. They must lighten the heavy
burden of accumulated social problems, simultaneously
increase freedoms while narrowing the distance
between inequalities, and ensure that the marginalized
masses who are caught in the tangled web of poverty
have access to the benefits ofparticipation and inclusion
in the face of the overwhelming tide of globalization.

In our efforts to build the genuine rule of law,
democracy must construct creative bridges to
development so that we can make our way towards
progress so that those who are alienated can turn their
disappointment into hope.

