Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his update on recent developments. I also thank
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Mrs. Vlora Citaku for
their briefings.

An issue of great concern for all of us is the recent
murder of the prominent politician Oliver Ivanovie,
from North Mitrovica municipality, which took place
on 16 January. We urge close cooperation with all
interested parties so as to carry out a fair and objective
investigation and bring those responsible for this
heinous crime to justice as soon as possible.

Kazakhstan fully supports the statement of the
political leaders, the European Union (EU) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
condemning the murder and considers this barbaric act
to be an attempt by some forces to disrupt the peace
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. In this regard,
we call on the leaders of the two parties and local
communities to avoid any further provocative rhetoric
or actions that could lead to additional tensions and
instability. Democracy, security, stability and economic
development cannot be achieved without the rule of
law, criminal justice and institutional and human-
rights-related reforms, including the fight against
corruption and organized crime, and addressing any
outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary and the need
for its depoliticization, impartiality and independence,
including in the prosecution of war crimes.

We commend the steps taken by the Governments
of Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices of EU High
Representative Mogherini to continue the dialogue by
holding a series of technical-level meetings in Brussels.
My delegation also encourages all interested parties to
continue interacting to strengthen confidence-building
measures, trust, dialogue and cooperation, with the
engagement of representatives of the Government, the
opposition, civil society, women and youth, the media
and religious organizations.

The role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in this process is very
important. During the reporting period, UNMIK
launched 12 confidence-building measures to promote
an interest in dialogue as well as intercommunal
reconciliation in different parts of Kosovo. The question
of returning refugees and displaced persons, together
with their resettlement, cultural heritage and human
rights, still have to be addressed.

Finally, we believe that peace and stability in this
part of the world will be achieved only if the parties
continue to fulfil their commitments in a positive spirit
of mutual respect, understanding and compromise.

