Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before
the Council once again to report on the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

Before I proceed with my remarks, I would like
to offer my congratulations to the United States on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals and to offer my particular thanks to the
delegation of Chile for its superb leadership of the
Group.

As always, I must also underscore my deep
appreciation for the assistance provided to the
Mechanism by the Office of Legal Affairs, in particular
by the Legal Counsel himself, Mr. Miguel de Serpa
Soares, and the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias. Their support and the
support of their whole team continue to be invaluable
to the Mechanism and its continued success.

Finally, I wish to note that I appear before the
Council today along with two of my friends and
colleagues, President Vagn Joensen of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and President
Carmel Agius of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). This is a historic day for
both of them and for the Tribunals they represent.
President Joensen has presented the final report
(S/2015/577) to the Council on behalf of the ICTR, and
I wish to commend him for the integrity and dedication

with which he has led that Court since 2012. President
Agius, meanwhile, is appearing before the Council for
the first time as the President of the ICTY. It has been
my great pleasure to work with him closely over the past
four years when he was Vice-President of the ICTY,
and I wish him every success as he steers the ICTY
towards the completion of its own vital remaining tasks
in these, the final years of the Tribunal.

As the six-month report (see S/2015/883)
recently submitted by the Mechanism makes clear,
the Mechanism continues to carry out the mandate
entrusted to it and to do so in a manner that reflects
a commitment to the highest possible standards as
well as to the Council's vision ofa small, efficient and
economical institution. Since I last appeared before
the Council (see S/PV.7455), the Mechanism's Judges
have issued a great number of judicial orders and
decisions, addressing everything from the enforcement
of sentences to requests for the review of judgements
to applications for the variation of protective measures
granted to vulnerable witnesses and victims. At the
same time, all three organs of the Mechanism have
continued preparations at the working level for the
historic appeals that are anticipated to begin in spring
2016 as well as for the trials of the remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR whose cases are the responsibility
of the Mechanism.

During the past six months, work on the legal
and regulatory framework of the Mechanism has also
progressed, and a number of new policies and other
regulatory instruments addressing matters ranging
from legal aid to access to archives are expected in the
coming months. The Mechanism has also continued
to monitor proceedings referred for trial in Rwanda
and France and to receive and respond to requests for
assistance in relation to proceedings in national courts.
The Mechanism has also continued to supervise the
enforcement of sentences in a number of States on
two continents and remains very appreciative of the
commitment and cooperation of those enforcing States.

During the reporting period, important advances
have been made at both branches in terms of the
preparation and transfer of records from the Tribunals
to the Mechanism with the great majority of ICTR
records of long-term or permanent value now in the
custody of the Mechanism. At the same time, the
Mechanism has continued to take a number of steps,
both large and small, to facilitate greater access to the
records entrusted to it.

At the Arusha branch, the past six months have been
particularly busy as the Mechanism has increasingly
assumed responsibility for the remaining functions
and obligations of the ICTR, including responsibility
for the United Nations Detention Unit in anticipation of
the closure of the ICTR at the end of 2015. A number
of ICTY administrative sections have worked together
with staff at the Mechanism and the ICTR to ensure
that all contractual arrangements and structures
are in place at the Mechanism's Arusha branch to
ensure the uninterrupted provision of administrative
services following the closure of the ICTR. Progress
has continued on the construction of the permanent
premises in Arusha for the Mechanism. We are very
grateful for the generous support of the Government
of Tanzania and the invaluable assistance of various
offices of the United Nations Secretariat in connection
with the project. All of this, I should note, has been
accomplished at the same time that the Mechanism,
together with a number of other departments and
offices throughout the United Nations, have undergone
the labour-intensive process of transitioning to Umoja.

While the reporting period has been a productive
one, the Mechanism continues to face certain
challenges e challenges of which I have spoken before.
When the Mechanism opened its doors in Arusha on
1 July 2012, there were nine individuals indicted by the
ICTR who had yet to be arrested and brought to trial.
Thanks to Prosecutor Jallow's considerable efforts, we
have some news to report today on which the Prosecutor
will brief the Council in a few moments. While the
Mechanism's own fugitive-tracking activities continue,
the involvement and commitment of Member States
is essential if we are to ensure that the fugitives are
apprehended. And ensure that we must. The Council's
continued attention to the issue is Vital and very much
appreciated.

The second challenge facing the Mechanism
involves the resettlement of the small number of persons
acquitted by the ICTR or who have completed the
sentences imposed by that Tribunal. The Mechanism
continues to seek ways to promote resettlement, but,
as is true with the fugitives, we are dependent on the
involvement of the international community to solve
the humanitarian Challenge posed by the issue. The
challenge is, in many respects, a challenge to and for
international justice itself.

Before concluding my remarks, I wish to take note
that, pursuant to the statement (S/PRST/2015/21) by
the President of the Security Council of 16 November,
the Mechanism has submitted a report in connection
with the review of its work in the initial period of its
operations and provided additional information to
facilitate this important review process. I am most
grateful for the attention that you, Mr. President, and
your colleagues are giving to the review of the work of
the Mechanism. The Mechanism stands ready to offer
any further information or assistance that may be of use
to the Council in connection with the completion of the
review by 21 December, as called for by the presidential
statement.

The Mechanism has accomplished much over
the course of the initial period of its operations and,
indeed, in just the last six months as well. While much
important work remains to be done, including the
completion of those trials and appeals that are expected
to come within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism,
the Mechanism is prepared to carry out this work
efficiently, while respecting the entire panoply of fair-
trial rights.

As the initial period of its operations draws to
its close - a period in which the Mechanism has
benefited greatly from the support of, and coexistence
with, the ICTY and the ICTR - the Mechanism
is increasingly standing on its own as a separate
institution, an institution that learns from the lessons
of its predecessors and fulfils its obligations and its
mandate both economically and effectively.

The Mechanism's success in that regard depends
to a great deal on effective management focused on
seeking out new, principled ways to ensure economy
and efficiency and that takes full advantage of the
Mechanism's novel structure and legal framework.
For instance, the statute already provides for single
judges - rather than full trial chambers, as was the case
with the ICTR and the ICTY - to address most matters
at first instance. But even where the statute calls for the
assignment of a multi-judge panel, significant savings
as compared with the ICTR and the ICTY may be
achieved as a result of pre-trial and pre-appeal judges
carrying out much of the preparatory work for cases,
with the full bench involved only if and as necessary
and in those situations remunerated only for the days
of work conducted. Such work by the full bench would
also be conducted remotely unless the bench's presence
is required at one of the seats of the Mechanism.

I wish to assure the Council that my fellow
principals and I continue to invest all of our energies
and focus in helping to ensure that the Mechanism
lives up to its promise and is truly a model of what an
international judicial institution should be. In doing so,
the Mechanism will not only be a credit to the United
Nations and to the Council. The Mechanism will
also - like the ICTR and the ICTY before it - serve as
a vital and continued embodiment of the international
community's dedication to the fight against impunity.

In a world where armed conflicts still rage on
continent upon continent, where atrocities against
civilians continue unabated and where international
humanitarian law can stillbe violated with impunity- in
this world, we must not underestimate the need for,
and the importance of, such symbols of our shared and
continued commitment to principled accountability,
to international law and to respect for the rule of law.
We must not underestimate the value of institutions
such as the Mechanism that demonstrate that respect
for the rule of law must be paramount, that we cannot
and shall not tolerate impunity for serious violations
of international law, and that justice can be delivered
efficiently and economically, yet in accordance with
the highest possible standards. And it is perhaps all the
more important now, as we despair at the indescribable
violence and violations that continue to be committed
in conflicts around the globe, that the Council take
all possible steps to ensure that the important tools
at its disposal in the fight against impunity, like the
Mechanism, realize their full potential.

