Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to heartily thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui for her enlightening briefing. I would also
like to thank Ms. Anny Tenga Modi for her statement.

I would like to focus on three issues in my statement:
first, the political process; secondly, the security and
humanitarian situation; and, thirdly, the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

With respect to the political process, despite the
shortcomings of the electoral process, we hope that the
new President and the new Government will show their
commitment to carrying out the necessary reforms and
work towards inclusive and sustainable development in
their country. If that is the case, historians will point
to the recent elections as an important turning point
in the history of the country. If that is not the case,
those elections will be seen as a new disappointment
for Congolese society, which has overwhelmingly voted
for change. The society's expectations are very high,
and the new President and the new Government face
many challenges. Those aspirations can be achieved
only through profound institutional, social and
economic reforms.

Poland welcomes the statements made by President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi on the occasion of the first
100 days of his term, including those on the release
of political prisoners, respect for and the promotion
of human rights and good offices, the fight against
corruption and the strengthening of good relations with
the region. We also welcome the decision to reopen
Schengen House in the country's capital.

Poland appreciates the fact that, despite the reported
and undoubtedly justified concerns about the conduct
and transparency of the electoral process, candidates
who question its results have used legal remedies and
that the situation in the country remains generally
calm. We believe that the upcoming elections in the
cities of Beni and Butembo in North Kivu and Yumbi
in Mai-Ndombe province, as well as the local elections
to be held next year, will be a positive continuation of
the institutional transition. It is extremely important
that all citizens, especially the most vulnerable, such as
women and people with disabilities, can participate in
the elections safely.

Tensions and strains in community relations
associated with rumours and a lack of transparency in
decision-making processes are a threat to society. We
hope that there will be an inquiry into the tragic events
of December 2018 in Yumbi and that the culprits will
be brought to justice.

At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing Ebola epidemic in the east of the country.
Poland strongly condemns the continuing attacks
against humanitarian workers, medical personnel and
hospitals and other medical institutions. We call on all
parties on the ground to create the necessary conditions
for the safe delivery of humanitarian aid. We also call
for access to areas affected by Ebola.

Despite the efforts made so far, the actions of
foreign and national groups in the east and south of the
country have had a significant impact on the security
situation. We welcome the encouraging signals we
received after the elections from several armed groups
demonstrating their willingness tojoin the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which
is supposed to be the focus of the efforts to stabilize
the security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Irrespective of those developments, Poland stresses
the need to ensure responsibility on the part of those
accused of crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other serious violations of international law. State
institutions are responsible for providing security to
citizens. There is a need to prioritize resolving problems
linked to the fact most human rights violations and cases
of sexual exploitation are committed by representatives
of the State.

Despite the taking ofimportant steps to stabilize the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is clear that much
remains to be done. MONUSCO needs to be adapted
to the post-election reality. Poland considers that the
Mission should prioritize a comprehensive approach
to the protection of civil society. At the same time, we
see the need for MONUSCO to engage in a process of
support for political transformation and strengthening
State authority at all levels.
Yet all United Nations efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will require good cooperation
with the Government. We believe that the Security
Council should give the new authorities a few months
to define their agenda and demonstrate a willingness
to cooperate closely with the United Nations in order
to stabilize the country. In addition, we call on the
Secretary-General to present to the Security Council
an independent strategic assessment of the Mission,
including proposals for key objectives for the future
engagement of the United Nations on the ground.

In conclusion, allow me again to express our
gratitude to Ms. Zerrougui and the entire MONUSCO
team for their tireless efforts in support of stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Poland hopes
that the authorities will cooperate constructively with
the Mission to consolidate the important achievements
already made and lay the foundation for lasting peace,
stability and development.

