The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

We join others in expressing our deep
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
comprehensive briefing.

My delegation supports the conclusions of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1113) on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), as well as the joint assessment of
the progress of UNAMID's reconfiguration, and would
like to offer the following observations.

Kazakhstan is encouraged by the continuing
progress made on the security and humanitarian
situation in Darfur, as well as by enhanced cooperation
among the Sudanese Government, the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). The most recent proof
of such cooperation is the Government's consent to
establish the operating base in G010. We also welcome
the decision of the Government of the Sudan to extend
the unilateral ceasefire until the end of March. We hope
that the other parties will also undertake the efforts
necessary to invigorate an inclusive political process led
by the AU High-level Implementation Panel. Gradually,
we must move towards fulfilling the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur.

Kazakhstan is also pleased to note that no adverse
effects have been observed during phase one of
UNAMID's reconfiguration. We believe that, during
its mandate renewal in June, UNAMID's duties should
be adjusted towards prioritizing its peacebuilding
capacities. Peacebuilding efforts should focus on
the implementation of the UNAMID United Nations
country team's Integrated Strategic Framework for
Darfur for 2017-2019, which identifies the priorities
for sustainable peace in Darfur. At the same time, the
Government of the Sudan needs international support,
including expertise and financial assistance to resolve
the plight of internally displaced persons and succeed
in the arms collection campaign. That effort should also
be accompanied by investment in development projects.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.

