Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have listened attentively - extremely
attentively, even - to today's briefers, and we thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo,
Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Mr. Joseph Malanji, Minister
for Foreign Affairs onambia, and Monseigneur Utembi
for their information.

We have taken note of the Commission electorale
nationale independante's publication of the preliminary
results ofthe presidential elections held on 30 December.
As we understand it, in accordance with the election
law of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
official outcomes of an election must be certified by the
Constitutional Court, after which the inauguration of
the elected Head of State will take place. We view the
holding of the presidential elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as an important step in the
gradual normalization of the situation in this major
African country, which has been experiencing internal
political tensions for several decades, and we hope to
see Congolese society making further progress on the
path to political and socioeconomic development.

We note that the elections were held peacefully, and
we respect Kinshasa's right to postpone the voting in
areas where there are security problems or where the
Ebola outbreak has not yet been stamped out. We note
the generally positive reports by the regional observer
missions from the Southern African Development
Community and the African Union. We agree with the
observers' opinion that the fact that the elections took
place is in itself a major victory for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and we commend
the efforts of the Government and the Electoral
Commission in that regard.

In our view, the parties in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should resolve potential disputes about
election issues through legal channels, and we join the
Secretary-General in his call to that effect. We hope
that the country's political actors can display calm,
patience and a commitment to exclusively legal and
peaceful methods of political expression. We consider
any pressure on the country's judiciary or the Electoral
Commission unacceptable.

We would like to remind those who have been
actively commenting on the elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the right to certify election
results is the sovereign prerogative of that country's
relevant authorized bodies. We urge the international
community to behave responsibly in that regard and
to avoid any interpretations of issues related to the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that at the moment any speculation
about the published voting results is not simply
inappropriate and a violation of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but could have far-
reaching repercussions for the stability of the country
and the entire Great Lakes region.

We hope that during this critical period the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will adhere strictly
to its mandate under resolution 2409 (2018). Right
now it is especially important to maintain the unity
of the Security Council and take a calm and balanced
approach to the situation without interfering in the
domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in full respect for its sovereignty.

