Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of October.
I also wish to extend our gratitude to your predecessor,
Mr. Stefan Tafrov, and his team for their excellent
performance last month.

I would like also to thank the Secretary-General
for joining us at last Friday's meeting and for his
important statement, as well as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
for his very informative briefing on the activities of the
Committee.

I have the honour to deliver the statement on
behalf of the States participating in GUUAM: the
Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine.

The year that has passed since the tragic events of
11 September 2001 has not extinguished the anger and
indignation of mankind caused by these terrorist acts,
nor has it soothed the pain and bitterness at the loss of
innocent lives. These acts became, in fact, a direct
challenge to the entire civilized world and proved that
no State could face the challenges of the twenty-first
century alone.

As was emphasized by the Secretary-General,
terrorism is an assault on the fundamental principles of
law, order, human rights and the peaceful settlement of
disputes - principles upon which the United Nations
was built. Therefore the United Nations should play a
central role in our common struggle against terrorism.
In this regard we support the strategy of the United
Nations approach to the issues of terrorism, which was
outlined in the report of the Policy Working Group on
the United Nations and Terrorism.

The GUUAM. Participating States believe that the
Security Council is uniquely placed to facilitate
cooperation between Governments in the fight against
terrorism. Last year, the Council adopted the
exceptionally strong and important resolution - 1373
(2001) - designed to enhance international response
to the threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts.

We share the views expressed by previous
speakers that the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
established by that resolution is making a valuable
practical contribution in our common struggle. The
CTC helps the world system to upgrade its anti-
terrorism capability and to deny space, money and
support to terrorists. As mentioned earlier by the
United States and other delegations, the crucial role of
the Committee in making international anti-terrorism
legal instruments universal cannot be overestimated.

The CTC has established constructive dialogue
with Member States. This great achievement will
certainly help us to identify potential gaps and find
effective ways to address them. In this regard, we are
grateful to the Chairman and the members of the
Committee, as well as to the experts, for promoting
maximum transparency of the Committee's work.

The CTC has extended its role beyond monitoring
the implementation by States of their obligations.
GUUAM. welcomes the CTC's activities in providing
assistance to States for ensuring effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
character and scope of the Committee's mandate and
working methods represent an important innovation
and open up new possibilities for inter-State
cooperation. I wish to reiterate GUUAM's continued
support for the CTC in the discharge of its important
duties.

Among the achievements of the CTC outlined by
its Chairmen, I would like to underline its endeavours
to provide all possible assistance to the multinational
anti-terrorist coalition by strengthening, inter alia, the
capacities of the regional organizations and groups. For
their part, the GUUAM. Participating States have
committed themselves to consolidate their efforts in the
fight against international terrorism.
At the recent GUUAM. Summit, held this July in
Yalta, the Presidents of the Participating States
reiterated their firm positions on the issue of combating
terrorism and organized crime. They reaffirmed the
determination of their countries to provide political,
legal and organizational bases for overcoming the
challenges of international terrorism, separatism,
intolerance, extremism and related illegal actions. All
these commitments were included in the Declaration on
Common Efforts to Ensure Stability and Security in the
Region, which was signed at the GUUAM. Summit.

GUUAM. attaches great importance to the
strengthening of its legal basis. In this regard I would
like to report that at the Yalta Summit the GUUAM
Participating States signed an agreement on
cooperation in combating terrorism, organized crime
and other dangerous types of crimes.

GUUAM. fully recognizes the danger posed when
the proceeds from crime are used to finance terrorist
activities. Attaching special attention to that problem,
the Presidents of the participating States charged their
Governments with thoroughly examining the issue of
establishing close interaction between GUUAM. and
the Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering.

The efforts of GUUAM. to combat terrorism
received their logical continuation during the first
meeting of the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the GUUAM. States, which was held here in New
York at Headquarters on 18 September. At that
meeting, the Ministers reiterated the importance of
enhancing cooperation within GUUAM. in the sphere of
combating terrorism and organized crime. They
expressed their readiness to elaborate specific projects
in the framework of such cooperation.

Finally, let me emphasize that GUUAM. stands
ready to make a worthy contribution to the collective
efforts of the international community in fighting
terrorism.

