Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply troubled and disturbed at the death of two
United Nations officials. I should like to extend our
condolences to the families of Mr. Michael Sharp and
Ms. Zaida Catalan and to the countries concerned. The
safety and security of United Nations personnel must be
effectively guaranteed. Any attack on United Nations
personnel is intolerable.
China voted in favour of resolution 2348 (2017),
which the Security Council just adopted. China has
always paid close attention to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We appreciate the
efforts made by that country's Government to facilitate
the peace process, safeguard national stability and
promote economic development. We encourage the
parties to actively implement the political agreement
and resolve their differences through dialogue
and consultation.

China has always supported African countries in
addressing African issues in African ways and has
supported regional and subregional organizations in
Africa in playing an active role in resolving regional
problems. We hope that the countries of the Great Lakes
region will strengthen their cooperation and jointly
implement the Framework for Peace, Security and
Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes Region, and achieve common
regional security and development. The international
community should act, on the basis of respecting the
country's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, and continue to provide constructive
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

China supports the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in its implementation of its
mandate and in the constructive role it plays to assist
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in advancing the political process, combating
armed groups and facilitating humanitarian access.

United Nations peacekeeping operations need to
adjust their mandates and scope in a timely manner in
accordance with changing circumstances and the will
of the State concerned. We hope that, in accordance
with resolution 2348 (2017), the Secretariat will
continue to engage in dialogue with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
implementation of the mandate of MONUSCO, as well
as on its financing, while fully taking into account
the views of that Government, and stepping up the
reform of the peacekeeping system so as to enhance the
operational effectiveness of the Mission and bolstering
its ability to cope with complex situations.

China has always supported the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and has over the
years provided , within our abilities, assistance to its
nation-building efforts. China has sent more than 200
peacekeepers to MONUSCO. China stands ready to
work with the international community and continue
to play a constructive role towards the realization of
lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

