Mr. Gama (Portugal)(spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): Portugal has already had
the opportunity to state in the Security Council its support
for the remarkable report of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa. I would like to reiterate emphatically that the
Portuguese Government is ready to support fully and
actively the role of the United Nations in forging a new
and more dynamic relationship with Africa.

It is up to us all, as Members States of the United
Nations, to turn from words to deeds if we really wish to
contribute to freeing Africa from economic
underdevelopment and to help the peoples of Africa to
maintain their steady pace towards democracy and good
governance. Africa gives us several good examples of
this, such as Mozambique and Cape Verde, which
encourage us to act according to the proposals correctly
identified by the Secretary-General.

The common pursuit of peace and development in
Africa presupposes the existence of a corresponding
political will on the part of all actors in this process.
Portugal will play its part in all international forums,
including the United Nations system and the European
Union. We are committed to bringing to fruition the
holding of a Europe-Africa summit during the Portuguese
presidency of the European Union in the year 2000.

In harmony with the Secretary-General's report,
Portugal agrees that weapons proliferation is one of the
most devastating scourges currently affecting Africa. We
should mobilize our collective efforts effectively to
overcome this problem. Portugal agrees that much more
has to be done to stop the flow of weapons, particularly
small arms, across borders and from conflict to conflict.
We believe that it would be useful to reduce defence
budgets in Africa wherever possible, as well as to carry
out a reassessment of the objectives of bilateral military
cooperation programmes with developed countries.

In this context, let me underline that Portugal has
already adopted legislation making the Violation of
Security Council arms embargoes a criminal offence. I
would also note the importance we attribute to resolution
1196 (1998), recently approved by the Council.

In my statement here last year, I indicated that
Portugal would respond to the need to make available
greater resources for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa. We were part of the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique and of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission in Angola, where we
continue to participate in the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola. We are also present in the United

 

Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara and
in the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic.

Portugal has been one of the most active European
Union countries participating in peacekeeping operations in
Africa and is committed, to the best of its abilities, to
responding positively to the needs of the United Nations.

On another level, we recognize the unique role that the
Organization of African Unity and African subregional
organizations should have in both conflict prevention and
conflict resolution in Africa. Therefore we support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General pointing to
closer coordination between the United Nations and those
organizations. In this context, resolution 1197 (1998),
adopted last week, is a step in the right direction.

However, we should bear in mind that the final
responsibility to authorize the use of force to restore peace
always belongs to the Security Council.

As a member of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries (CPLP) - an organization principally
composed of African countries - Portugal is in a position,
through that organization, to provide an effective
contribution to the resolution of the conflict in Guinea-
Bissau, a country with which we share many close ties of
cooperation. We believe that the mediation of this conflict,
currently being carried out jointly by the CPLP jointly with
the Economic Community of West African States, is a good
example of how two international organizations can work
towards the same goal - the peaceful and negotiated
settlement of a conflict - taking into account their
respective vocations and specifications.

Often, the tasks of peace consolidation are as difficult
as those of peace enforcement or conflict prevention. This
may require a sustained and prolonged effort on the part of
the international community. We fully share the views
expressed by the Secretary-General on the importance of
post-conflict peace-building as, in his own words,

"actions undertaken at the end of a conflict to
consolidate peace and prevent a recurrence of armed
confrontation" (S/1998/318, para. 63).

We sincerely hope the Security Council will avoid an
overly narrow perspective of its own competencies with
regard to this matter and discuss it with the seriousness it
deserves.

We believe that the elements of peacebuilding
should be clearly identified and integrated, from the
outset, into the mandates of peacekeeping operations. This
is one of the lessons we have learned from our
participation in the United Nations missions in Angola
and Mozambique.

The humanitarian and human rights components of
peacekeeping operations and post-conflict peace-building
are other elements to which we attach particular
importance. To that end, we are ready to contribute to the
implementation of the recommendations put forward by
the Secretary-General, stressing in particular the
following: measures to increase the security of refugee
camps, possibly the most visible consequence of the
conflicts that have plagued the African continent; the
expansion of the concept of children as "zones of peace",
and here I would underline the expectations we have with
regard to the pilot experiment in Sierra Leone; and the
proposal that special human rights missions be funded
from assessed contributions to the United Nations.

A word also is needed to reiterate the importance we
attribute to the promotion of good governance and
sustainable development in Africa, equally vital
components of the way in which we see the possible
paths to overcoming the problems faced by that continent.
Let me recall the wise words of the Chairman of the
OAU here last year, when he affirmed that

"it is also true that the seed of democracy cannot
germinate, let alone thrive, in the soil of mass
poverty, illiteracy, hunger and disease." ( S/PV.3 875, p. 32)

The international community should provide
appropriate assistance to the efforts of the Africans
themselves to overcome these problems. Portugal has
taken concrete steps in that direction by carrying out a
global reform of the mechanisms of official development
assistance in order to adapt them to the current needs of
aid for development. From 1996 to 1997, Portugal was
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development country that registered the greatest
proportional increase in its official development
assistance - 27 per cent. But Portugal's most significant
contribution to economic growth in Africa should be seen
in the increase of our flow of trade with several African
countries, the opening of our markets to African exports
and the increase in Portuguese investment in the
continent.

 

The wounds that affect Africa are particularly deep in
certain parts of the continent. Some of these, as in the case
of Sudan and Somalia, are longstanding and do not show
any signs of improvement. Others are more recent and
could spread out of control to infect others, with
unforeseeable consequences. We feel concerned at the
resurgence of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and we appeal for a political solution based on
respect for international law and the territorial integrity of
that country. We are also concerned at the instability still
prevailing in other areas of the Great Lakes, as well as in
other regions such as Sierra Leone, Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The current impasse in the peace process in Angola
causes us profound apprehension in Portugal. We will
persevere, alone as well as with the troika, which met this
morning at the ministerial level in New York, and in close
cooperation with the United Nations, to seek a political
settlement to the problem, in strict accordance with the
Lusaka Protocol and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. The prolonged instability in Angola clearly shows
that, in the final analysis, peace or war depend on the
political will of the parties in situations of conflict.

As a final note, I should like to emphasize this last
point. All the proposals and recommendations of the report
of the Secretary-General have as a fundamental
presupposition - I would even say a sine qua non
condition - the political will of the international
community and of individual States; the will to choose
tougher roads, despite their difficulty; the will to transform
rhetoric into reality; the will to choose peace and
development, instead of war and selfish interests. In sum,
the will to change the state of affairs. The very
comprehensive approach towards Africa recommended by
the Secretary-General relies on an act of will on the part of
the international community as a whole. We hope that we
are all up to this great challenge.

