Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Ghana joins previous
speakers in expressing its appreciation to the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on addressing complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, and to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on the subject.

As rightly pointed out in the concept note prepared
for this debate (S/2017/1016, annex), our world today is
witnessing the negative influence of complex driving
factors that pose a serious challenge to the ability of
the United Nations to fulfil its primary responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation therefore welcomes the convening of
this open debate, which follows a series of thematic
debates held at the Security Council in recent years on
topics including the interlinkages between security and
development, addressing the root causes of conflict,
peace and security in Africa - which specifically
focused on the impact of climate change on security in
the Sahel region - conflict prevention and sustaining
peace and other themes touching on human rights,
economic and social advancement and gender and youth
perspectives on peace and security. The cumulative
outcome of those debates has served to reinforce the
validity of this statement by the Secretary-General
from his report entitled "In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all":

"we will not enjoy development without security,
we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for
human rights." (A/59/2005, para. 1 7)

There is no denying that compelling arguments
have been made for a broader conceptualization
of what constitutes a peaceful and secure world.
The need for holistic and integrated approaches to
addressing contemporary challenges to international
peace and security has also been duly acknowledged
by the membership of the United Nations. Resolutions
2282 (2016) and 70/262 - on the issue of sustaining
peace - which were simultaneously adopted by the
Security Council and General Assembly, respectively,
signalled the normative and conceptual shift towards
a more proactive cross-pillar and cross-sectoral
approach and strategy to preventing conflict. What
remains outstanding is our ability to define effective
system-wide mechanisms that will put the strategy
into operation and foster better interaction between
the Security Council and other organs, agencies
and bodies of the United Nations in order to address
those challenges.

While the causes of crises are closely interlinked,
our responses so far remain fragmented. In today's
globalized and interdependent world, the challenges
to international peace and security, which range from
the effects of climate change and environmental
degradation to infectious diseases and pandemics,
terrorism, transnational organized crime - including
drugs and human trafficking - nuclear proliferation,
the proliferation of small arms and weapons, genocide
and human rights violations, all require coherent
responses across pillars from all parts of the United
Nations system and from Member States.

Since the factors affecting one country quickly take
on regional and transnational overtones and have the
effect of destabilizing adjoining countries and regions,
our failure to effectively handle conflict multipliers
will continue to result in the cycle of prolonged and
aggravated conflicts, as well as compounding the plight
of peoples suffering in conflict situations and lowering
the threshold for conflict. It is therefore important to
work across the United Nations system and to break
down silos across the pillars of development, peace
and security, and human rights in order to meet those
challenges. The Security Council would no doubt
benefit from enhanced collaboration in that regard. By
working closely with the relevant organs and bodies
of the United Nations, the Council's capacity to play a
preventive and mitigating role will be enhanced through
the exchange of formal documentation or structured
dialogues on the security implications of development-
related issues, including those issues that may trigger
violence, crises or conflict.

My delegation is also of the View that these
discussions should be well-situated in the current
process to reform the peace and security architecture
of the United Nations. One of the key elements in
the Secretary-General's reform measures within this
pillar is the role envisaged for the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
and strengthening the Organization's prevention
and peacebuilding work. As we await the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report on the proposed reform
measures in the coming months, this might perhaps be
an opportune time to further explore how the envisaged

restructuring and new organizational culture will lead
to enhanced collaboration with the Security Council for
a more coherent and integrated approach to addressing
contemporary challenges to global peace and security.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the need for strategic
and inclusive partnerships to be nurtured and further
developed with regional bodies, non-governmental
organizations and civil society groups that have a stake
in peace. There is much to be gained from increased
support and collaboration between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, in developing appropriate human and
institutional capacities towards our collective efforts
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response, which Ghana had the honour of hosting, and
the inception of the African-led International Support
Mission to Mali, which was the precursor to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, were two partnerships that really
made an impact in ameliorating crises situations.

The United Nations has acknowledged the
importance of taking a comprehensive and integrated
approach to complex challenges to international peace
and security in today's world. A number of relevant
reports by high-level panels have presented us with
recommendations on how the Organization must work
to address the multifaceted and complex nature of
existing and emerging threats to international peace
and security. We have an opportunity now to apply
those far-reaching recommendations in the work of the
Organization, together with the much-needed reform of
the peace and security architecture.

Conflict prevention and the culture of prevention
need to be adopted not only by the United Nations but
by all Member States. Peacebuilding and sustaining
peace go hand in hand with Sustainable Development
Goal 16 - promoting just, peaceful and inclusive
societies. It is Ghana's view that effective strategies
across the entire United Nations system to support the
implementation of that goal will ultimately lead to the
effective maintenance of global peace and security for
all humankind.

