Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): I have the
honour and privilege of speaking to the Council on
behalf of the African Union Commission, and I am
very glad to do so under Lebanon's presidency, a
brother country whose issue contribute qualitatively to
the economic dynamism of many African countries and
brand the promising exchanges between Africa and the
Arab world with their own brilliance. I thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited me to take part in this
debate on developments in the situation in Somalia, a
country that belongs to the African and Arab groupings
and whose emergence from crisis involves the entire
international community.

The year 2010 has been declared the Year of
Peace and Security in Africa. It marks the fiftieth
anniversary of Somalia's accession to independence.
Nothing could better symbolize the success of the
many activities and increasing efforts that the African
Union has undertaken throughout this year than
Somalia's decisive progress in promoting peace and
reconciliation by fully restoring State authority through
its territory and the ability of its institutions to exercise
their sovereign prerogatives.

Nothing would more fully repay the innovative
partnerships that have been established between Africa
and the United Nations, as well as between Africa and
the relevant countries and organizations, than the
significant strengthening of operational capacities and
effective synergies among all the actors and factors
that seek to address all the challenges posed by the
situation in Somalia and their enduring effects on
international peace and security.

In fact, developments during the early months of
the year show a generally positive trend towards
achieving the goals whose attainment the international
community is ensuring through its support for the
ongoing action of Somalia's Transitional Federal
Government under the authority of President Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, and the particularly perilous but very
necessary and important work being done by the brave
Burundi and Ugandan peacekeepers deployed within
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

The agreement signed on 15 March between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a movement at the headquarters of the
African Union Commission can quite rightly be seen as
a distinctive milestone in the strategic changes in the
situation in Somalia. The agreement is of a character
and scope that have considerable potential at the
political, military and territorial levels and with regard
to influencing the social, religious and cultural
dynamics in the country.

While slow and still insufficient in terms of the
urgency and the extent of the needs, the positive effects
of the international community's multifarious
contributions to Somalia's institutions and AMISOM
are beginning to be felt. Programmes and projects that
should in time lead to a fundamental change in
Somalia's political and security landscape are being
created or implemented.

In that regard, the development of the Somali
security forces through quality training, the provision
of functioning equipment and the standardized
management of their operation and the careers of their
staff, must receive high priority. At the same time, the
standardization of AMISOM's logistical and
operational norms and the conditions of service of its
staff must be actively pursued to ensure that its change
of status to a United Nations peacekeeping force is not
unduly delayed for technical reasons.

The situation in Somalia calls for comprehensive
and agreed strategies so that all contributions will be
complementary and mutually reinforcing. These
strategies should give issues of security in the current
context of Somalia the importance they deserve and
must also include the rebuilding of the State and its
institutions and administrative instruments, as well as
renewed humanitarian action and the implementation
of development projects.

The mobilization of support for all of these
purposes must increase. The follow-up to the Brussels
conference; the Jeddah and Cairo meetings of the
International Contact Group on Somalia which were
facilitated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, my friend Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
to whom I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute for
all that he has done; the regular Addis Ababa meetings
among the African Union, the United Nations, the
troop-contributing countries and international partners;
and the forthcoming Istanbul Conference: these are all
to be welcomed for their importance and usefulness.
The parallel activities on the issue of piracy at sea are
also part of this same context insofar as the developing
international consensus must focus on the elimination
of the underlying causes of piracy, as well as proper
coordination of the considerable naval forces deployed
on the high seas with other forces that are also well
endowed with the capacity to act and deter. AMISOM
must be rapidly provided with such a capacity so that it
can fight piracy and terrorism throughout its area of
activity, including the maritime space of Somalia.

As it marks its fiftieth anniversary this year,
Somalia is at a crossroads. Much has been done by the
international community and by the Somalis
themselves; just as much remains to be done. The
promotion of peace, security and reconciliation in
Somalia is ongoing, even with imperfect execution and
incompletely met goals. However, we must build on
the progress made and the results achieved and open up
new horizons for the role of the international
community, and especially the role of the United
Nations, in and around Somalia. Relocating the United
Nations and African Union facilities to Mogadishu
would be a significant step in that direction.

For its part, the African Union will continue to
share its vision and to make its contribution to
increasing the effectiveness of our joint action and to
bolster the credibility of our commitments through
concrete results meeting the expectations of the Somali
people and serving the comprehensive goals at stake in
the situation in Somalia.

