Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his very informative, though
alarming, briefing. I would also like to pay tribute to
the humanitarian workers engaged in Yemen and to
thank them for their devotion and commitment.

The Council's last meeting on the situation in
Yemen (S/PV.8348) inspired cautious optimism. We
discussed the resumption of consultations with the
parties to the conflict and the prospects of bringing
them to the negotiating table, and we were united
in our message that the way forward is by finding a
political solution to this conflict. While we still firmly
believe this to be true, today, only 10 days later, we
are meeting here again, and yet again we have to
acknowledge the deteriorating situation on the ground
in Yemen and confront the grim reality of its severe
humanitarian crisis.

We are saddened to see the recent escalation of
violence in Al-Hudaydah governorate and the armed
clashes moving closer to Al-Hudaydah city every day.
The number of civilian casualties has risen significantly
since the beginning of September. As military action
continues to intensify around the port and city of
Al-Hudaydah, the deterioration of the humanitarian
crisis is not simply imminent - it is already happening,
and it is not going to stop unless the conflicting
parties immediately renounce violence and commit
to a cessation of hostilities. We must not forget that
Al-Hudaydah is a crucial lifeline for millions and the
main gateway for food and other supplies entering the
country. What happens in and around it therefore has
a major impact on the humanitarian situation in every
other governorate of Yemen. We call on all stakeholders
to work to ensure that all roads are accessible and all
ports, including Al-Hudaydah, Ras Isa and Saleef,
remain open and fully functional, so that humanitarian
aid can be delivered to the millions of people who need
it so desperately.

Unfortunately, we constantly face alarming reports
of the targeting of civilian infrastructure in Yemen.
Therefore, we strongly call on all the parties involved
in the conflict to respect the most basic principles
of international humanitarian law, such as those of
distinction and proportionality, and to ensure the
protection of civilians.
Let me reaffirm our strong support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy aimed at relaunching an inclusive
peace process. We firmly believe that there can be only
a political solution to the conflict in Yemen. We call on
the parties to the conflict to cease Violence and refrain
from taking actions that may lead to further suffering
of civilians and that may push the whole country into a
humanitarian disaster.

