Chad welcomes the holding of this important ministerial meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Libya via video-teleconference and thanks Germany for having taken that initiative. Chad notes with regret that the parties to the conflict, supported by foreign Powers clashing by proxy in the Libyan theatre, continue to foster an escalation of violence, in violation of the commitments undertaken within the framework of the Berlin Conference of 19 January. Faced with this dangerous military escalation, which could have extremely serious regional consequences, Chad calls on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities to enforce the arms embargo and put an end to external interference and to recourse to mercenaries and foreign fighters. The continuation of deadly clashes against a backdrop of competition from foreign Powers and the increasing use of militias, mercenaries and auxiliaries from abroad only intensify the violence and worsen the humanitarian situation. To this must be added the spectre of possible war crimes following the horrifying discovery of mass graves during the retaking of cities by one or another camp. Chad calls on all Libyan stakeholders to immediately cease hostilities and engage in negotiations for a lasting ceasefire, with a view to promoting an inclusive dialogue process leading to genuine national reconciliation in the best interests of the Libyan people. Chad is convinced that the solution to the Libyan crisis is political, not military, and that such a solution must be the result of an understanding among the Libyans themselves. The role of the international community is to help them achieve that goal. In this respect, Chad underlines the urgency of strong mobilization on the part of the United Nations, together with the African Union and the countries neighbouring Libya, in order to pick up the thread of the dialogue among all Libyan actors without any exclusion. A lasting resolution of the Libyan crisis must be inclusive and take into account all the sociological, regional and political dimensions of Libyan society in all its diversity. To that end, the best platform for allowing Libyans to talk to one another is the inclusive forum for intra-Libyan dialogue, the organization of which is entrusted to the African Union. There is an urgent need for the actors to agree on a largely consensual road map, emphasizing national reconciliation, the unity of the country and the restoration of State authority. Such a road map must also include the disarmament and integration of militias into State institutions or social life, the dismantling of mercenary and terrorist groups present in Libya and the withdrawal of foreign fighters. In that regard, Chad calls on all Libyan stakeholders to immediately cease hostilities and to engage in negotiations for a lasting ceasefire with a view to an inclusive dialogue process leading to genuine national reconciliation, in the best interests of the Libyan people.
