Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on recent developments
in the Darfur situation. As the Prosecutor has explained
in detail, the overall situation in Darfur has shown little
improvement since her briefing in June (see S/PV.6974).
Intertribal and intercommunal clashes still continue
and hinder peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
aid workers.

The lack of cooperation among the parties
concerned and of capabilities and political will on
the part of the Sudanese Government remain major
obstacles to the effective functioning of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The ensuing delay in delivering
justice to the fullest extent in that part of the region
continues to take its toll on innocent people. Under
those circumstances, it is commendable that the ICC
has made progress in its judicial activities, especially
the preparations for the trial of Mr. Abdallah Banda.
My delegation hopes that the trial will go forward as
scheduled, and that it will mark another milestone in
the Sudan situation.

The efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to garner
international support to execute outstanding arrest
warrants are also appreciated. Although it is regrettable
that the warrants have not yet been fully executed, the
efforts ofthe ICC to urge the State parties concerned to
cooperate with it deserve due recognition.
Meanwhile, new allegations are being reported in
the region. My delegation shares the serious concern
of the Prosecutor regarding those allegations, including
alleged aerial and ground attacks affecting civilians
and alleged crimes against human rights activists and
humanitarian aid workers. The allegations that the
Sudanese Government is allowing militias to loot and
pillage with complete impunity and its security organs
to interfere in the work of aid workers are points of
particular concern. In addition, the investigation into
disturbing reports of sexual and gender-based violence
should be made a priority, as the alleged victims are
the most vulnerable and also make up the fundamental
threads of that region's fragile social fabric.

In order to achieve stability in the Darfur region, all
such allegations need to be thoroughly investigated and
all of those responsible for such crimes should be held
accountable. My delegation encourages the Prosecutor
to keep up her investigating efforts until justice is
delivered to the victims of such serious crimes.

On the issue of non-cooperation, there should be
no doubt that the ICC requires the full cooperation of
States parties in fulfilling its mandate. In cases that
have been referred to it by the Security Council, the ICC
also needs the Council's robust support. My delegation
would therefore like to stress that it is incumbent
upon the Sudan to cooperate fully with the ICC, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005). The Council
must also redouble its efforts to expand interaction and
dialogue with the ICC with a view to further improving
such cooperation.

We have taken note that the Prosecutor has called
upon the Security Council to ensure compliance with
the Council's resolutions by the Sudan and other
Governments concerned with regard to the four suspects
at large. The Council needs to consider what support it
can provide to the ICC in that regard. At the same time,
the Council, in close interaction with the ICC, should
continue to closely monitor the Darfur situation. My
delegation stands ready to work with other Council
members and the ICC.

