Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We welcome your
initiative, Sir, in organizing today's debate on
transition and exit strategies. We thank the Secretary-
General, the Under-Secretaries-General and the Special
Representatives present here today for their important
and thought-provoking contributions to this discussion.
We are convinced that this meeting can also serve as an
important opportunity for troop- and police-
contributing countries to share their highly relevant
experience with Council members and the Secretariat.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later in this meeting, but let me make the following
additional points.

The draft presidential statement before the
Council rightly underlines that the overarching
objective of successful United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be the creation of conditions for
sustainable peace on the ground, ultimately allowing
for a mission's reconfiguration and withdrawal. For a
successful transition from peacekeeping to continued
peacebuilding or other forms of United Nations
presence, it is necessary that effective national
capacities for the provision of security, basic services,
rule of law and long-term development be put in place
in an integrated manner by national authorities, in
close cooperation with international stakeholders.
Mr. von der Schulenburg has underlined the key role of
the national contribution. Peacebuilding and
peacekeeping efforts need to go hand in hand from an
early stage, based on a common and integrated
strategy.

That approach should also guide future
mandating of United Nations missions. Clear, credible
and achievable mandates must be oriented towards a
desired outcome or, as Mr. Doss has suggested, at least
towards alternative outcomes. We also need clear
benchmarks and a clear prioritization of tasks. I must
say that I sympathize with the criticism expressed by
Ms. Loj, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, regarding the Council's calls that missions
should fulfil protection mandates within their
capabilities. The Council must ensure - at least, this is
our opinion - that mandates are matched with the
resources required for their full implementation from
the very start.

In order to avoid premature closure of operations,
however, both benchmarks and objectives must be
field-driven and shared by all parties. Moreover, those
tools for monitoring progress must be reviewed
regularly and aligned with the needs on the ground.

Against the background of increasing, and
increasingly complex, operations, cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and other
international actors, in particular in a transition
context, will become ever more important. The Council
has already discussed this. But to give one example
from one of the cases being discussed today, the
European Union has for several years actively
supported the transition process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo under the framework of the
security sector reform launched by that country's
Government.

More often than not, the active involvement of
regional and subregional organizations is essential for
ensuring the sustainability of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities undertaken by the United
Nations. There is therefore a need to ensure close
coherence among peacebuilding plans and programmes
launched by those organizations, Member States and
the financial institutions, as well as the United Nations
presence on the ground.

In line with Security Council resolution 1894
(2009), the protection of civilians must be duly taken
into account throughout the life cycle of peacekeeping
operations, including in the transition phase. That is a
very important angle of our discussion here today. The
ability and willingness of a State to protect its own
civilian population is a precondition for sustainable
peace and thus for the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
operation.

Creating a favourable protection environment
goes beyond protecting civilians from physical
violence and must be complemented by activities in the
fields of security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, rule of law,
transitional justice, human rights and empowerment of
local society. Early coordination of these activities and
a common strategy among all actors involved will be
crucial for success. Let me also emphasize that the full
participation of women in all processes has to be
ensured, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).
Liberia, for instance, is clearly a model case in that
regard.

We welcome the clear link made in the draft
presidential statement between peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development, an
interconnection Mr. Von der Schulenburg pointed out
very eloquently in the model case - and it is truly a
model case i of Sierra Leone. This interrelationship
must also be taken into account in the ongoing
Peacebuilding Commission review process. Early
economic recovery and the delivery of a peace
dividend are crucial incentives for societies to invest in
peace and stability. In this context, let me also point
out the significant contribution peacekeeping missions
can make to socio-economic development in their areas
of deployment, not least through local procurement.
And let me say that my delegation is very supportive of
the work of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra in this
field.

Over the past years, several peacekeeping
operations have been closed and followed by other
forms of United Nations engagement, in many cases by
integrated peacebuilding offices. We agree that the
time has come to draw lessons learned from those
examples. Therefore we welcome the decision of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations to address in the coming months key
lessons learned from past and current missions
regarding the successful implementation of transition
strategies. We believe that continued dialogue between
the Working Group and troop- and police-contributing
countries will contribute to this exercise.

