President Tadie: Let me begin by repeating that
Serbia's central strategic priority is a peaceful,
negotiated solution to the future status of Kosovo. In
that respect, Serbia is committed to becoming a
member of the European Union and to seeing the
whole region integrated into the European Union in the
future. Serbia is a constructive and reliable partner in
that respect. We have submitted our candidacy and
confirmed our European vision, and I want to thank all
the countries that acknowledged this important
development in this forum.

I also want to thank the 127 States that respect
the basic principles of the United Nations Charter and
Serbian sovereignty and territorial integrity by not
recognizing the unilateral declaration of independence
of Kosovo.

It is deeply disappointing and incredibly shocking
that Mr. Hyseni has made the claim, even today, that
new talks on status and negotiating could "provoke a
new conflict". That reflects a very strange
understanding of dialogue and negotiations. In my
view, it is a direct threat. It is truly outrageous and
shows the truly destabilizing consequences of the
unilateral declaration of independence.

We have all suffered because of the bad policies
and terrible visions of our leaders in the Balkans in the
19905. We have all suffered together. We have had so
many human victims in the region, on all sides. I am
very sorry because of that. Everyone who uses such
argumentation is destabilizing the region once again.

Allow me to say a few things about the elections
that happened in Kosovo and about crystal-clear
figures. In the first round of these elections, 6,022
Serbs voted, according to a United Nations report, and
more than 100,000 Serbs live in Kosovo today. Thus, at
the very most, 6 per cent of Kosovo Serbs voted. There
were 23,000 international observers - four times as
many observers as Serb voters.

Regarding the electricity problem in the northern
part of Kosovo, Electric Power Industry of Serbia has
provided electricity for the ordinary people living there
only because Kosovo Energy Corporation cut off the
supply of power to northern Kosovo, and only after
that. By providing electricity for ordinary people, we
have averted a humanitarian catastrophe affecting up to
100,000 residents. What happened with respect to the
electricity supply in Kosovo is crystal clear. I hope that
it will be possible to find a practical solution and to
depoliticize this issue, and I totally agree that the
money should go to whoever supplies the electricity, as
noted by the representative of the United Kingdom
representative in this forum.

I would also like to respond to some of the other
comments made this afternoon. I want to acknowledge
the statement made by the representative of our
neighbour country Bosnia and Herzegovina. Being a
responsible member of the international community,
Serbia will continue to fully support the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
will strongly oppose any attempt to partition that or
any other State Member of the United Nations. We will
also keep encouraging all three constituent peoples to agree
on necessary reforms with the aim of accelerating Bosnia's
accession to the European Union, which is a strategic
priority for all.

We have made it clear that we will support
whatever arrangement is acceptable to the parties,
stressing the need for pragmatism and compromise.
Completing the reconciliation process is an imperative,
not only in Bosnia but everywhere in the region. The
forthcoming resolution on Srebrenica, to be introduced
in Serbia's National Assembly, is intended to
contribute to this process and to enhance regional
peace and stability. Regrettably, other important
stakeholders have failed to be constructive. We
strongly condemn the dangerous sabre-rattling and
war-mongering statement of the Croatian President,
Mr. Stjepan Mesie. There is no justification for
threatening the use of force against Bosnia or any other
Western Balkan country. Serbia categorically rejects
such provocations, and we expect every other
responsible stakeholder to do the same. We have had
enough ofthis.

At the same time, to be crystal-clear, Serbia
remains fundamentally committed to working with
Croatia and all other United Nations Member States on
resolving all outstanding bilateral and regional issues.
Serbia is going to support integration into the European
Union of all Western Balkan countries, honestly and
fully.

I am grateful for this opportunity to explain the
official position of the Serbian State.

