Mr. Kablan Duncan (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's high-level debate on the issue of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I would also like to welcome you, Mr. President, as
well as the other Heads of State and Government and
eminent persons present at today's meeting, to discuss
an issue of such great importance for our planet.

The rapid development of nuclear and ballistic
programmes has led to the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Such weapons fuel violence and
conflict, threaten the stability of entire regions and
make the issue of non-proliferation an objective that
will ensure the survival of humankind. Despite all
efforts made by the international community to achieve
a world free of nuclear weapons, regrettably, our world
remains under the constant threat of such weapons and
of biological and chemical weapons. At the moment,
there are more than 14,500 nuclear weapons in the world.
They pose the risk ofa nuclear conflict with irreversible
humanitarian and environmental consequences and
represent a real challenge for the Organization.

It is also regrettable that States are inclined to invest
more in the modernization of their nuclear arsenals but
very little in the elimination of such weapons and their
means of delivery. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
ofNuclear Weapons, considered to be the cornerstone of
the non-proliferation regime, has been sorely tested and
is the source ofmaj or discord at its Review Conferences,
held every five years. Non-compliance by certain States
in upholding their commitments regarding disarmament
and non-proliferation constitutes a serious blow to
security and could lead to the acquisition of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors.

The Iranian nuclear problem, the situation in the
Middle East 4 including Syria and allegations of
the use of chemical weapons in that country and the
use of ballistic missiles in Yemen - and the issue of
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula constitute
truly complex situations and real sources of concern for
the international community. Those situations urgently
compel us to place the fight against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction at the top of our list of
priorities. In facing that situation, the Security Council,
as the guarantor of the maintenance of international
peace and security, must continue to shoulder its
responsibilities in the area of non-proliferation.

In that regard, cote d'Ivoire calls for the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the implementation of the
various international legal instruments on disarmament
and non-proliferation. To that end, my country calls on
Member States, supported by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), to meet
their international obligations in accordance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. Accordingly, cote d'Ivoire,
which is party to all major non-proliferation treaties
and conventions, has incorporated all obligations under
those international legal instruments into its national
laws. With regard to disarmament, as the step-by-step
approach has not produced the desired results, the
delegation of Cote d'Ivoire calls on the nuclear-weapon
States to consider a new and more effective approach.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomed the adoption of the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons on 7 July 2017
and stresses the importance ofits swift implementation.
Outer space, rightly considered as a common good
for humankind, deserves our sustained attention and
requires the urgent adoption of an international and
legally binding instrument to protect it from any arms
race and thereby avoid its militarization. Moreover,
Cote d'Ivoire stresses the need for the international
community to adopt a more binding instrument in
the area of biological and toxin weapons. Similarly,
my country would like to see the adoption a universal
and non-discriminatory instrument so as to ensure
security for non-nuclear-weapon States. With regard
to chemical weapons, Cote d'Ivoire calls for the
universalization of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
2325 (2016). In that regard, the mandate accorded to the
OPCW at the special session held at The Hague on 26 and
27 June to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators
of chemical-weapon attacks could greatly contribute to
resolving the issue relating to allegations of the use of
chemical weapons. Cote d'Ivoire calls on the Security
Council to stand united on that important issue.

Concerning the Iranian nuclear issue, the Ivoiran
delegation supports the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is satisfactory
in general. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire calls on
stakeholders to settle their differences concerning the
agreement, which was the result of unprecedented
international compromise and remains to this day a
genuine assurance for the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and a
pledge to ensure peace and regional stability.

Regarding the situation on the Korean peninsula,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes recent positive developments.
The historic 12 June meeting in Singapore between you,
Mr. President, and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un
remains one of the major milestones of the new regional
dynamic. In that regard, cote d'Ivoire reiterates its
commitment to the principles of the peaceful settlement
of disputes through dialogue and consultations. We
urge all stakeholders to rule out definitively all military
options, which could lead only to damaging and
irreversible consequences for the entire planet.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to multilateralism and international law,
and stresses the need for according high priority to
the maintenance of the non-proliferation regime on
chemical weapons, including their means of delivery,
as well as promoting disarmament and arms control.

