Mr. Dauth (Australia): I did have a whole lot of
nice things to say about you at the start of my address,
Mr. President, but, following your instructions, I have
withdrawn them. That is not to say that I do not mean
them.

We all know that on 8 November 2002 the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1441
(2002), affording Iraq a final opportunity to comply
with its disarmament obligations. That resolution came
11 years and seven months after resolution 687 (1991)
demanded that Iraq give up its weapons of mass
destruction. Given the amount of time that has passed,
we had hoped that resolution 1441 (2002) would have
been be the final step in resolving this issue. Given its
unanimous adoption by the Council, we had hoped that
the Government of Iraq would finally get the message.
But, sadly, 11 years and 10 months after the Security
Council first demanded that Iraq disarm, Saddam
Hussain still has not understood the message.

Resolution 1441 (2002) set up two objective
criteria of compliance: the provision by Iraq of a full
and complete declaration of its programmes of
weapons of mass destruction, and unconditional
cooperation with weapons inspectors. More than three
months later, by any objective reading of those criteria,
Iraq has failed to meet its obligations.

On 7 December Iraq delivered a declaration that
was patently incomplete. As the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) noted, it provided no new information
and failed to answer serious outstanding questions,
including questions about the production of anthrax,
VX and mustard gas.

On 27 January, after some 60 days of inspections,
neither UNMOVIC nor the IAEA were able to say that
Iraq was actively cooperating. Serious questions about
VX and about thousands of litres of chemical and
biological agents remained unanswered.

On 5 February Secretary of State Powell
presented further evidence that Iraq was not
cooperating, indeed, that it was actively trying to
subvert the inspection process. Australia found the
intelligence presented by Secretary Powell compelling.
If some believe that that information was open to
interpretation, that is of course their right. But given
Saddam's record of deception, I am not sure why we
should be giving him the benefit of the doubt.

And on 14 February, after almost 80 days of
inspections, UNMOVIC and the IAEA again reported
to the Council. What did we hear? We heard that Iraq
had been working to extend the range of its missile
systems beyond prescribed limits. And what did we not
hear? We did not hear that Iraq had finally decided to
cooperate immediately, actively and unconditionally
with inspectors.

It is patently clear, by the criteria established
under resolution 1441 (2002), that Iraq is in further
material breach of its obligations. The question today is
what the Security Council, as the primary multilateral
instrument of international peace and security, is going
to do about it. Last year the Council spent eight weeks
putting in place a robust inspection regime. Resolution
1441 (2002) gave inspectors the tools they needed to
verify Iraqi disarmament - and it is verifying Iraqi
disarmament which is their job, not a game of catch as
catch can.

But that was only one part of the solution to this
problem. Active Iraqi cooperation remains the other,
more fundamental, part. And this is still missing. In the
examples I have already listed - in everything we
heard from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei - the one
thing missing was immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation, as demanded by resolution 1441 (2002).
All of us understand the importance of this. I have
heard no one here say that doubling the number of
inspectors or giving them more time and more
resources will work without Iraqi cooperation. This is
what the Council should be focusing on today.

Yes, the Council could give Iraq more time. Yes,
we could wait until March; we could wait another three
months. But do we really think more time will make
Iraq cooperate? Does Iraq really need three more
months to make a decision that it should take in no
more than three minutes?

In Australia's View, the Security Council cannot
wait forever to confront this issue. Either Iraq has
complied or it has not. In our View, the Council should
move quickly to consider a further resolution that deals
decisively with Iraq's failure to comply with resolution
1441 (2002). The Security Council has a fundamental
responsibility to assert its authority. If it does not, it
places in jeopardy not only the cause of Iraqi
disarmament, but also the very basis of our current
system of collective security.

Resolution 1441 (2002) gave Iraq a final
opportunity to meet its obligations and promised
serious consequences if it did not comply. Is the
Security Council now saying that Iraq should be given
yet more opportunities and can forget about the serious
consequences? What message does that send to other
States prepared to thumb their noses at international
law and international norms?

Delays and divisions in the Council will only play
into Iraq's hands. We cannot allow a tyrant to evade
Council decisions. The Security Council must stand
united around what is fundamental, and must not be
distracted. It must act decisively to ensure that, after 12
years, Iraq finally meets its obligations.

