The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Gabon, Guinea, Iceland,
India, Iraq, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Norway, Senegal, Sri Lanka and Uganda, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

There being no objection it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Otunnu to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Salah to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ibrahima Diouf, Special Adviser on Child
Protection to the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Diouf to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
document S/2005/72.

I now give the floor to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.


