Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): We are gravely
concerned about the continuing crisis in the Central
African Republic and its implications for the whole
central African region. We fully share the view of the
regional countries that the crisis in the Central African
Republic poses serious threats to regional peace and
stability.

Given the gravity of the situation, we highly applaud
the efforts which have been undertaken for the last
several months by regional countries - in particular by
Burkina Faso, Chad, Gabon, Mali, Senegal and Togo -
and by other countries which support them, to resolve the
crisis in the Central African Republic through the
deployment of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB). We
also commend their courageous and resolute decision to
undertake a military operation at a time of uncertainty. It
is our firm belief that such regional efforts deserve strong
support and encouragement by the international
community.

We further believe that the Council should extend its
full political support and blessing to the on-going regional
initiative by approving the continuation of MISAB
operations and authorizing MISAB to ensure the security
and freedom of movement of their personnel under
Chapter VII of the Charter. We will therefore vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

It is our most sincere hope that MISAB will
continue to lay the groundwork for the return of peace
and security to the Central African Republic at the earliest
possible date. We trust that the Council will continue to
scrutinize closely, through periodic reports by the
participating countries, the operations of MISAB and their
impact on the situation in order to help promote an early
resolution to the crisis.

In concluding, we would like to underline the
significance of today's decision by the Council. We
believe that the Council's endorsement of MISAB will set

 

an important precedent in establishing appropriate linkages
between the Council and regional initiatives in matters of
international peace and security. We hope that the success
of MISAB will encourage further positive developments in
regional peace and security initiatives, in close coordination
with the Council.

