Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Kazakhstan as he presides over the
Security Council today and to express my certainty
that under his able leadership the work of the Council
will be crowned with success. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his involvement in the development of the Central
Asian region.

The discussions initiated by Kazakhstan today are
focused on issues related to sustainable peace, security
and development in the Central Asian region and its
closest neighbours, first and foremost Afghanistan.
Turkmenistan takes an active part in joint international
efforts to strengthen peace, security and cooperation
in Central Asia. We have gained solid peacekeeping
experience, which is also needed to properly address
such crucial issues as assisting regional disarmament
processes, resolving water and energy resource
problems in a balanced manner, ensuring environmental
well-being and countering the threatening dangers and
challenges of the day.

We note the role of preventive diplomacy in
preventing conflicts, dealing with their root causes,
promoting an atmosphere of trust among countries and
creating conditions conducive to effective interaction
among States in the political, diplomatic, economic,
social, environmental and other spheres. Turkmenistan
attaches particular importance to the activities of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, which was established by
a decision of the Security Council upon the initiative of
the five Central Asian States. Over the 10 years of its
existence, the Centre has provided the Governments of
the countries of Central Asia a platform for dialogue
on the most important regional issues, including the
management of shared resources, combating such
transnational threats as terrorism, violent extremism,
organized crime, drug trafficking and human
trafficking and making joint efforts to help stabilize
the situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and members of the Security
Council and all of those who have spoken in favour
of the comprehensive efforts of the Centre, which we
expect will continue in future.

We fully agree that there is an inextricable link
between security and development. Turkmenistan
has therefore undertaken large-scale projects that
meet the shared goals of bringing welfare and
sustainable development to the people of the region.
An important aspect of this constructive strategy
is the strengthening of our traditional relations of
friendship, good-neighbourliness and cooperation with
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We have been
unwavering in our support of an exclusively peaceful,
political and diplomatic resolution to the situation in
that neighbouring country. Indeed, Turkmenistan is
effectively supporting the socioeconomic and cultural
regeneration of Afghanistan.

We have made constructive proposals aimed
at developing fundamentally new mechanisms to
stabilize the situation in the country and are taking
consistent steps to rebuild its economy. Accordingly,
Turkmenistan initiated the large-scale infrastructure
projects mentioned here today, with Afghanistan's
involvement. In the end, however, the problems of
Afghanistan go far beyond the region and affect the
prospects for sustainable development for the entire
international community. Therefore, Turkmenistan has
always adhered to its principled position on the need
to develop a non-military, political and diplomatic
approach to resolving the situation in that neighbouring
State.

As an active participant in the efforts of the
international community in this area, our country is
convinced that peace and security are a crucial part of
the prosperity of the region and its peoples, including
Afghanistan. In that context, we view Turkmen-Afghan
cooperation as an integral part of a broad international
partnership. Turkmenistan's perspective is based on
the desire to quickly involve our southern neighbour in
regional integration, as well as seeing it join various
projects, which, in turn, will make it possible for active
peacebuilding to occur in Afghanistan.

The seventh Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, which took place in
Ashgabat on 14 and 15 November 2017, is the logical next
step for Turkmenistan in this area. It is also yet another
step forward towards strengthening and broadening
regional economic partnership. We support all regional
and other initiatives, including Uzbekistan's initiative
aimed at settling the situation in Afghanistan.

We call on Afghanistan and regional partners to
maintain momentum in their efforts to strengthen
regional dialogue and cooperation. We will continue
to further support activities of cooperation and
coordination of efforts between the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in order to strengthen their capacity to
maintain peace and sustainable development in the
region.

In conclusion, I would like to say to our brotherly
country Kazakhstan that we wish it success in presiding
over the Security Council this month.

