Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 22 March
to 21 May, during which time the Committee met once
in informal consultations and conducted additional
work via the written silence procedure.

During the informal consultations held on 3 April,
the Committee discussed a letter dated 7 March from the
Coordinator ofthe Panel of Experts on Libya, addressed
to me, expressing the Panel's extreme concern, which
was shared by Committee members, regarding the
leak to the media of the Panel's unpublished interim
report of 16 January. The Committee heard briefings
by the Secretariat and the Coordinator of the Panel. The
Committee also discussed, under "Other matters", the
issue of the Libyan assets frozen pursuant to Security
Council resolutions following reports of alleged
devaluation and losses.

With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
sent a letter to Libya seeking any update to the written
briefings that were provided in May 2017, pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 2278 (2016), concerning
the Libyan coast guard, explosive-ordnance disposal
units and the presidential guard. As of 1 May, the
Committee is considering proposals for the designation
of six individuals under the assets-freeze and travel-
ban measures in the context of migrant exploitation
and abuse.

During the reporting period, the Committee also
received a request for de-listing from the travel ban,
through the focal point for de-listing established
pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006), from a listed
individual, Aisha Al-Qadhafi, whose name is currently
inscribed on the Committee's sanctions list as subject to
the assets-freeze and travel-ban measures. In accordance
with the provisional guidelines of the Committee, given
that Ms. Al-Qadhafi was listed by a resolution of the
Security Council, the Committee assumes the role
of designating State and will take further steps after
having received any possible comments from the States
of citizenship and residence.

Finally, the Committee received updates from the
Panel of Experts in relation to the vessels Nadine and
Lynn S, which had previously been subject to some of
the measures in connection with its attempts to illicitly
export petroleum, including crude oil and refined
petroleum products, from Libya. The listing of the two
vessels expired on 18 and 29 April, respectively.

