Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for his
comprehensive briefing and his report (see S/2011/283)
on developments in the country.

We reiterate our support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its endeavours to complete the
implementation of the Dayton Accords and to achieve
the goals set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which will lead to the closure
of the Office of the High Representative.

The quiet and peaceful conduct of the general
elections in October 2010 was followed by a period of
semi-paralysis in the formation of a Government and
an increase in political rhetoric. That is regrettable. We
hope that more attention will be paid in the days to
come to the formation of a representative Government
that will promote the necessary reforms and conduct an
open dialogue to achieve reconciliation.

We are concerned at the conclusions issued by the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska on
13 April, in which it challenged the role of the
country's legal institutions and the prerogatives of the
High Representative, thereby violating the letter and
spirit of the Dayton Accords, the country's Constitution
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
negatively affecting coexistence.

We therefore call on the Republika Srpska
authorities to abide by the letter and spirit of the
Dayton Accords. In that connection, we reaffirm our
backing for the independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also important for all
parties to refrain from taking measures, be they
through constitutional reforms or the formation of new
bodies of authority, outside the scope of the Dayton
Accords or the country's Constitution. That would be
counterproductive for all parties. All parties must enter
into dialogue, negotiate on controversial issues and
make mutual concessions with a view to arriving at a
compromise acceptable to all parties. We realize that
such an approach is complex, yet it provides a safety
valve in multicultural societies. Local actors should
play a leading role.

In conclusion, we fully support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its efforts to entrench the pillars of the
State while achieving the requisite reforms to bring
about stability and improve the welfare of its citizens.

