Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for calling this meeting. I take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence of the new Permanent
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of
Tunisia; we wish them welcome. I would like to thank
Mr. Petritsch for his informative briefing on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend his
excellent work in implementing the Dayton/Paris
Agreements, as outlined in his most recent report. We
take this opportunity too to pay tribute to the excellent
work of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which, as Mr. Petritsch has
said, must be carried through to its conclusion. Its
achievements in reforming and restructuring the law
enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly the police, are impressive indeed.

As Ireland fully subscribes to the statement which
will be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Sweden for the presidency of the European Union, I
will be very brief and will highlight only a few points
of particular national interest.

Ireland believes that the democratization and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina are essential
to overall stability in the Balkans. Since the signature
of the Peace Agreement more than five years ago,
considerable progress has been achieved there. We
believe that the regional approach adopted is the
correct one, and we urge all parties in the region to
contribute to the strengthening of inter-State relations.
At the same time, we believe that there is continued
need for the involvement of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ireland, as a
member of the European Union, will continue to be
active in that regard.
Ireland welcomes the formation of a moderate
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina which, for the
first time, contains no extreme nationalistic parties. We
support the programme outlined by that Government
and hope that it will make rapid progress in
establishing State institutions to promote a sustainable
democratic and multi-ethnic civil society. The
Government must undertake serious political,
economic, human-rights and rule-of-law reform in
order to improve the conditions of all people in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Such reform will strengthen the
capacity of the country for self-sustainability and will
help it to fulfil the conditions outlined in the European
Union road map for moving towards full European
integration.

Ireland joins others in condemning the recent
unilateral moves by the self-styled Croat National
Congress in Bosnia and Herzegovina to establish a kind
of Croat self-rule. Such moves are a clear violation of
the Peace Agreement. We support the decisive action
taken by Mr. Petritsch in removing Mr. Jelavic and
others from their offices and their positions within the
Bosnian Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). We urge
all parties to work within the legal institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of its entities to promote
their legitimate interests. Such an approach is the only
way forward.

While we recognize that progress has been
achieved, we remain extremely concerned about the
situation of the more than one million refugees and
displaced persons remaining in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The authorities in the country and
elsewhere must make progress on that issue and on
implementing property rights laws, both of which are
central to the normalization and stability of the region.

We are also concerned about the level of human
trafficking and illegal migration through Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This has obvious implications for
stability, not just in Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, but
in the wider region. We recognize the efforts of the
State border service in that regard and agree that the
service needs to be further strengthened.

Finally, we express our pleasure that progress is
being made in bringing to justice the perpetrators of
crimes committed under previous regimes. We
encourage all parties in the region to make further
progress on this extremely important issue and to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
