The Secretary-General: Allow me to first thank
the United States and you personally, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting.

The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of
the longest-standing and most serious issues before the
United Nations. The Security Council first adopted a
resolution (resolution 825 (1993)) on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea nuclear issue in 1993, when
it urged the Democratic People's Republic of Korea not
to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Twenty-four years later, and despite
extensive efforts, the challenge is still unresolved.

In response to the accelerated nuclear and ballistic
missile activities of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, the Security Council has adopted two
sanctions resolutions (resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321
(2016)) and met 11 times in emergency consultations
since January 2016. During that period, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea conducted two nuclear
tests, more than 30 launches using ballistic missile
technology and various other activities relating to its
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. Its launches
using ballistic missile technology have included
tests of short-, medium-, intermediate-range and
submarine-launched ballistic missiles, as well as the
placement of a satellite in orbit.

Those tests and launches are clear violations
of Security Council resolutions. The absence of
coordination and notification in advance of these
launches, other than the space launch on 7 February
2016, is contrary to internationally accepted regulations
and standards adopted by the International Maritime
Organization and the International Civil Aviation
Organization. Aircraft and ships have been prevented
from planning their routes in order to steer clear ofthose
hazardous activities. And adjacent States have been
prevented from promulgating dangerous, restricted or
prohibited areas in their areas of responsibility.

The International Atomic Energy Agency
remains unable to access the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to verify the status of its nuclear
programme. The Agency continues to monitor
developments through satellite imagery and has
observed "signatures" consistent with the operation
of the plutonium-production reactor and the reported
centrifuge enrichment facility. Commercial satellite
imagery analysis has also indicated continued activity
at the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear
test site, which is believed to be maintained in a state of
readiness to conduct additional nuclear-test explosions.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has increasingly stressed the importance of nuclear
deterrence in its military doctrine. At the seventh
Congress of the Workers Party of Korea, held in March
2016, the country's leader, Mr. Kim Jong Un, described
the country as a responsible nuclear-weapon State.
More recently, in a statement to the United Nations
Disarmament Commission on 3 April 2017, while
reaffirming its support for comprehensive and complete
nuclear disarmament, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea stated that "going nuclear-armed is the policy
of our State" (see A/CN.10/PV.363).

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is the

only country to have conducted nuclear tests in this
century. We must assume that, with each test or launch,
the Democratic People's Republic ofKorea continues to
make technological advances in its pursuit of a military
nuclear capability.

I condemn in the strongest terms the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's repeated violations of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's continued pursuit of its
nuclear-weapon and ballistic-missile programmes, in
defiance of repeated demands by the Security Council
to cease such activities, threatens to destabilize regional
and international security and seriously undermines
international disarmament and non-proliferation efforts.

I am alarmed by the risk of a military escalation
in the region, including by miscalculation or
misunderstanding. I am particularly concerned by
the possibility that efforts to offset the destabilizing
activities of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea could also result in increased arms competition
and tensions, further impeding the ability of the
international community to maintain unity and achieve
a peaceful solution.

The onus is on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to comply with its international obligations. At
the same time, the international community must also
step up its efforts to manage and reduce tensions.

The absence of communication channels with
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea could be
dangerous. Armed conflict in North-East Asia, which
is home to one fifth of the world's people and gross
domestic product, would have global ramifications.

We need to avoid miscalculation and misunderstanding.
We need to act now to prevent conflict and achieve
sustainable peace. That means the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea refraining from further testing,
complying with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and exploring the resumption of dialogue. It also means
reopening and strengthening communication channels,
particularly military-to-military, to lower the risk of
miscalculation or misunderstanding. And it means all
Member States implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

I have taken note of the Security Council's
commitment to a peaceful diplomatic and political
solution to the situation; of efforts by Council members,
as well as other States, to facilitate a peaceful and
comprehensive solution through dialogue; and of the
importance the Council has placed on working to
reduce tensions. The Council has important tools at its
disposal, from targeted sanctions to communication
channels. As Secretary-General, I am committed to
seeking peaceful and political solutions. I stand ready
to assist in any way possible, but I would welcome
guidance and assistance from the Security Council in
this regard.

I welcome the Council's understanding of the
importance of the humanitarian imperatives from
the political situation. On 21 March, we released the
latest Democratic People's Republic of Korea needs
and priorities document. For this year, 13 United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations operating in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea are calling for $114 million to meet
the urgent needs of 13 million especially vulnerable
people - half of the country's population. The people
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea need our
generosity and help.

1 also call on the authorities of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to engage with United
Nations human rights mechanisms and with the
international community to address the grave human
rights situation and improve the living conditions of
its people. I therefore welcome the visit next week by
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights
of persons with disabilities to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. As we discussed in this Chamber
on 18 April (see S/PV.7926), improvement on human
rights will not only protect the livelihoods and dignity
ofpeople in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
but also promote long-term security and stability in the
region and beyond.

I would like to conclude by underlining our
collective priority for conflict prevention. We must
remain committed to pursuing peaceful and diplomatic
paths forward for a peaceful and denuclearized
Korean peninsula.

