Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is my
special privilege and pleasure to have the opportunity
to address the Security Council today and to share
some views on the increasingly important topic of the
relationship between global security and international
terrorism. On behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our best wishes to the
Government of Croatia for its presidency of the
Security Council this month. Today's agenda and the
presence of the President of Croatia, Mr. Stjepan
Mesic', should once again show the importance that
Croatia and countries in the region accord to the issue
of terrorism, which has taken the lives of hundreds of
innocent civilians.

Indeed, the challenges posed to the modern world
and our societies by the various forms, methods and
manifestations of international terrorism make the
rethinking of current approaches to preventing and
combating this phenomenon inevitable, thereby
reaffirming the necessity of strengthening international
cooperation in this very respect. I remain confident that
such a cooperative approach will prevail and will bring
results, providing at the same time for a significant
contribution to the strengthening of global security.

At the very outset, I would like to stress that
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully committed to
the fight against this scourge and will continue to make
an active contribution in this respect. Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to invest significant efforts in
the prevention and fight against terrorism, and it has
been confirmed as an active member of the counter-
terrorism coalition committed to fighting all types of
terrorist activity, especially through institutional
capacity-building and the harmonization of its
legislation with the relevant United Nations and
European conventions and protocols.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has also concluded a
series of bilateral treaties and agreements on police
cooperation with other countries in our region and
beyond, as part of its fight against terrorism. Most of
the measures set forth in our strategy for combating
terrorism adopted in July 2006 have been successfully
implemented. In an ongoing manner, the Ministry of
Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina closely monitors
the situation in the world in this regard and is currently
involved in drafting a new national document on
fighting terrorism and strengthening the counter-
terrorism capacities of our country.

At the international level, our country is actively
cooperating with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in
particular with regard to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the implementation of the
Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions. The Monitoring Team of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities
conducted a visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina in May
2006 and officially acknowledged our State authorities'
efforts to implement sanctions and to undertake
effective measures to counter the threat of terrorism.
The same Committee also recognized the need for
further technical assistance, in particular in
strengthening and modernizing our capacities with
respect to immigration and border control.

That Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee made a field visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in November 2007, and we hope that their
forthcoming findings will help us to fulfil our
international obligations and further promote our
legitimate fight against terrorism. Designed to improve
cooperation and interaction among the Member States,
the new methods of work of the counter-terrorism
committees and bodies will no doubt help us to achieve
our common goal - countering and preventing
terrorist attacks.

Combating terrorism and addressing its root
causes in order to prevent insurgency and the spread of
terrorist acts are today among the most challenging
issues on the United Nations agenda. Convening this
meeting on such an important global topic is indeed
timely and imperative, especially in the light of the
recent tragic events that took place Mumbai, India.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns those
horrible terror attacks, and I avail myself of this
opportunity to reiterate the deepest condolences and
sympathies to the families of the victims and to the
friendly people of India.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is an effective way to provide a
coordinated, multilateral response to terrorism and to
understand the particular conditions of each region and
country. We truly believe that regional organizations'
understanding of the situation in their neighbourhood
could be helpful in providing rapid and appropriate
answers to threats endangering international peace and
security.

The counter-terrorism-related technical assistance
of the European Union, the Council of Europe, NATO
and other regional organizations have helped Bosnia
and Herzegovina to carry out necessary reforms
undertaken with the aim of achieving the country's full
integration into Euro-Atlantic security structures.

This highly valuable assistance has improved the
functioning of the relevant State structures -
ministries, agencies and other State bodies - and
strengthened Bosnia and Herzegovina's contribution to
the shared approach of international efforts aimed at
increasing security at the national, regional and
international levels.

Tomorrow we will be celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Fighting the scourge of
terrorism should not hinder the obligations of States
under international human rights instruments, refugee
and humanitarian law. It is our responsibility to find a
just balance between legitimate national security
concerns and the protection of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of our citizens.

I wish to reiterate that Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains fully committed to effectively preventing and
fighting this global threat and stands ready to provide
any assistance and support to the international efforts
in the same respect.

