Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) represents the
first preventive force deployed by the United Nations.
Therefore, the Republic of Korea attaches particular
importance to its work. Its presence has been crucial for
the maintenance of peace and security in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as well as in the whole
Balkan region. Its success is bound to have long-term
implications for the future of United Nations peace-
keeping operations.

Since its deployment in 1992, UNPREDEP has been
largely successful. It has effectively discharged its
primary task of monitoring, and reporting on the situation
along, the borders of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
with Albania.

UNPREDEP has played a very constructive role in
promoting internal political stability by facilitating
dialogue and compromise between various segments of
society. It has also provided much-needed humanitarian
aid to the local population and assisted considerably in
national capacity-building.

We wholeheartedly applaud all these outstanding
achievements of UNPREDEP. My delegation wishes to
express its gratitude to the personnel of UNPREDEP for
these laudable contributions. We should also like to pay
tribute to the commendable work of other United Nations
organizations and international agencies operating in the
region, such as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Health
Organization (WHO), the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF).

The situations in the different parts of the former
Yugoslavia are inextricably linked. Peace and stability in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
developments in the rest of the former Yugoslavia,
including the effective implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, are mutually dependent and reinforcing.
Therefore, in contemplating the future of UNPREDEP, we
must consider the Balkans as a whole.

Today, the structures of peace in the former
Yugoslavia are flimsy at best. In Bosnia and Herzegovina,
although direct hostilities have ceased and the inter-entity
boundary line has been established, we have a long way
to go before realizing a sustainable peace. The return of
refugees and displaced persons and their resettlement
remain formidable tasks. The holding of free and fair
elections is also a daunting issue. The forces of

 

reconciliation and reintegration appear to be overshadowed
by the forces of partition. Too few war criminals have been
brought before the International Tribunal. Meanwhile, in
Eastern Slavonia, the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) has just begun the crucial task of
demilitarization.

The internal situation in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and its relations with neighbouring countries
are similarly volatile. Despite measurable improvements in
its political stability, inter-ethnic tensions remain a source
of great concern. Its economy, deeply affected by four
devastating years of war in the region, acts as a further
destabilizing factor. Its relations with both the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Greece, albeit improved of late,
still remain delicate, and much work needs to be done. In
particular, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's
border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has yet to
be demarcated.

From this perspective, we concur with the Secretary-
General's assessment that it would be too early to conclude
that a durable peace has taken hold in the region. After
weighing all these factors and taking note of the wishes of
the Governments of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and of the troop-contributing countries to have
the mandate of UNPREDEP extended, my delegation came
to the conclusion that it is premature at this stage to
consider either the down-sizing or the withdrawal of
UNPREDEP. We will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

Finally, given the fluid character of the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and throughout the
Balkans, we welcome the intention of the Secretary-General
to keep the Council regularly informed of the developments
on the ground and look forward to his further
recommendations regarding the composition, strength and
mandate of UNPREDEP.

