Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing
and for the continued efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO) to support peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, protect civilians
and secure access for public health organizations
responding to the Ebola outbreak. We deeply appreciate
the Mission's efforts. I also wish to thank Ambassador
Alotaibi for his update on his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The United States is extremely troubled by the
recent clashes across the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including violence in the
provinces of Ituri, South Kivu and North Kivu, which
left hundreds dead and displaced hundreds of thousands,
as Ms. Zerrougui just highlighted. The United States
commends President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's efforts
to stem this violence by dispatching senior officials to
negotiate peace in South Kivu, launching community
dialogue initiatives and ordering a military offensive
in Ituri, all of which have helped address the violence.

We also welcome the decisions of several militias
to lay down their arms since President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi took office, and we urge Congolese officials
to lead a demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
(DDR) process. We encourage key officials to consider
whether the DDR process should provide willing
former fighters, such as those of the Force de resistance
patriotique de l'Ituri militia, a path to transition into a
peaceful and productive civilian life rather than simply
absorbing them into the armed forces ofthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo and risk perpetuating cycles of
human rights violations and abuses. We encourage the
Government to clarify confusion with regard to the
DDR's focal point as well.

At the same time, we recognize that DDR is only
one part of a larger political solution. The United
States remains committed to fighting impunity and
supporting the rule of law, and we are encouraged by
the ongoing trials of warlords, such as Sheka, and by
the warrant issued for Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, We
applaud MONUSCO's assistance with these efforts.

The flow of arms and the illicit trade in gold and
other precious minerals enables the violence in the east
to persist. We thank Ambassador Alotaibi for leading the
recent trip of the Sanctions Committee to the region and
the United Arab Emirates, during which we witnessed
significant goodwill to help Congolese leaders tackle
these challenges. However, we remain concerned that
the Congolese generals under United States sanctions,
such as General Gabriel Amisi Kumba, continue to
participate in illicit gold trafficking. Removing these
bad actors is critical to ending cycles of violence in
the east.

Ending the Ebola outbreak also remains a top
priority for the United States. The United States is the
largest single country donor to the Ebola response,
having contributed more than $98 million to stop the
spread ofthe disease. We urge existing and new donors to
consider making contributions as well. We also welcome
the World Health Organization's recent decision to
designate the outbreak as a public health emergency of
international concern and to release the public-health
pillar of the fourth phase of the strategic response plan.
We urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations to finalize and
release the enabling-environment pillar as soon as
possible so that donors can holistically assess priorities
and resource requirements. The United States also
encourages all partners to ensure that response efforts
align with and enable clearly defined leadership and
coordination, engage and empower Congolese actors
and address the security, humanitarian and development
needs of Ebola-affected communities.

Finally, it is important to raise the key concern that
progress is slow on a number ofissues, especially DDR
and the Ebola response, which has been caused by the
absence of a national Government owing primarily to
the intransigence of political actors aligned with former
President Kabila. It compromises all other progress to
which the Congolese people aspire. We call upon those
blocking the formation of a Government to adopt the
flexibility required to seat a Cabinet and fulfil the
hopes of the Congolese people for a better future.

We will continue to consider sanctions designations
and visa restrictions for those who engage in or provide
support for acts that undermine the peace, stability
and security of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the light of the aforementioned challenges we
welcome the strategic review of MONUSCO and look
forward to receiving the report. We place great value
on these reviews and other United Nations reports
examining peacekeeping activities and performance.
We appreciate that the Secretary-General's report to the
Security Council (S/2019/575) included performance
assessments as well as overall assessments of progress
on mandated tasks and would urge the inclusion
of even more details. MONUSCO cannot fulfil its
mandates without high-performing troops, police and
civilians committed to a clear set of standards and to
the protection of civilians. We urge the Secretariat
and MONUSCO to continue to implement the reforms
outlined in resolution 2436 (2018), which will be
essential to planning a troop drawdown.

