Mr. Holkeri: I arrived in Kosovo to begin my
mission as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General 11 weeks ago. I had hardly been on the ground
for half an hour when someone fired several rounds of
bullets at a group of children swimming in a stream.
Two Kosovo Serb boys were killed and two were
seriously injured that day in Gorazdevac. That incident
may well have been intended to be a message for me.
There have been previous cases in which violent acts
were timed to coincide with high-level international
visits or heightened international progress on Kosovo.
However, it only strengthened my resolve to start my
mission.

Last week I visited a military hospital in
Belgrade, where one of the seriously wounded, Bogdan
Bukumiric, is recovering. He asked me how the
investigations were progressing. I told him that it was
our responsibility to do our utmost to bring to justice
those responsible for the crime. But, echoing the
message that I have delivered to so many in Kosovo, I
told him that we needed the help and cooperation of
ordinary people to ensure that justice was done.
Unfortunately, as in many other societies, investigators
run up against a wall of silence due to fear and
intimidation. My young friend Bogdan and his
generation need a future in which there is no threat of
violence. I am convinced that the overwhelming
majority of the people of Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnic background, are against the use of Violence.

In addition to the shooting at Gorazdevac, several
other senseless, violent incidents shook Kosovo in the
weeks that followed. I have made it clear to Kosovo's
leaders that issuing statements of sorrow is not enough.
I have urged them to get out of their offices and explain
to their constituents in towns, villages, workplaces,
schools and families that violence must stop. It harms
Kosovo. Far too many people silently tolerate
ethnically based violence. This must be opposed.

The attacks can resume at any time. Extremists
from one side or the other may again try to influence
the international perception of Kosovo to discredit the
peace-building activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), or they can resort to violent
acts to dissuade internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees from returning.

The overall security situation has vastly improved
across most of Kosovo, but the dramatic advances
enjoyed by the majority community have not been felt
by all. The rule of law is being openly flouted in many
places around Kosovo. Combating these phenomena
will require upholding intensive cooperation between
UNMIK's Police and Justice Pillar, with the full
engagement of the Kosovo Police Service (KPS), and
the NATO-led peacekeeping force. KFOR continues to
do excellent work in ensuring a safe and secure
environment throughout Kosovo. We count on their
continued, robust support.

The Kosovo Police Service, now numbering
nearly 6,000 servicemen and women, is increasingly
qualified to handle more advanced police activities. As
a result, UNMIK police have begun gradually reducing
their presence. Similarly, the judiciary is also
increasingly being staffed and run by local residents.
The exclusive use of international judges on trial
panels is rapidly diminishing as members of the local
judiciary demonstrate the ability to take on difficult
cases.

Still, much remains to be done to improve the
security situation in Kosovo. Security and the rule of
law remain my highest priority, as both are
indispensable for progress on so many other key issues,
including returns and economic development.

The violent incidents of this past summer have
had a serious effect on the perception of security in
minority communities. Clearly, if internally displaced
persons fear for their safety they will not return to their
homes. Inter-ethnic violence should not be allowed to
hamper the positive trend in returns, which was
supported by the open letter signed at the beginning of
July by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and addressed to the IDPs, urging them to return. This
commendable commitment was further backed up by
the allocation by the Provisional Institutions of €7
million from the Kosovo consolidated budget to
funding returns projects. This is a most welcome and
constructive development.

Overall, freedom of movement has continued to
improve in most parts of Kosovo as UNMIK has
provided or facilitated transport services for minority
communities. The challenge remains to ensure that all
municipalities, and particularly those that are to receive
returning IDPs, show a clear commitment to a tolerant,
multi-ethnic society.

Let me take this opportunity to remind you that
returns require timely planning and sufficient financing
to be successful. Donor funds for 2004 should be
released early enough to allow the projects to be duly
prepared.

Another fundamental objective is the direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. Much of my
time has been occupied in preparing the launch of this
important process. My aim has been to translate the
political commitment of the Thessaloniki European
Union-Western Balkans Summit, where both Belgrade
and Pristina accepted the dialogue process, into a
concrete and effective framework for communication
between the parties.

This has proved to be a challenging and strenuous
effort. Prime Minister Rexhepi has consistently
conditioned the Government's participation in the
dialogue on the consensual approval of the main
coalition parties or a consensus of the Assembly. In my
view - and this view is largely shared by the
international community - the Government must
promptly decide to engage in the technical talks. The
Prime Minister and his respective ministries should
determine without further delay how best the
Government can contribute to the process.
Furthermore, some Kosovo Albanian political leaders
have made their participation in any talks conditional
on changes in the governmental responsibilities and
structures as well as the establishment of new
ministries, including in reserved areas.

There cannot be any linkage between the dialogue
process and enhancement of the responsibilities and
structures of the Provisional Institutions. Such
bargaining is not acceptable. Dialogue is one of the
standards approved by the Security Council. As to the
transfer of further competencies beyond chapter 5 of
the Constitutional Framework, the Security Council, I
am sure, will provide the necessary guidance.
Failure of the Government and the coalition
parties to accept responsibility for contributing to the
achievement of this particular benchmark resulted in
the launching of the talks in Vienna on 14 October
2003 with the participation of only two out of three
institutional leaders - Mr. Rugova, President of
Kosovo, and Mr. Daci, President of the Kosovo
Assembly. I commend their political courage and
responsible action. It is regrettable that the
Government's absence prevented a multi-ethnic
representation from Pristina at the Vienna meeting. I
appreciate that despite this fact Prime Minister
Zivkovic and Deputy Prime Minister Covic decided to
come.

The Belgrade and Pristina delegations sat on
either side of me in the historic Congress Hall of the
Austrian Federal Chancellery. An impressive array of
representatives of the international community at the
highest level was present. It is known that the Belgrade
and Pristina delegation members did not interact, but at
that first encounter they did listen carefully to what the
other side had to say and, in certain areas, their
comments provided encouraging signals that progress
could be made. The international community's
representatives offered words of encouragement to the
participants to proceed with the dialogue, emphasizing
this as one of the eight benchmarks that should be
fulfilled before talks on final status or future status can
begin.

Now our task is to maintain the momentum and to
move forward. The four working groups with multi-
ethnic representation on the Kosovo side must be
promptly established and begin technical talks in
Belgrade and Pristina at the expert level. That, too, is
likely to be an uphill struggle. I appeal to this Council
and to the international community as a whole to
provide continued support for the dialogue process.
Speaking with one voice as they did in Vienna is of
utmost importance.

While these efforts are ongoing, the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and UNMIK are now
intensely focused on a joint plan for implementing the
eight benchmarks. We are closely coordinating with the
Office of the Prime Minister to develop achievable
goals within agreed time frames to enable the
Provisional Institutions to meet standards. The joint
plan should offer clarity both to the people of Kosovo
and to the international community on implementation
of the standards and the evaluation of progress.

I have focused primarily on security, returns,
dialogue and standards, but there are serious challenges
in other areas as well. Kosovo's economy is showing
progress. Tax revenues and customs duties exceed
expectations. Necessary management changes for
Kosovo's most intractable problem in the economic
sphere - the unstable and inadequate electricity
supply - have been agreed with the Government.
Unemployment remains at about 57 per cent overall
and is even higher for women and young people.
Privatization is essential and certainly the only hope in
addressing this challenge.

However, the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) is
expressing concerns related to immunity of its
personnel and the legal platform provided by the
current KTA legislation. This is adversely affecting the
privatization process. Further discussions on these
issues are necessary in order to facilitate the effective
implementation of the privatization process, which is
vital to the economic development of Kosovo.

UNMIK is nearing completion of the agreed
transfer of competencies in non-reserved areas to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government based on
the Constitutional Framework. We must ensure not
only that non-reserved competencies are effectively
transferred, but also that the Provisional Institutions are
in a position to absorb the new responsibilities and to
carry them out with the necessary technical
competence and political fairness.

Kosovo's leaders are increasingly demanding that
UNMIK also transfer competencies in reserved areas. I
have told them that the Provisional Institutions'
advance into reserved areas under the Constitutional
Framework is beyond my mandate and will require
action by the Security Council. At the same time, I
have expressed my commitment to working with the
Government to enhance its effectiveness in a true spirit
of partnership. I have indicated my readiness to give
favourable consideration to the establishment of new
structures that may be needed for this purpose, always
in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework.

Meanwhile, Kosovo's democratic institutions, at
both the central and municipal levels, continue to
develop and are gradually improving their
administrative skills and effectiveness. UNMIK will
soon be receiving the Council of Europe mission's
recommendations on decentralization in Kosovo, due
in mid-November. These should form a good basis for
bringing democratic local Government closer to the
people and increasing its efficiency. The process of
decentralization is likely to be complex and lengthy
and will depend on the ability of local representatives
to take on additional responsibilities. However, even
now much more needs to be done to provide
functioning services to all citizens and to ensure
respect for minority rights at all levels of governance.

It is of very serious concern that the Belgrade
authorities continue to strengthen parallel structures in
Kosovo, as evidenced by the recent unilateral
appointment by the Coordination Centre for Kosovo of
so-called regional and municipal coordinators.
Belgrade must work with Kosovo structures and
replace this unacceptable policy with a commitment to
truly multi-ethnic organs of Government in Kosovo.
Failure to change course will impede the development
of genuine multi-ethnicity in Kosovo.

Parallel courts continue to function in the
northern municipalities and even outside of Kosovo.
This is really unacceptable. These parallel courts
pretend to exercise jurisdiction in Kosovo.
International arrest warrants that have no validity have
been issued through these unauthorized structures
against Kosovo residents. This has already caused
serious difficulties and cannot be tolerated. Under
resolution 1244 (1999), it is UNMIK that has
jurisdiction and authority over Kosovo.

The short-to-medium term outlook for Kosovo is
uncertain, but the strong desire of Kosovo's people to
live in a peaceful, stable, lawful society is crystal clear.
Infighting and jockeying for position among politicians
in advance of elections in Kosovo and Serbia will
continue to hamper our attempts to fulfil the tasks vital
for implementation of UNMIK's mandate. The public
is growing increasingly frustrated with the
Government's apparent inability to tackle matters that
affect its well-being. Continued high levels of
unemployment are of special concern. The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government for their part are
constantly blaming all deficiencies on what they
perceive to be an absence of authority to deal with
these matters.

These tensions - caused by Belgrade's continued
support of parallel structures; the possibility of a
renewal of ethnically-motivated violent attacks; and the
resulting fears that continue to keep many internally
displaced persons from returning to Kosovo - are all
challenges that require us to maintain a firm
commitment to the principles and objectives embodied
in resolution 1244 (1999).

UNMIK, KFOR and the international community
still have much to do together in Kosovo to ensure the
fulfilment of standards. This will enable the Security
Council to determine Kosovo's future status. We look
forward to the continued support of the Security
Council and the international community in meeting
the ongoing challenges.

