Guatemala would like to express its gratitude to the Estonian delegation as President of the Security Council for convening this open debate via video- teleconference on the theme "Ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council". We are confident that our deliberations will not only renew our collective commitment to improving the efficiency and transparency of the Security Council, but also will serve as a solid basis for the effective implementation of presidential note S/2017/507 in general, and its annex in particular, which our delegation greatly values as a guide for the Council's work. Guatemala also wishes to express its thanks to the delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions for their contributions to this process. Guatemala commends the efforts of the Informal Working Group, skilfully led by the current and previous Chairs, and welcomes the progress it has made on some practices and measures highlighted in note 507. However, we note that the codification of best practices is unfinished, and remains an extremely useful exercise for this body. Also, given our own experience as a non-permanent member of the Council for the period 2012-2013, we believe there is always room for improvement. In that regard, we would like to highlight three issues of relevance to the working methods of the Security Council. First, the search for information and understanding regarding the Council's activities remains a fundamental and legitimate request. We welcome the overall increasing trend of public Council meetings through the holding of open debates, which promote the wider participation of non-Council members and, in recent years, through the holding of numerous Arria Formula meetings, which have enabled the Council to obtain truthful information and thus be more effective in upholding its responsibility to maintain international peace and security. We believe it is important to hold wrap-up sessions and to increase the Council's interactions with the Peacebuilding Commission - an advisory body to the Council that plays an important role in preventing the recurrence of conflict - and the Presidents of the configurations of the Commission in charge of specific countries, as well as with other United Nations agencies. We appreciate the continued implementation of provisions of note 507 regarding the importance of maintaining communication with the Peacebuilding Commission, as an intergovernmental advisory body, as well as its configurations. Obviously, that would allow the Council to obtain reliable first-hand information, as well as precise advice on the country configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, it would also allow for efficiencies in conflict prevention, thus advancing the concept of sustaining peace. Secondly, in the past, the Council has been balanced, transparent and inclusive when taking important decisions on the appointment of the chairpersons of the different subsidiary bodies. That practice allowed for a more balanced approach to the consultations taking place around that process, which benefits everyone - but especially the newly elected Council members. My delegation hopes that this practice and trend will be strengthened in future. It is also necessary to ensure that the selection and appointment processes for the various expert groups are also more transparent and balanced in order to ensure the widest possible geographical and gender representation, pursuant to paragraph 111 of note 507 guidelines - indicating 1 October as the deadline for the yearly appointment of the presidents of said bodies. In that connection, we are convinced that the timely appointment of the chairs of the subsidiary bodies will help bolster decisions related to the sanctions committees and their effective implementation. Thirdly, as a troop-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, Guatemala attaches great value to section VIII of note 507, since the importance of holding consultations among the Security Council, the Secretariat and the countries that contribute troops and police forces is paramount for the implementation of the mandates decided by the Security Council. The interactions with the troop-contributing countries clearly increase the capacity of the Security Council to make appropriate, effective and timely decisions to fulfil its responsibilities. This coordination is relevant in the event of transitions from peacekeeping operations to special political missions as well as in eventual changes in mandates. In conclusion, our delegation appreciates the serious work that has been done in past years to update the working methods of the Security Council. We welcome in particular the progress made in the last three years. In the light of its responsibilities, the Security Council must be accountable to the wider membership of the United Nations, but it is the elected members that are more likely to take action on improving the Council's working methods. The best way to highlight the representative and democratic character of the Council is to strengthen the standards of accountability and transparency. Improved cooperation with the permanent members in the Council would lead to greater synergy and effectiveness around the common objective of improving its working methods, since its decisions have an impact on the entire membership of the United Nations. In this regard, Guatemala expresses its hopeful expectation that a relevant document of the Security Council could be agreed in the context of the unprecedented times in which we are living caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, considering both the urgency to act and the seriousness of the consequences of this pandemic for the international order.
