Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should like also to commend your
predecessor, the representative of Guatemala, and
the members of his team for their outstanding work
last month. Let me also thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for the information that she has provided to the Council.
I should like to congratulate her on her assumption
of her important post and wish her every success in
discharging her mandate.

The Libyan delegation explained to the Council,
on 16 May 2012 (see S/PV.6772), the Libyan
Government's plans to deal with the different aspects
of the implementation of the judicial system and the
restoration of peace and stability to the country, as well
as the upcoming trials, which will be a top priority for
us. We will deal with every case irrespective of the
identity of the victim or the accused.

I should like to reiterate that those plans are
still valid. As we have already underscored, the
Libyan judicial authorities will initially focus their
investigations and trials on the leaders and high
officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime, as they are the main
perpetrators of the serious crimes committed, given
that they were the ones who ordered or orchestrated
them. Those leaders include SaifAl-Qadhafi, Abdullah
Al-Senussi, Al-Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi and Abuzed
Dorda, all of whom are in detention in Libya. Some
of them have already been interrogated at length, and
progress has been made in that respect. The trial of
Saif Al-Qadhafi was due to start, but, because of the
investigation into his actions, it was postponed so as
to enable the Libyan judicial authorities to give full
consideration to his case.

Other leaders of the old regime fall into that same
category, but they are currently outside the country. In
that regard, the Libyan judicial authorities are seeking
to persuade the States where they are located to arrest
them and deliver them to the Libyan authorities, so
that they can be put on trial. We hope that the States
concerned will cooperate with us and that those same
States will understand that it is incumbent upon them
to comply with Libya's request, in line with paragraph
3 of resolution 2040 (2012), which "urges all Member
States to cooperate closely with the Libyan authorities
in their efforts to end impunity for such violations".

I should like to take this opportunity to underscore
the fact that the Libyan Government is under
considerable pressure by the country's people to cease
all cooperation with certain States until they hand over
those leaders ofthe Al-Qadhafi regime who are on their
territory. The Libyan Government believes that it will
have to do so if the extraditions are not carried out.

We believe that the close cooperation that
exists between the ICC and the political and judicial
authorities in Libya is of pivotal importance. That
cooperation has, incidentally, just been underscored
by the Prosecutor in her report and in her briefing.
The Libyan judicial authorities are awaiting a positive
decision by the Pre-trial Chamber judges pertaining to
the admissibility challenge submitted by the Libyan
Government in the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi.
The Libyan judicial authorities also intend in the
coming days to submit an admissibility challenge in the
case of Abdullah Al-Senussi.

We would like to reaffirm here the determination of
the Libyan authorities to guarantee the protection of the
rights of the accused and to respect the necessary legal
procedures while ensuring that the trials are carried out
in conformity with international law and criteria.
The Libyan authorities have taken note of some
criticisms made by human rights organizations. We
have also listened to the comments from the members
of the Council. In any case, the Libyan authorities are
not neglecting any allegation pertaining to human
rights violations, irrespective of who the perpetrators
may be. The Libyan authorities are firmly determined
to establish the rule of law and create a comprehensive,
fair and effective judicial system. To that end, the
Libyan authorities have drafted a comprehensive
strategy to ensure the end of impunity and to achieve
national reconciliation. However, the implementation
of that strategy is facing numerous challenges.

There is also a delay in the formation of the new
Government following the election of the National
Congress. The Libyan authorities are also aware of the
fact that there are on occasion inadmissible delays in
the trials of detainees. However, the delays of which
we are accused are due to the situation regarding the
reform of the judicial system and security reforms and
to our desire to expand the rule of law throughout all of
our territory.

I am certain that members understand the scale of
the challenges facing us and the range of complex and
interrelated problems that the Libyan Government is
encountering. Those issues require wise and cautious
solutions that take all the various aspects into account
and that seek to improve the security situation, to
achieve justice, to build State institutions, to provide
essential services, to relaunch the economy and to meet
the citizens' needs.

Certainly, the Libyan Government vitally needs the
understanding and assistance of the Council and of the
international community, as well as international aid,
in order to achieve those goals. I am glad to note today
the willingness of all States to provide assistance to
Libya at this difficult time.

