Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation
is grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate on Security Council working
methods and for developing the concept paper for this
debate (S/2013/6l3, annex). We thank you for your
constructive approach in maintaining a practice that
we hope becomes a permanent feature of this important
organ of the United Nations, which has yet to reform.

We would also like to thank Argentina, as the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, for continuing to assess
the implementation of presidential note S/2010/507.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
wishes to add the following remarks in its national
capacity.

Like other delegations, we acknowledge the
progress made by the Security Council over the past
few years in improving its working methods and
attempting to make the Council more transparent and
inclusive with regard to those methods. In both our
recently completed terms as an elected member of the
Council, we consistently endeavoured to encourage

the Council to engage more regularly with the broader
United Nations membership and regional organizations
when addressing its various agenda items. We are
proud of our modest achievements in that regard, which
include regularizing annual engagements between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and - having served as Chair
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution - involving the broader United Nations
membership and non-State entities in the Working
Group's discussions.

But more must be done, and we believe that the
various proposals and recommendations made today
and at debates of this nature to come are intended to
be contributions of a constructive nature, designed to
enhance the effectiveness, transparency, inclusiveness
and credibility of the Security Council. The Council's
adoption in August of presidential note S/2013/515 is
a step towards maintaining that momentum, with the
commitment made by Council members to the 10 steps
towards greater transparency outlined in that document.

In addition to those commitments, all of which
South Africa strongly supports, we wish to add
additional recommendations that can further contribute
to the Council's more effective functioning in the
execution of its mandates. They include maintaining
the practice of field visits and even mini-missions
by the Council as well as its subsidiary bodies, in
order to enhance the Council's understanding of the
situation on the ground and contribute to informed
decision-making; and spreading country-specific
files - otherwise managed as an exclusive domain
or prerogative of some permanent members - more
widely among elected members. Such exclusiveness
contributes to an inflexible approach to dealing with
Council resolutions, which are in fact a mandate for all
of those who serve on the Council. Engagement with
regional organizations should be based on the principle
of subsidiarity and done in a cohesive and organized
manner. We also recommend that such engagements
should be acknowledged and included in the Secretary-
General's reports. And we suggest a longer lead time
on all Security Council reports provided to Council
members before consultations, especially at the time of
mandate renewals.

Predictability in the working methods of the
Security Council is integral to ensuring that there is
consistency in the way various matters are handled.
It has been an unfortunate reality in some cases that

the Council has been perceived as being selective
in addressing certain issues, which we ascribe to
inconsistency born out of the provisional nature of
the Council's rules of procedure. Inextricably linked
to that is the notion of some members of the Council
approaching matters on the Council's agenda on the
basis of narrow national interests, writ large against
the Council's primary mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That is reflected
in the Security Council's inability to resolve certain
conflicts, Syria being the most recent case in point.
That unfortunate reality has furthermore resulted in
many Security Council decisions being either ignored
or flagrantly undermined.

The situations of Palestine and Western Sahara
are but two clear examples of how detrimental narrow
national interests can be in frustrating the lofty objective
of maintaining international peace and security. In
the case of Western Sahara, we have witnessed how
selective small groups, some of which are not even
Council members, have a greater influence on the text
of resolutions than the Council members themselves.
The subsequent weakening of the text of that annual
resolution has resulted in the Security Council not being
able to implement its own decisions. We have witnessed
a similar unfortunate approach in dealing with the
situation in the Middle East, Palestine in particular.
The Council has repeatedly failed to speak in unison
on that matter, thereby being unable to issue even a
media statement when the two parties to the conflict
resumed direct talks earlier this year. Since September
2000, the State of Palestine has written approximately
473 letters to the Secretary-General and the Presidents
of the Security Council and the General Assembly
regarding the ongoing crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, the most recent
of which was submitted on 17 October. In the absence
of any significant decision over the past two years by
the Council, whether in the form of a resolution or a
presidential or press statement, it is our consequent
assessment that the Security Council has unfortunately
not found it appropriate to reflect seriously on the
content of those hundreds of written testimonies by
one party to the conflict, namely, the State of Palestine,
highlighting numerous violations of international law
and obligations of States party to resolutions adopted
by the Council that go blatantly unheeded.

Such approaches unfortunately put in question the
Council's credibility in discharging its clear mandate.
The debate on working methods is but one important

part of the greater whole of the debate on Council
reform. We therefore remain convinced that greater
legitimacy and effectiveness, including in its working
methods, will prevail when the Council becomes more
representative.

