Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Mr. President,
Bangladesh applauds your leadership of the Council
during the current month. Being close friends and
regional neighbours, we share a modicum of the pride
our Pakistani brethren must rightly feel on this
occasion. Pakistan and Bangladesh, being two
consistent partners in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, also have a common interest in the theme
of the day, for the choice of which we commend
Pakistan. Let me also state that we believe that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations team and its
very able steward, Jean-Marie Guehenno, deserve our
highest praise for their relentless labours and for the
quality of their work.

Over five and half decades, United Nations

peace-keeping has confronted and overcome numerous
challenges and constraints. Bangladesh remains
serenely confident that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will perform admirably in
meeting the surging challenges of 2004 - given, as a
sine qua non, political support, enabling resources and
secure financing. In the light of that positive prognosis,
may I call the Council's attention to a number of areas
where adherence to the following could buttress our
capability to achieve our collective goals.

First, there is palpable need for a strong message
to emanate from this Council for the peoples of the
world reaffirming the centrality, universality and
legitimacy of the United Nations as the principal
multilateral institution devoted to the maintenance of
global peace and security. The dynamics of ongoing
global conflicts make it imperative that the Council
also reaffirm United Nations peacekeeping operations
as the effective, impartial, acceptable and less costly
collective security instrument enjoying global public
confidence.

Secondly, the Council, having the primary
responsibility for international peace and security, must
continue to act promptly and effectively to respond to
global conflicts without compromising the principle of
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States, impartially and with the
consent of the parties. Mandates must be well defined,
credible and achievable, and must be supported by
enabling rules of engagement and command-and-
control structures. Clear political direction by the
Council, appropriate use of best practices and close
consultation with troop-contributing countries while
planning, changing, renewing, downsizing or
terminating mandates are prerequisites for better cost
management and task management.

Thirdly, the United Nations must be supported in
every possible way in responding to the upcoming
surge and in preventing future conflicts. Mandates
must be matched with the necessary enabling
components, including a fully integrated mission
planning capacity and pre-mandate operational, logistic
and material preparedness to initiate a 30-day or 90-
day rapid launch. The strategic stocks at the United
Nations Logistics Base must be replenished rapidly to
facilitate multiple multidimensional mission start-ups.
The United Nations Standby Arrangements System, the
on-call list and the rapid deployment level system
should be put to better use to ensure ready availability
of well-trained personnel as well as force multipliers
and enablers. Complementarity of rapid deployment
support from regional and subregional organizations
must be encouraged. Where possible, better
coordination and utilization of capacities and resources
among adjacent missions should be explored.

Fourthly, peacekeeping should not be seen as a
substitute for sustainable peace and development.
Rather, it should lay a firm foundation for phased
transition to post-conflict reconstruction and for the
prevention of the recurrence of armed conflicts.
Inclusion, where appropriate, of peace-building
elements in mandates, early integrated mission
planning and the implementation of comprehensive
strategies - including disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation, the rule of law and
criminal justice - is key. Models for the active
engagement of the Economic and Social Council in
post-conflict reconstruction should be developed to
lessen the Security Council's burden, with coordinated
support from the United Nations Development Group,
donors, the international financial institutions and civil
society. Gender mainstreaming, empowerment of
women and protection of children must constitute
essential elements of any peace-building endeavour.
Most important, a culture of prevention must overtake
a culture of reaction, saving resources for investment
in the Millennium Development Goals.

Fifthly, the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers must never be compromised; attacks on
peacekeepers must never be condoned; and appropriate
preventive measures must always be incorporated in
mission mandates. The United Nations should be
supported to enhance its capacity to strengthen safety
and security in field missions. Mandates and tasks must
also be matched by robust and uniform rules of
engagement to deter the spoilers of peace, within the
principle of non-use of force except in self-defence.

Sixthly, lessons learned and best practices must
be incorporated in policy development, planning,
training and the implementation of strategies for
peacekeeping operations, so that each new operation
becomes more efficient and more cost-effective. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and its Best
Practices Unit should be provided the wherewithal to
carry out this exercise effectively.

Last but not least, it is a categorical imperative
that there must prevail the political will and capacity of
troop-contributing countries to undertake risks and
rapidly deploy, and also the determination to stay the
course until the mission is completed. At the end of the
day, the United Nations must be able to confidently
depend on troop-contributing countries that pledge to
deliver on time and that can and will do so.

For Bangladesh, United Nations peacekeeping is
indeed a foreign policy priority and a window to reach
out to strife-torn societies. When we do peacekeeping,
we carry with us the conviction, learned from our own
historical experience, that, for development to take
root, conflicts must first cease and never recur. We
seek to spread the values of pluralism, liberalism,
human rights and gender justice. We wish to share with
those societies our indigenously evolved paradigm of
development, involving micro-credit and non-formal
education. It is not just a coincidence that in the
General Assembly our flagship resolution is on a
culture of peace and non-violence, and that, as Council
members, we were closely associated with resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1353 (2001).

Our participation in more than 27 peacekeeping
operations has amply testified to the fact that our
words are matched by deeds. As a dependable and
consistent troop-contributing country, Bangladesh has
already demonstrated its flexibility and innovativeness
in making some recent peacekeeping operations cost-
effective through the inter-mission mobilization of
assets and troops. In 2004, Bangladesh is among the
few troop-contributing countries to have made
substantive pre-mandate pledges to all four anticipated
missions, including the offer to redeploy well equipped
troops from Sierra Leone to Haiti, which would save
the United Nations time and money and would
facilitate early exit of the Multinational Interim Force
from that island.

We conclude with a tribute to those courageous
men and women who have made the supreme sacrifice
in the course of global peace and to other colleagues
who continue to bring succour to suffering populations.
We express the hope that the ideas we have put on the
table will prove useful with regard to the draft
presidential statement to follow, for we have gleaned
them from our experience as we have trod the path to
stability that we have helped to make by traversing it
ourselves.

