Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Mr. Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, and Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.

Let me start by joining the United Nations
unequivocal condemnation of the attacks on the
ARAMCO facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
on 14 September. They were reckless and despicable
and are completely unjustifiable. It is only sheer
luck that no one was killed, not by any design of the
perpetrators. Threatening civilian areas and commercial
infrastructure is a violation of international law, as
well as being dangerous and provocative. I am sure that
all members of the Council will today want to join in
condemning the attacks not only as a clear threat to
regional and international peace and security but also
as an effort to disrupt global oil supplies.

At the moment, we are still assessing what happened
and who is responsible for the attacks. Once that is
being established, we will discuss with our partners
how to proceed in a responsible manner. We hope for
a united international response to the terrible attacks.

Turning at to the situation in Yemen, I note with
great sadness and concern/trouble that the situation
is not improving. What we heard today from the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Special Envoy
shows that we are in grave danger of letting the
situation slide backwards despite everyone's efforts.
We have been gravely concerned about the escalation
in violence in the south, and we condemn the use of
force by the Southern Transitional Council to seize
State institutions.
The Saudi-led talks in Jeddah need our full backing
and all parties need to cease hostilities and engage in
the talks. We support Saudi Arabia's efforts. We hope
that the talks can broker a deal that brings southern
representatives into the Yemeni Government and
makes the Yemeni Government more representative.
Inclusivity is a key pillar of stability, as we have seen
in so many conflicts around the world. For the United
Kingdom's part, we stand ready to assist in any way
that we can, and we support what the Under-Secretary-
General said with regard to safe, rapid and unhindered
access for humanitarian responses and commercial
supplies. Goods need to be able to move freely through
Aden port across the south and from Aden to the north
of the country, and we call on the parties to ensure
the continued functionality of institutions and the
protection of civilians from human rights abuses.

The Special Envoy rightly devoted a large part of
his briefing to the broader inclusive political process.
We remain strong supporters of efforts to that end.
They are given renewed momentum by the events over
the weekend and in the south of Yemen last month. In
its presidential statement S/PRST/2019/9, of 29 August,
the Security Council gave its full backing to the
Special Envoy and his efforts to work with the parties
to pave the way for the resumption of comprehensive
negotiations without delay on the security and political
arrangements necessary to end the conflict and
resume a peaceful transition in Yemen. We look to
such negotiations to engage all parties in an inclusive
dialogue in order to resolve differences and address
the legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including those
in the south, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Turning to the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah
and the Ports of Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, we
too welcome the appointment of Lieutenant General
Guha and look forward to working with him. I wanted
to welcome the recent meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee held on 8 and 9 September and
urge the parties to engage constructively in that process
and to finalize outstanding negotiations to allow for the
implementation of the first and second phases of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement.

We heard from the Under-Secretary-General
about the very dire situation of attacks, violence and
violations of international humanitarian law. I thought
what he said about the operating environment and the
300 incidents affecting nearly 5 million people was
particularly shocking and something that the Council
should address. We also echo his calls on handling
the tanker incident. I wonder why we have so many
bureaucratic impediments from Ansar Allah and what
lies behind that. But we look to all parties to work with
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies to
ensure that support reaches those who so desperately
need it.

The one bright spot, as Mr. Lowcock also said,
is the pledge from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
$500 million, to be made on the 25 September during
high-level week. That is extremely welcome news and
we join others in thanking the Saudi Arabian authorities
for that step. All donors should now consider whether
they can provide additional funding this year to ensure
that the $4.2-billion humanitarian appeal is fully
funded. For our part, we have already disbursed 87 per
cent of our funding and we are assessing whether we
can provide more.

Finally, while I would like to say more when we get
to closed consultations, I would like to end by echoing
what the Under-Secretary-General said about the
economy. We are also very worried about the backlog
of fuel vessels outside Al-Hudaydah. We hope that the
Government of Yemen will engage constructively with
importers on the effective implementation of Decree
49 and that the revenues can be used for the regular
payment of public salaries in all areas of the country.
It is vital that fuel continue to enter the Red Sea ports,
reducing the risk of pump prices increasing, which
would further worsen the humanitarian situation.

