The President: Pursuant to the decision taken at
the 5919th meeting, I invite the representative of
Zimbabwe to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chidyausiku
(Zimbabwe) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in response to a letter dated
18 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of
Belgium addressed to the President of the Security
Council and contained in document S/2008/407.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns the
campaign of violence against the political
opposition ahead of the second round of the
presidential elections scheduled for 27 June,
which has resulted in the killing of scores of
opposition activists and other Zimbabweans and
the beating and displacement of thousands of
people, including many women and children.

"The Security Council further condemns the
actions of the Government of Zimbabwe that
have denied its political opponents the right to
campaign freely, and calls upon the Government
of Zimbabwe to stop the violence, to cease
political intimidation, to end the restrictions on
the right of assembly and to release the political
leaders who have been detained. The Council
urges the international monitors and observers to
remain in Zimbabwe while the crisis continues.
"The Security Council regrets that the
campaign of violence and the restrictions on the
political opposition have made it impossible for a
free and fair election to take place on 27 June.
The Council further considers that, to be
legitimate, any government of Zimbabwe must
take account of the interests of all its citizens.
The Council notes that the results of the 29
March 2008 elections must be respected.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
over the impact of the situation in Zimbabwe on
the wider region. The Council welcomes the
recent international efforts, including those of
SADC leaders and particularly President Mbeki.
The Security Council calls on the Zimbabwean
authorities to cooperate fully with all efforts,
including through the United Nations, aimed at
finding a peaceful way forward, through dialogue
between the parties, that allows a legitimate
government to be formed that reflects the will of
the Zimbabwean people.

"The Security Council further expresses its
concern at the grave humanitarian situation in
Zimbabwe and condemns the suspension by the
Government of Zimbabwe of the operations of
humanitarian organizations, which has directly
affected one and a half million people, including
half a million children. The Council calls on the
Government of Zimbabwe to immediately allow
humanitarian organizations to resume their
services.

"The Security Council will continue to
monitor closely the situation and requests the
Secretary-General to report on ongoing regional
and international efforts to resolve the crisis."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.
08-39530

