Mr. Lavrov (spoke in Russian): I wish to join in
thanking you, Sir, for the initiative to holding today's
meeting of the Security Council on Africa. Conflicts on
the African continent bring untold suffering to the
population, hinder the transition of African States to
sustainable social and economic development and pose
a serious threat to regional and international security.

Russia supports the joint work of the United
Nations and the African Union aimed at preventing and
settling conflicts on the African continent. Special
focus should be given to addressing chronic political
and socio-economic problems that are further
aggravated by new threats and challenges.

We support a more active and responsible
methodology for conflict resolution and advancing the
goals of national reconciliation based on agreements
between the conflicting parties. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of illicit armed
groups, strengthening of State governance, security
sector reform, development of democracy and the fight
against poverty, corruption and the illicit use of natural
resources are the core elements of the peace process.
The resolution of these issues is the focus of the
decisions taken by the African Union and the United
Nations, which should be consistently implemented.
We support a more active and responsible role of
African States in advancing these goals.

It is important that the countries that have
emerged from conflict do not slide back into crisis.
Meaningful assistance to such countries in this respect
must be provided by the Peacebuilding Commission,
which should complete its institutionalization as soon
as possible and focus on fulfilling its mandate.

I agree with those who have spoken today who
believe that another important step was made in the
peacekeeping efforts on the African continent. The
Security Council has decided to establish a
multidimensional joint African Union and United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Darfur. We believe
it will contribute to restoration of peace and order in
the long-suffering province of the Sudan and normalize
the situation around the Sudan. The next step in this
line is to deploy operations in Chad and the Central
African Republic. We welcome the initiative of the
European Union in this regard.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and as a member of the G-8, Russia is contributing to
the resolution of African conflicts, based on political
and diplomatic means. We actively participate in
international assistance to Africa, including our support
to enhance African peacekeeping capabilities. Russian
personnel are involved in practically all United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the continent, and we are
sending specialists in other areas as well. We will
continue to provide multilateral support to help Africa
resolve its problems, as we have close and friendly
partnerships with African countries.

