Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2018/795) pursuant to
resolution 2410 (2018). We are also grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Keita for her briefing on the most
recent developments in Haiti and on the activities of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), based on the report.

We note that we meet against the backdrop of
the violent events that happened in July and that
reflect the serious socioeconomic difficulties that
Haiti continues to face. We agree with the Secretary-
General about the need to find a consensus solution to
some of those challenges within the framework of the
existing constitutional dispensation. It is important to
ensure that the Government of Haiti continues to make
progress towards adopting a governance pact to support
the implementation of agreed political, economic and
social objectives in order to enhance the confidence
of the Haitian people in their institutions. We believe
that strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, ensuring political stability and improving
socioeconomic conditions are the key elements
needed for Haiti's greater security, stability and future
prosperity. The recent events in Port-au-Prince and other
Haitian cities underscore the importance of attaining
them. We welcome President Moise's appointment
of a new Prime Minister and we look forward to the
formation of a Government that will continue to lead
Haiti towards the consolidation of peace, stability and
sustainable economic development.

Ethiopia recognizes the important contribution
of MINUJUSTH, as well as the wider international
community, in support of ongoing efforts to promote
dialogue, advocate respect for the rule of law and
foster stability in the country through enhanced
communication and dialogue at all levels. There is
no doubt that much remains to be done to ensure a
smooth and effective transition to a non-peacekeeping
presence in Haiti in the coming year in accordance
with MINUJUSTH'S mandate. We therefore concur
with the Secretary-General's assessment regarding
the redoubling of efforts to ensure progress against
the benchmarks that will inform the future drawdown
of MINUJUSTH. We welcome the appointment of
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime as the new Special
Representative and Head of MINUSUSTH. She will
have the important responsibility of overseeing progress
while working closely with Haitian stakeholders and
the United Nations country team. We wish her every
success and commend all of the Mission staff for their
dedicated efforts in carrying out their mandated tasks.

In conclusion, I reaffirm our commitment to and
solidarity with the brotherly people and Government
of Haiti as they continue striving to consolidate the
progress made in recent years, and our confidence in the
Haitian people's determination to persist and succeed
in their quest for stability, democracy and prosperity.

