Mr. Li Zhenhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
first like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their briefings and
their respective detailed reports on the implementation
of the completion strategies of the ICTY and the ICTR
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. With regard to the work of both Tribunals
and their residual mechanisms over the past six months,
I would like to say the following.

First, we are pleased that progress has been made
in the work of both Tribunals. During the reporting
period, the ICTY rendered five judgements. The ICTR
delivered an appeal judgement on the transfer of cases
to Rwanda. Both Tribunals have taken steps to advance
their completion strategies. The majority of the ICTR
judicial and appeal functions have been transferred to
the Rwanda branch of the Residual Mechanism. The

ICTY branch of the Residual Mechanism commenced
operations as of 1 July. We acknowledge those
developments with appreciation.
Secondly, we note that despite the progress in
the work of both Tribunals, there are still undue
delays in their proceedings. Individual cases have
been postponed for as long as six months owing to
translation issues. That is not in keeping with the spirit
of the completion strategy. China is of the view that
the relevant resolutions should be fully implemented.
We urge both Tribunals to take more rigorous steps
to accelerate their work, while ensuring the quality
of their proceedings to ensure the completion of their
work within the established time frame.

Thirdly, we acknowledge the transfer of cases by
both Tribunals to the relevant national courts. We hope
that both Tribunals and their residual mechanisms will
follow up on domestic judicial proceedings, provide the
necessary assistance and update the Security Council
regularly on the progress made.

Fourthly, we also note the difficulties and challenges
that both Tribunals continue to face in their work, such
as the resettlement of acquitted persons and those
who have been served their sentences and have been
released. It is against the spirit of fair justice to ignore
the fundamental human rights of such individuals.
In addition, the ICTR Branch is also responsible for
tracking and arresting fugitives and bringing them to
justice. We therefore call on the countries concerned to
continue to cooperate with the Tribunals.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Rosenthal, Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
In the past two years, Guatemala has provided excellent
guidance to the the Working Group under his able
leadership. We pay tribute and express our gratitude to
him and his team.

