Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks the Secretary-General for his most recent report on the situation in the Central African Republic (S/2020/994). China also thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ndiaye, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui and Managing Director for Africa of the European External Action Service Vervaeke, for their briefings. At present, the situation in the Central African Republic is showing positive general trends. The Government of the Central African Republic is actively advancing the implementation of the peace agreement and has made positive progress in consolidating Government authority, security sector reform and socioeconomic development. China commends the people and the Government of the Central African Republic for their unstinting efforts in this regard. At the same time, the Central African Republic is faced with daunting challenges in security, the humanitarian situation, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and, by the end of the year, is going to have a new round of presidential and national assembly elections. The international community should continue to follow the situation and lend its support. Having heard the statements made by colleagues before me, I would like to make the following points. First, this year's election will be the first after the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. It is important for consolidating the peace process. The current Government overcame a multitude of difficulties and challenges and actively prepared for the election, registering close to 2 million voters, almost half of whom are women. | trust that all parties in the Central African Republic will continue to advance in the preparations of the elections in an orderly manner and see to it that the elections take place smoothly and as scheduled. The participation of refugees has entailed many difficult complications, some of which are beyond the control of the country's Government. We respect the relevant decisions made by the country's National Electoral Authority. China has provided two batches of electoral aid materials to the Central African Republic and would like to work together with the international community to provide more assistance to the country for election preparation. Secondly, at present, we are seeing violence among the armed groups in the country. A secure and stable environment is what the country needs. China calls on the armed groups to respond positively to the Secretary- General's global ceasefire initiative, immediately cease violence and effectively abide by the peace agreement. This past July, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) suffered casualties in the western part of the country from landmines. China is concerned with this and appeals to all parties to increase coordination with MINUSCA and _ to implement resolution 2518 (2020) to ensure the safety of peacekeepers. The Secretary-General points out in his report that the country's national defence and security forces and administrative authorities have been deployed to Bamingui-Bangoran prefecture for the first time since 2013. China welcomes this because it is significant for the consolidation of Government authorities and maintenance of social stability. The international community should support the Central African Republic in strengthening capacity and security and in gradually taking up the responsibility of protecting its own people. In this regard, China reiterates that the Security Council should lift its arms embargo against the Central African Republic at an early date. Thirdly, durable stability in the Central African Republic requires integrated measures and increased input in development. The international community should support the Government of the country in implementing its national recovery and peacebuilding plan, assisting the Central African Republic in strengthening its building of infrastructure, ensuring employment and improving people's livelihoods. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the local humanitarian situation and affected its socioeconomic development. The international community should lend its helping hand and assist the Central African Republic in effectively bringing the pandemic under control. The Council's timely adjustment of the sanctions against the relevant economic entities in the country is conducive to unlocking its own economic resources. The Government of the Central African Republic has recently voiced a specific request to the related Security Council sanctions committee, and the sanctions committee should make a positive general response. In conclusion, China commends MINUSCA for the important role it played in maintaining stability and advancing the peace process in the Central African Republic. China supports the work of the Special Representative and that of MINUSCA and supports the Council in acting, in accordance with the Secretary- General's recommendation, to renew MINUSCA's mandate for a year.
