Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for
their briefings to the Council today and their recent
reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471).

The Residual Mechanism has now entered an
important phase of its mandate. With the closure of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and, at the end of last year, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), it is now the
Mechanism's sole responsibility to continue the work of
those Tribunals. Over the past decades, both Tribunals
shone a spotlight on some of the worst atrocities
witnessed in modern times. They showed that there
would be no impunity for those who have perpetrated
the most egregious of crimes. Resolution 1966 (2010),
which established the Mechanism, provides it with the
mandate it needs to ensure that the legacy of the ICTY
and ICTR is carried on. As members of the Security
Council, we need to continue to support the Mechanism
in its important work.

We note the Mechanism's current case-load,
which reflects the significance of the work that lies
ahead - important appeals in the Karadeie and
Mladic cases, the retrial of Stanisie and Simatovie, the
contempt of court hearing and the review of an appeal
sentence in the Ngirabatware case. We are pleased to
note that the Appeals Chamber delivered its judgement
in the case of Seselj in April. The Tribunal had already
set out a time frame within which to hear those cases,
and it is noteworthy that cases are proceeding at pace,
and even ahead of their original schedule, such as the
case of Karadeie.

We commend the Mechanism's efforts in
establishing itself as a lean and efficient tribunal. The
recent Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
report has underlined that point, specifying that the
Mechanism has already achieved much of what the
Security Council envisaged in resolution 1966 (2010).
Its strategic approach to handling cases has undeniably
played a crucial role in achieving that goal. The
structure of the Mechanism has enabled it to manage
its case-load efficiently by employing, in addition to its
full-time President, a roster of independent judges who
perform judicial functions only when tasked to do so.
They can also work remotely, in addition to working at
one of the seats of the Mechanism, potentially saving
time and resources. It has proved to be a successful
way of working. Presidential oversight in ensuring the
expeditious nature of trials has resulted in substantially
reduced costs for the judicial activities of the Residual
Mechanism when compared to those ofits predecessors.

Let me turn to the valuable work being carried out
by both the Prosecutor and the Registrar.

With regard to the Prosecutor's recent initiatives,
we take note of the OIOS comments that the Prosecutor
was effective in planning, restructuring and refining
his Office's operational methods in response to the
need for a lean and cost-effective organization. It is
clear that embracing the one-office policy over recent
years and redefining his Office's policy on tracking
fugitives last year enabled it to be innovative in its
operations in the post-ICTY and ICTR periods. Those
innovations are to be applauded, but the support of the
international community is still needed. We call upon
Member States to assist the Prosecutor's Office in
fulfilling its mandate.

For example, locating and apprehending fugitives is
not a task that lies exclusively with the Prosecutor. We
therefore urge States and international organizations to
work constructively with the Office to bolster its efforts.
Similarly, we call upon relevant States to engage with
the Prosecutor in pursuing national prosecutions. The
increasing number of requests that the Prosecutor is
receiving from national judicial authorities for advice
and support is encouraging, and we are pleased that
such work will be done consistent with the lean and
effective organization mandate. At the same time, it is
an indication of the level of work that the Prosecutor
will have to undertake over the next few years.

The work of the Registry often goes unnoticed,
yet it is important that we note the changes made in
the Registry, which have encouraged a unified work
culture. Better coordination between the two branches
has ensured harmonization of governance frameworks,
leading to the sharing of best practices. In the future,
we look forward to hearing from the Registry on further
progress, including on the new archives repository and
the work being done to create a unified information
technology system for The Hague and Arusha, ensuring
easier public access to information, as well as the steps
being taken to increase responsiveness to changes in
the Mechanism's workload going forward.

We are pleased that the Mechanism has welcomed
the OIOS recommendations and has started work on
their implementation. We are confident it will continue
to carry out appropriately the Residual functions with
which it is tasked, and the United Kingdom remains
fully committed to supporting the Mechanism until it
completes its mandate.

