Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): Mr.
President, once again I must remark on the way in
which Namibia's month has got off to a rather dramatic
start. I hope you can slow the pace down, but I
congratulate you on moving so rapidly to assemble this
extremely important Security Council meeting under
very difficult and complicated circumstances. I express
my appreciation to my many friends, other
Ambassadors and Permanent Representatives here who
are waiting their turn to speak, and I hope they will
understand the very difficult, complicated situation
which led to the arrangements announced by the
President of the Security Council a few minutes ago.

I have listened carefully to the statements of the
previous two speakers, from the Palestinian Authority
and from Israel, and on behalf of my Government I
would like to address what they said on the situation.

The United States Government joins all the other
members of the Council who, I am sure, will express
their deep sorrow and regret at the violence we have
seen between Israelis and Palestinians in recent days.
We offer our deepest condolences to the families of the
victims, particularly those who have lost children. We
extend our sympathies to the injured. We pray for the
restoration of peace in a region where, as both previous
speakers have suggested, there has been an
extraordinary effort by the leaders to achieve peace
recently - in talks at Camp David, in Europe, in the
Middle East and elsewhere.
What is needed now is to focus on stopping the
violence and to do everything we can to encourage the
parties to return to the peace process. This is the only
way to end the cycle of heartbreak and sorrow.
President Clinton and Secretary Albright and their
colleagues are in ongoing consultations with the parties
in a search for ways to end the violence. Tomorrow,
Secretary Albright will meet in Paris with Prime
Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat. On Thursday,
Egyptian President Mubarak will bring the parties
together in Cairo for further discussions. I know that
my French colleague, Ambassador Levitte, will also
want to address the Paris meetings and we look
forward to hearing from the Egyptian Ambassador, Mr.
Aboulgheit later this afternoon with an important
statement on behalf of his Government in regard to
Egypt's role.

All of these meetings in Paris and in Egypt will
have great importance. The world will be watching.
The world will be hoping that the cycle of violence will
be reversed and that the very encouraging and intense
efforts to make progress will be resumed.

As soon as conditions permit, the United States
will chair a meeting of Israeli and Palestinian security
officials for the purpose of fact-finding and to prevent
a recurrence of the events of the last few days.

But I want to stress that the first priority for all
parties must be to stop the violence. Now is not the
time to be apportioning blame. Israelis and Palestinians
have negotiated historic agreements in the past. They
have engaged in practical cooperation on the ground.
Now, tragically, in full view of a horrified world,
victims, innocent victims, have suffered senseless
violence.

But empty rhetoric does not advance the cause of
peace. Too often in the past, positions taken by the
United Nations have tarnished this great Organization's
credibility and undermined its ability to play a
constructive role in the peace process. Let us not repeat
this error again in this cycle of history. Recent events
have undeniably been a setback for the peace process,
and we cannot pretend otherwise. But let us not allow
them to become a setback to our commitment and our
efforts to move forward in the peace process and also
to restore the United Nations credibility so that it may
play whatever role it can in this process.

There is, of course, no place for violence,
intimidation or pressure in this process, although we
recognize that they have been concomitants of the
problem for generations. The only way peace can be
achieved - the only way the hopes and dreams of the
people of the region can be fulfilled - is through
negotiations. Neither side wants a future of indefinite
confrontation. The way ahead lies through
negotiations, to which both sides remain committed, as
we have heard here today. At this delicate and
dangerous moment, the Security Council should keep
its focus on the task at hand: restoring calm and
creating a climate in which the parties can take steps
that will lead to a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace.

Thank you, Mr. President, for calling this
important meeting today.

