President Museveni: I should first of all like to echo
the congratulations which I know my delegation has already
extended to you, Madam President, and your country, the
United States, on assuming the Presidency of the Security
Council for the first month of the new millennium. I also
want to salute your initiative, supported by this Council, to
give the highest priority to the consideration of African
matters this month.

I thank the Secretary-General for his incisive statement
and for his report on the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The report should help
focus the discussion of the issue before the Council today.

It is my view that this occasion is not one on which
we want to dwell on the background to the unfortunate
situation in the Congo that has made the political and
security situation in the Great Lakes region so precarious
and fragile. I have, since the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo began in 1995, categorically stated
the Uganda position on the conflict. I also dispatched two
special envoys - our Prime Minister and our Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs - to come to the Council to
discuss the issues involved.

I will therefore only restate that Uganda and, indeed,
the other neighbouring countries of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have legitimate security concerns,
which, fortunately, have now been recognized by the region
in the Lusaka Agreement, and also by the international
community. In fact, a meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and of Defence, which met in Lusaka, Zambia from
14 to 16 January 1999, established a committee on the
security concerns of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbouring countries, whose terms of reference
included working out a mechanism to fully and
satisfactorily address those concerns.

Secondly, our region, which had just witnessed a
most gruesome genocide in Rwanda, in 1994, was on the
verge of yet another catastrophe of ghastly proportions as
a result of the fallout from the ouster of the murderous
regimes of the late Presidents Habyarimana of Rwanda
and Mobutu of Zaire. The events that followed, which
were to pit our armies against each other, are well known
to the Council.

Thirdly, the Security Council must be cognizant of
the terrorist role played by the Islamic regime of the
Sudan, sometimes using the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with or without cooperation from
Kinshasa, to destabilize the neighbouring countries. The
situation in Central Africa, unfortunately, divided for the
first time the former anti-colonial freedom fighters of
Africa. This is a very unfortunate episode in our history,
and we must resolutely put an end to it.

Africans are not new actors on the international
political stage. We fought injustice and oppression as a
united front for many years. This was one of the reasons
that caused us to append our signatures to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement as a concrete framework for ending
the sad events in our region. We take the Lusaka accord
very seriously and challenge all the parties to do likewise.

I have stated before, and reaffirm, that the Lusaka
accord deserves our total support because it addresses, in
a comprehensive way, all legitimate and security concerns
of all the parties. It addresses the long, drawn-out internal
problems of the Congo right from the time of Mobutu.
Secondly, it addresses the concerns of the neighbours,
including Uganda. Thirdly, and most importantly, it
restores the unity of Africa. Lastly, it promises peace and
prosperity in our region, because, with its full
implementation, we can turn our whole attention to issues
of national and regional development. For all these
reasons, we will oppose any parties that adopt an
adventurous attitude that flouts this Agreement. I take this
opportunity to renew Uganda's total and unequivocal
support for the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

I know that my colleagues have variously alluded to
the salient provisions of the Lusaka accord. I will
nevertheless repeat some of them, so that this Council
may take them into account in charting the way forward.

The Agreement provided for a ceasefire and troop
standstill, and, as I mentioned earlier, a Political
Committee is in place to work out the details of the
ceasefire and the modalities of its implementation. We

 

urge that the work of this team be supported by the
international community and that, when a fully fledged
united international involvement is agreed upon, the
Committee's activities be coordinated with those of the
United Nations Mission.

The security concerns of the neighbouring countries
and of the Congo have been recognized, and a committee
has been established to resolve the question of the
destabilization of neighbouring countries by elements
operating from the Congo territory. In this regard, we agree
with the recommendation of the Secretary-General that to
create the conditions for a lasting peace in the subregion it
is vital to include the security of the borders of the States
concerned, their territorial integrity and their full enjoyment
of their natural resources, and that at the appropriate time
a regional conference on peace and security in the region
must be convened.

I therefore see as a red herring the repeated talk about
the territorial integrity of the Congo, because this is not the
issue. The issue is not the territorial integrity of the Congo.
My country supports the territorial integrity of all the
countries in Africa, so the territorial integrity of the Congo
is not the issue. It has not been the issue throughout this
conflict.

The issues are as follows. It is important for the
Security Council to remember that since 1960,
approximately 1.2 million Rwandans, 400,000 Burundians,
800,000 Ugandans and many Congolese have been
exterminated extra-judicially by the fascist regimes of
Kayibanda and Habyarimana, leaders of Rwanda;
Michombero of Burundi; Idi Amin, the monster of Uganda;
and Mobutu. This is the issue - not the territorial integrity
of the Congo, not all of these red herrings that are being
floated around.

In the century that has just ended, only Hitler's
Germany and P01 Pot's Cambodia could compete with our
area with respect to these horrific stories. We have no
competition in terms of horrific stories, aside from Hitler's
Germany, where 6 million people were killed, and
Cambodia's Pol Pot. These are our competitors. This is the
issue: the human being is the highest form of God's
creation in terms of intelligence. To find, therefore, that
approximately 2.5 million citizens of the contiguous
countries of the Great Lakes region have been
extra-judicially killed in the period from 1959 to date is
something the patriots of this area have rejected for good.
We will not allow ourselves to be killed without resisting.
We are not chickens to be slaughtered by demented
political actors. We expect the international community to
support us in this. That is why the Security Council was
set up.

Another red herring was floated: aggression against
the Congo. I did not want to go into this; in fact, it was
not part of my speech. But since someone floated this red
herring, I have no alternative but to respond.

We had to fight Mobutu's regime in 1996 because
it was threatening to visit another Holocaust on our area
and to cause another genocide in Rwanda. As we fought
Mobutu's regime, we supported Mr. Kabila, who is sitting
here. When we were supporting him, he did not call us
aggressors. When we supported Mr. Kabila and opposed
Mr. Mobutu, we did not hate Mr. Mobutu, nor did we
love Mr. Kabila. We had to defend ourselves; that was
all. Unfortunately, when Mr. Kabila went into the
Government, he forgot about our original problems and
why we had supported him. This is inconsistent. Today
they are allies, tomorrow aggressors. I do not think that
this is consistent.

In the Lusaka Agreement, the opposition groups in
the Congo should be involved in the peace process in
order to ensure that they cooperate fully in its
implementation. We expect a neutral international
peacekeeping force to be deployed as an interpositional
force in the Congo under the auspices of the United
Nations. That is why we propose that this United Nations
mission to the Congo should be established under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in order to
enable it to effectively deal with questions of
disarmament, demobilization and the protection of
civilians.

We expect all foreign troops to withdraw in
accordance with a timetable to be worked out according
to the Lusaka Agreement, by the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), under the
supervision of the United Nations interpositional force.
This aspect presupposes the active cooperation of all of
the parties to the Lusaka accord, especially with regard to
the obligation to guarantee the security of United Nations
and related personnel. Here again I would like to assure
the Council of the total cooperation of Uganda.

We also expect that a national conference involving
all Congolese political stakeholders will be convened as
soon as possible, with the assistance of the OAU and the
new facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, to determine the
political future of the Congo. Uganda supports the

 

appointment of retired President Masire as the facilitator
and the reaffirmation of President Chiluba in Maputo as a
coordinator of the peace process.

Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America) took the
Chair.

We recognize, of course, that these are complex and
huge undertakings. The renewal and strengthening of our
commitment to carrying them out, as we have just done,
should, however, provide the first concrete step forward.
We, the regional leaders, must be seen to lead the way.
This is what I believe we are here for. However, as I have
already mentioned, the international community also has to
demonstrate clear and concrete support for the efforts we as
Africans are undertaking.

Recent events in all parts of the world have clearly
demonstrated that conflict and war are not exclusively
African phenomena. They can happen anywhere for a
variety of reasons, including the most rampant - that is,
the farming of racial and ethnic hatred. The response of the
international community must be even-handed and not
lopsided.

The magnitude of an effective United Nations
involvement in the Congo, given its size, and, as I said, the
complexity of the situation, will be large and certainly
costly. The Secretary-General confirms this in his report.
But the cost of inaction, as we witnessed in Rwanda, would
be too ghastly, more costly and morally repugnant. I appeal
to the Council to act now to avoid this type of unfortunate
happening. It is the hope of Uganda that the United Nations
mandate will be under chapter seven of the United Nations
Agreement that thoroughly equips the United Nations to
play its part fully.

I should like to conclude by once again reiterating our
appreciation to the President and to the Council for
affording us this opportunity to discuss a very important
and urgent priority that has dogged Africa for four decades
now, starting with the murder of Patrice Lumumba in 1961.
We are happy that this is taking place here at the United
Nations and particularly in the Security Council, whose
primary mandate is the maintenance of international peace
and security. This should mark the beginning of a new era
of reconciliation, peace, stability and prosperity in the Great
Lakes region. The timing of this dialogue could not be
more appropriate.

Mrs. Albright (United States of America) returned to

the Chair.

