Ms. Sison (United States): The international
community has made notable progress in degrading
terrorist groups worldwide, with recent significant
gains in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). But the Security Council
must stay vigilant to counter the dynamic threat that
ISIS and other terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others, pose around the
globe. As ISIS loses territory and funding, thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters are returning from the
conflict zone. We also see ISIS and Al-Qaida affiliates
radicalizing and recruiting others, with ISIS continuing
to establish and support its affiliates around the world.
That demonstrates that terrorist groups and their
extensive networks are still very capable of expanding
their areas of attack and convincing others to carry
out their heinous mission. No country is immune from
the threat.

That is why the United Nations has an ever-
important role to play in supporting the fight against
terrorism in all of its forms. Moreover, it is critical that
the three Committees that briefed us today, and indeed
all parts of the United Nations system, coordinate
their efforts closely and take a whole-of-United
Nations approach to support efforts to defeat terrorism
wherever it exists. One way that the Security Council
can support such an approach is by working closely
with the new United Nations counter-terrorism office,
which, when established, will coordinate counter-
terrorism efforts across 38 United Nations offices.
The office's close engagement with the three Counter-
Terrorism Committees will help eliminate duplication
across the United Nations system and contribute to
the balanced implementation of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Strategy across all four of its pillars.

Over the past year, the Counter- Terrorism
Committee, with the help of the Committee' s experts
in the Counter- Terrorism Executive Directorat,
examined 1ssues that we consider critical. They include
identifying good practices on countering terrorist
narratives, leveraging real world experience from
judges, prosecutors and police officers on prosecuting
terrorists, and promoting respect for human rights
and rule-of-law issues when countering terrorism. We
encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to work with
other parts of the United Nations system, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and other actors, to encourage States to
cooperate better, adopt new needed counter-terrorism
legislation, share best practices and build the Vital
capacity necessary to thwart terrorists' ability to carry
out attacks. The upcoming review of the mandate of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate offers an
opportunity to further enhance the Directorate's mission
to assess States' implementation of existing United
Nations counter-terrorism obligations and identify
opportunities to strengthen capacity. We hope that the
new United Nations counter-terrorism office can take
advantage of the Directorate's country assessments
to enhance the strategic planning of Member States'
capacity-building.

We continue to see the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities as vital to countering
the threats posed by such groups. We appreciate
Ambassador Umarov's active stewardship of that
Committee and thank the Monitoring Group for its
great work in reporting on the changing terrorist threat
picture challenges to implementing resolution 2253
(2015) and on the new areas on which the Committee
and the Council should focus to better counter-
terrorism financing.

Although much focus has been on ISIS, we should
also remember that Al-Qaida remains a potent threat,
blending in with local populations and assuming the
guise of a more "moderate" organization. We hope
that the Committee and its Monitoring Team will focus
on financing and recruitment activities, including the
challenges posed when foreign terrorist fighters return
home or relocate from Iraq and Syria. We must keep
in mind that, for many States Members of the United
Nations, the 1267 sanctions list is the only guide used
at border posts and at seaports and airports to screen
against terrorists. It is therefore crucial that all Member
States help update that list so that it accurately reflects
current threats. We must also work together and with
the United Nations to build State capacity to implement
the sanctions. We hope to use the Council's regular
review of the ISIS and Al-Qaida sanctions next month
to make sure that sanctions are best adapted to the
evolving terrorist threat.

Turning to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to thank Ambassador Llorentty Soliz for Bolivia's
leadership of the 1540 Committee. The United States
considers resolution 1540 (2004) to be the cornerstone
of international efforts to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Today's briefing is timely
because the proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction
and the risk if they fall into the hands of terrorists is by
no means a theoretical one. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea continues to develop nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles. In Syria, we have seen
the devastating consequences of confirmed chemical
weapons use by both State and non-State actors. Yet,
despite such challenges, the obligations in resolution
1540 (2004) are still not fully met.

Last year, in a comprehensive review, the 1540
Committee found that notable implementation gaps
remained, particularly in the areas of chemical and
biological security, countering proliferation financing
and controlling means of delivery. But we think that,
together, we can improve that trend, using the many
tools at the 1540 Committee's disposal. While today's
briefing is important, it should by no means be the
only time the Committees interact. There needs to be
regular, continued engagement on the intentions and
capabilities of terrorists. The Committees should also
be sharing notes on how the United Nations can help
to build State capacity to counter such threats. We look
forward to working with other countries to bolster those
efforts and advance our common security.

