Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. We also appreciate the
very useful introductions made by the briefers. Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later this
morning by the observer of the European Union. In my
national capacity, I would like to add the following.

Water, being a source of life and development, has
become a major strategic challenge. Under the constant
and growing pressure resulting from human activities,
population growth, accidents and climate change, water
resources require us to be more active in adopting
strategic approaches to the promotion of best solutions
and to strengthen our international commitments.

Striking an optimal balance between the practical
economic needs of society, its sustainable development
and the protection of water resources and the provision
of a consistent foundation for a human-friendly
environment in the future has become one of the most

important tasks of the international community. That
long-term objective is yet to be achieved. It is also
noteworthy that, in light of the scarcity of fresh water
and its uneven distribution across the globe, competition
for water can lead to conflicts. Even in the twenty-first
century, our technological and scientific advances
have not yet completely satisfied humankind's thirst,
meaning that the potential for conflict remains.

The Security Council has rarely dealt with water
issues, as it has focused mainly on the role of other
natural resources, such as gold, diamonds and timber,
in fuelling armed conflicts in some countries of Africa.
On the other hand, for instance in the Sudan, water
scarcity is considered one of the drivers of the conflict
in Darfur.

Throughout human history, warring armies have
not shied away from employing asymmetrical warfare
tactics such as poisoning water wells, redirecting
water flows to flood an enemy and so on. Even today,
we remember well the threats of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant to blow up the Mosul Dam,
which would cause a real humanitarian disaster. That
most recent example clearly demonstrates the need to
carefully consider the issue of the protection of critical
infrastructure through the promotion of international
cooperation on preventing terrorist attacks against it. In
that respect, I would like to thank all of the participants
in yesterday's Arria Formula meeting on this subject
for a constructive discussion.

For the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the issue of water should become
an essential element of its overall work in the area of
conflict prevention. Quite recently, Council members
had a fruitful discussion on that topic at the Arria
Formula meeting this past April, initiated by the
Senegalese delegation. Many United Nations Member
States shared the position that the effective inter-State
management of water resources could prevent the
eruption of conflicts around the world. Ideas and
proposals expressed at that meeting provide a solid
basis for today's consideration.

I would like to recall and commend the Senegalese
efforts aimed at promoting peace and stability in the
West African region through the strengthening of
transboundary cooperation in sharing the water of the
Gambia River.

The European continent is also working on
expanding inter-State cooperation on water. For
example, Ukraine, together with 13 other countries
and the European Union, is actively working on the
sustainable and equitable water management of the
Danube River through the International Commission
for the Protection of the Danube River. That
organization has grown into one of the largest and most
active international bodies of river-basin management
expertise in the world.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
highlight the important role of such instruments as the
1992 Economic Commission for Europe Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes, adopted in Helsinki, and the
1997 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
adopted in New York.

I also wish to note the activities of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia in promoting regional cooperation on
water resources management, which is a core factor for
strengthening stability in that region.

In my country, the Water Code of Ukraine is the
main regulatory act that governs legal relations in
the area of the protection and rational use of water
recourses. It is based on the principle of basin water-
resources management. Nowadays, Ukraine continues
to implement the basin-management principle in
practice, in particular by continuing its consistent work
on establishing basin authorities, which are structures
that, at the local level, directly implement the policy of
integrated water resources management in the interests
of local communities and economy.

Iwould like to use this opportunity to draw attention
to the resolution on protection of the environment in
areas affected by armed conflict that was adopted
by the United Nations Environment Assembly at its
second session, held in May in Nairobi. That document
reflects the international community's unanimous
support for the protection of the environment in times
of armed conflicts and reaffirms the need to respect the
relevant international obligations under international
humanitarian law.

Ukraine has learned a lot about the importance of
this issue from our own recent experience of external
aggression in the Donbas. We therefore believe that
greater awareness and the practical implementation
of the provisions of the resolution, as well as of
relevant international law, will foster protection of the
environment in relation to armed conflicts and reduce
conflict-related environmental impacts, ensuring the
successful delivery of the environmental dimensions of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
In our statement, we have touched upon only
a limited number of aspects of the water issue. At
the same time, strengthening our efforts in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in post-conflict societies
requires a more focused approach to the protection of
water supplies in various regions of the world. We hope
that today's deliberations will result in useful ideas on
how to address this subject in an effective and results-
oriented manner.

