Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): As
2014 draws to a close and the Chadian presidency of the
Security Council reaches the end of its term, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and your entire team for
the excellent role you have played in guiding our work.

Since this is the last wrap-up session in which
we are taking part as a non-permanent member of the
Council, I hope you will allow me to look back over
the Council's activities not only during the month of
December, but also for the period of 2013-2014. A
number of issues that were part of this month's agenda
have also concerned us over the past two years. That is
the case with Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan, Darfur, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, the Middle East peace process and Libya, but
also with regard to a number of matters to which Chad
quite rightly drew particular attention, such as counter-
terrorism and cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations.

Throughout Luxembourg's first term on the
Security Council, we have tried not to lose sight of the
fact that behind every agenda item, and behind every
statistic in the Secretary-General's reports, there are
human beings and individual destinies that are directly
affected by the results of our action or inaction. Holding
a seat on the Security Council is a very special and
grave responsibility. That awareness has guided our
actions throughout our term, especially with respect to
the question of Syria. Regrettably, the Syrian situation,
which continues to deteriorate, represents the most
egregious failure of the international community with
respect to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

The determination of the Syrian regime to repress
all opposition, the subsequent rise of terrorism and
the persistent differences among the great Powers
have prevented a political solution to the crisis up
to this point, plunging the Syrian population into an
endless calvary. In such difficult conditions, we did
everything possible to ensure the right of the affected
populations to humanitarian assistance. The joint work
undertaken, first with our Australian friends and then
with our Jordanian friends, with a view to improving
the situation of civilians and access to humanitarian
aid was reflected in the presidential statement of
2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), and subsequently in
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
The mechanism for delivering humanitarian aid across
borders and conflict lines established by resolution
2165 (2014) and extended for a year by resolution 2191
(2014) has proven effective. We hope that scaled up
efforts on the part of the international community will
allow more people in need to be reached.

At the same time, we take this opportunity to renew
our call on all parties to the conflict, in particular
the Syrian authorities, to fulfil their responsibility to
protect their population and to end their violations of
international humanitarian law and their abuses of
human rights. We call on them in particular to end
the violations and abuses committed against millions
of children by implementing the recommendations on
Syria adopted on 26 November by the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
But we should have no illusions - absent a political
solution to the Syrian conflict, there can be no end in
sight to the tragedy that has befallen the Syrian people.
We hope that the coming year will prove decisive in
that regard and that the efforts undertaken by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura will allow the contours of a
solution to the crisis to emerge.

Over the course of the past two years, the Council
has taken important decisions, and it can be said that its
action has prevented the worst. By way of example, I will
mention the establishment of an Intervention Brigade
within United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the creation of new United Nations stabilization
missions, first in Mali and later in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where there was reason to fear
a new genocide, which was an unacceptable risk just as
we were commemorating the twentieth anniversary of
the genocide in Rwanda. We were correct to act, but in
all those cases, sustained and vigilant support from the
international community has been essential. The same
holds true for Somalia.

Our work in the Security Council has been in
keeping with the convictions and priorities that
Luxembourg has long upheld in the United Nations.
Our approach to addressing crisis situations, inspired
by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, has been
a holistic one that views the links among security,
development and human rights as the best way to
establish lasting peace and maintain peace in post-
conflict settings. In that context, we have insisted on
the protection of civilians, respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, the question of women,
peace and security as well as the fight against impunity,
highlighting the fundamental role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The fact that the Council was
prevented from referring the Syrian situation to the
Prosecutor of the ICC will surely remain a black stain
for all those who, like us, saw such a referral as part of
a preventive logic that could have dissuaded the parties
to the Syrian conflict, including terrorist groups such
as Daesh, from committing further war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

We have made every effort to use the full array
of tools available to us to promote the protection of
children - first, of course, within the context of
our term as Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, but also by
ensuring that the language concerning the protection
of children affected by conflict was inserted into all
decisions and positions adopted by the Council. If our
statements on the subject struck some as repetitious, it
is because children are unfortunately the first victims
of contemporary conflicts. That is why we stress the
importance of ensuring that the protection of children is
taken into account across the spectrum of the Council's
work and why we insist on the implementation of the
Council's resolutions and presidential statements on the
issue, most recently resolution 2143 (2014), adopted on
7 March.

Faced with growing threats to international
peace and security, it is essential to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Security Council. Along with others,
we promoted innovations in the Council's working
methods to that end. Our time on the Council has also
strengthened our support for the French initiative for
a code of conduct under which the five permanent
members of the Security Council would voluntarily and
collectively commit not to resort to the veto in cases of
mass atrocities. We have come to recognize the degree
to which the use of the veto or even the threat of its use
weighs upon the Council's work.

The illegal annexation of the Crimea and the
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine cast a sharp light on the limitations of the
Security Council under its current structure, despite
the provisions of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations. The example of Ukraine
is unfortunately only one of many that prove that
additional efforts are required to more fully take into
account the importance of conflict prevention in the
work of the Security Council. Preventing conflicts will
certainly contribute to restoring the credibility of the
Security Council. In that regard, we place high hopes
on the Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative.
We hope that more frequent use of briefings by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Envoys of the Secretary-General for the prevention of
genocide and the responsibility to protect will enable
the Council to more accurately anticipate the outbreak
of crises and therefore to take appropriate conflict
prevention measures more quickly. It is also in that
spirit that we welcome the open information meeting
that the Council will hold this afternoon on the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Over the past two years, Luxembourg has committed
its resources and resolve to the service of international
peace and international security. We end our term
of office with a sense of mission accomplished, but
also with a feeling of humility, more than ever aware
of the limits of the Council's actions and of the fact
that we have assumed that responsibility over a two-
year period on behalf of all the States members of the
General Assembly. We are coming to the end of our
term office with a feeling of great gratitude with regard
to colleagues, permanent and non-permanent members,
with whom we have closely cooperated during this
period of very intense work.

We will now continue to work outside the Security
Council. We hope that the good practices established
in terms of transparency of the Council's work,
particularly these monthly wrap-up meetings, will be
continued in the future, and that we will benefit in our
turn from the transparency that has characterized our
work with regard to the entire membership over the past
two years

In conclusion, I would just like to wish the newly
elected members i Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela - success and satisfaction in
carrying out their mandates. Finally, we would like to
extend our best wishes to Ambassador Barros Melet
and the entire Chilean team during their presidency of
the Security Council in January 2015.

