Mr. Heusgen (Germany): If you, Mr. President,
were to put out the hourglass again, we would see more
clearly that we are speaking within the five minutes.

I will deliver this statement on behalf of the three
co-penholders: Kuwait, Germany and Belgium. I would
like to thank the briefers for the information that
they provided today on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. We extend our gratitude and deep respect to all
humanitarian and medical workers throughout Syria,
especially those in the very challenging environment in
and around Idlib.

As the Secretary-General said last week, the
situation in Idlib is especially dangerous and, yet again,
civilians are paying a horrific price. The Council has
met on numerous occasions, most recently last week
(see S/PV.8553), to address that situation. We have heard
repeatedly the clear assessment of the United Nations
that any large-scale military offensive would lead to a
humanitarian catastrophe for Syria and the region. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
again today drew the Council's attention to the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in north-
western Syria as a result of the continued air strikes
and shelling and the reported use of barrels bombs. We
call for the protection of the 3 million civilians living in
the region and we condemn the loss ofinnocent civilian
lives. The 350,000 internally displaced persons who
were left with no other choice than fleeing the violence

face a particularly dire situation. Those people are
among the most vulnerable, many of them having been
displaced several times or facing family separation in
fleeing the violence.

The attacks on civilian infrastructure, including
schools and health-care facilities, over the past
few weeks are deeply alarming, especially those
on health-care facilities whose coordinates were
communicated under the deconfliction mechanism. We
recall resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427 (2018), which
condemn attacks on hospitals and schools, respectively.

While we strongly condemn the attacks perpetrated
by Security Council-designated terrorist groups,
notably Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, we remind all parties that
counter-terrorism efforts cannot absolve the obligations
of all parties under international humanitarian law,
including the protection of civilians and respect for
the principles of distinction and proportionality. We
reiterate our call for the sustained implementation
of the ceasefire arrangements of the Russia-Turkey
memorandum of understanding of September 2018.
We also reiterate our call for a nation-wide cessation
of hostilities in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).
We call for a surge in diplomacy among the key players
to urgently stabilize and de-escalate the situation.

While the United Nations has been requesting
access for months, still no agreement has been reached
on a third desperately needed convoy to the Rukban
camp. That is unacceptable. The United Nations and
its partners must be able to provide assistance to those
remaining in the camp. Inhabitants should be able to
make an informed choice as to whether or not to leave
the camp in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner. For
those who are willing to leave the camp, key protection
standards must be in place. That includes regular and
continued access throughout the transition from the
camp to their final destinations.

The situation in the Al-Hol camp also remains
deeply concerning. It is overcrowded and the
humanitarian agencies and partners working there face
challenging conditions. Improved access is needed for
the population of more than 70,000 persons, 90 per cent
of whom are women and children, who face particular
protection concerns. We support all efforts to provide
adequate protection to all vulnerable groups, including
children who are suspected of being associated with
armed groups. Such children must be treated first and
foremost as victims.

Since the conflict began nine years ago, Syria and
its people have witnessed some of the most serious
crimes under international law. No lasting peace is
possible without justice and accountability. We stand
firm in our commitment to fighting impunity. In that
context, we renew our support for the work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.

Millions of refugees remain abroad. Regarding the
return of refugees, our position remains unchanged.
All returns must be safe, voluntary and dignified.
Tens of thousands of Syrians remain detained, missing
or unaccounted for. The Council recently adopted
resolution 2474 (2019), the first resolution of the
Security Council on missing persons in armed conflict.
The resolution is particularly relevant to the situation in
Syria today. The families of those detained or missing
deserve to know the fate of their loved ones. We call for
urgent and tangible progress on this issue.

Humanitarian access continues to be a challenge.
We want to remind all the parties to the conflict of
paragraph 1 of resolution 2449 (2018), which "calls
upon all parties to ensure principled, sustained and
improved humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2019".
Parties must live up to their obligations in that regard.

Finally, we reiterate our full support for Special
Envoy Pedersen, whom we will hear from in a few days,
in his efforts to reach an inclusive and credible political
solution in Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

