Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his presentation of the Secretary-General's
report. That is the first report on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
since the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007). I would
also like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his own
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq, of which the United Kingdom remains the
second-largest contributor.

I would like to echo the Secretary-General's thanks
to Mr. Ashraf Qazi for his tireless work as Special
Representative for Iraq over the last three years. We look
forward to working closely with the new Special
Representative as he takes steps to implement the
enhanced role, as set out in resolution 1770 (2007).

The Secretary-General reminded us this morning
of the point in his report that there is now an
opportunity that should not be missed. Over the last
eight months, as set out by General Petraeus in his
testimony to the United States Congress and by
Ambassador Khalilzad today, the Iraqi security forces
and the Multinational Force have had significant and
positive impact on security in Iraq, with sectarian
violence falling and successes against Al-Qaida.

These are very welcome developments, and they
need to be followed up by political steps towards
national reconciliation, driven by Iraqis and supported
and facilitated as necessary by the international
community. We encourage Iraqi leaders to build on the
agreements reached during the leadership conference in
August. In particular, we are keen to see further
meetings of the Prime Minister, the President and his
two Vice-Presidents to reach agreements on key
political issues. We welcome the priority the new
Special Representative has said he will give to
promoting national dialogue, as Mr. Pascoe set out
today.

Iraq is not going to succeed without the full
backing of its neighbours and States in the region. I
echo what colleagues have said in welcoming the
proposal made by the Secretary-General, at the high-
level meeting on Iraq last month, to establish a
secretariat for regional cooperation. We hope that this
can be discussed further at the Iraq neighbours meeting
in Istanbul in November, where the Special
Representative's participation will be very welcome.
We hope that the meeting will approve the Secretary-
General's proposal. The sooner the secretariat is

established, the sooner the principle of sustained
regional engagement and cooperation can have a
beneficial, practical effect.

The international community has to play its part,
too. Key partners have reiterated their commitment to
Iraq within the expanded neighbours' process and at
the high-level meeting. This week, the European Union
committed itself to more active support for Iraq and the
United Nations presence.

The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
support of Iraq through our military, diplomatic and
development efforts. Following discussions with the
Government of Iraq and our Multinational Force
partners, Prime Minister Gordon Brown set out the
United Kingdom's military and economic plans in the
south of Iraq, where we have lead-nation responsibility
within the Multinational Force.

As a result of the progress we have made in
training Iraqi security forces, and based on conditions
on the ground, we expect that provincial Iraqi control
will be established in Basra province in the next two
months. That would complete the transfer of
responsibility for security to Iraqi control in the four
southern Iraqi provinces that have been under British
responsibility. British forces will then focus on training
and mentoring the Iraqi army and police, securing
supply routes and policing the Iraq-Iran border, while
maintaining the ability to come to the assistance of
Iraqi security forces when called upon. Subject to
military advice nearer the time, we plan to move to a
second stage of overwatch in the spring of 2008, when
we will have fewer troops, with a more limited
reintervention capacity, largely focused on training and
mentoring.

In parallel, we will be supporting the economic
reconstruction work announced by Prime Minister
al-Maliki in July, including by helping to establish a
new Basra development commission, strengthening the
engagement of the international private sector in the
south and providing advice on investment and growth.

International support for provincial authorities is
important as they coordinate projects in the south that
will have a lasting effect. We are working closely with
the United Nations to advise on and facilitate the
establishment of a United Nations presence in Basra
over the coming months. I would draw attention to the
request for financial and logistical assistance made by
the Secretary-General, as set out by Mr. Pascoe today,
which are needed to allow the United Nations to
implement its role fully. I hope that Member States will
consider what support they can provide.

As I said at the beginning, there is an opportunity
now for Iraq and for us all that we must not miss.

