Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation is gratified at seeing you, Sir, preside over
the Council in the presence of the Secretary-General. We
also wish to thank you for having convened this meeting
and chosen this very important subject to be discussed
openly; this reinforces the principle of transparency to
United Nations Members.

Recent decades have seen an unacceptable
deterioration in respect for humanitarian norms in armed
conflicts and we note with great regret that civilians are
increasingly being directly targeted in the midst of armed
conflict. Civilian populations today are the source of the
largest number of victims; this reflects a violation of the
principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law.

Armed conflicts have grown ever more cruel and
barbaric. The warring parties tend to use means that serve
their interests and thus defy international security and
peace. Thus, a large number of civilian victims are women
and children who are frequently subjected to rape or
systematic sexual exploitation. Children are recruited or
kidnapped by armed forces to be turned into soldiers. This
problem must therefore be addressed very precisely through
the drafting of international legislation and treaties
prohibiting the use or recruitment of children in armed
conflict. Moreover, my delegation supports the idea, put
forward by the Secretary-General in his report on the
causes of conflict in Africa, to turn children themselves into
zones of peace. We hope that this idea will be widely
discussed. We should also like to see the recruitment age
raised to 18 years, as mentioned by the Director General of
the United Nations Children's Fund and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict.

I also wish to emphasize the problem of refugees,
whose numbers have grown considerably in recent years
because of armed conflict. Today, the security of refugees
is a matter of concern to us and to the States receiving
those refugees from neighbouring countries. The
proliferation of weapons, notably small arms and light
weapons, has had a serious impact on civilians. My
delegation believes that it is very important for all
Member States to control and limit the transfer of
weapons that incite and prolong these armed conflicts.
Cooperation in the campaign against the transfer and flow
of illicit arms into conflict zones must be stepped up.
Every effort must therefore be made to give refugees and
displaced persons the necessary protection and to meet
their needs, in accordance with agreed international rules
and norms.

My delegation wonders at the extent to which the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, is
being implemented. It has been nearly 50 years since that
Convention was signed. How is it being truly
implemented in the field? We ask this question because
of the growing number of civilians running every sort of
risk and danger, not to mention, of course, being killed
and displaced. It is therefore necessary to establish
machinery to ensure the implementation of these
conventions, whose essential and basic aim is to protect
civilians.

Furthermore, whatever might be done or said, one
can never insist enough on the importance of the security
of humanitarian personnel working for the various United
Nations agencies. My delegation does not hesitate to
repeat here that these humanitarian workers run the same
risks and encounter the same fates as do civilians in zones
of armed conflict. They are subjected to the same difficult
circumstances, and some have recently been killed or
assassinated. It is very hard to ask for the protection of
civilians in zones of conflict without giving the same
degree of protection to those who are providing assistance
to mitigate the suffering of those same civilians.

To conclude, I should like to emphasize that it is
necessary for there to be a degree of coordination
between the Security Council, on the one hand, and, on
the other, all of the agencies working in the humanitarian
field, including the Economic and Social Council. There
must be cooperation, among these humanitarian
organizations; otherwise each one will act unilaterally and
perform actions that run counter to those taken by the
others. This will have a negative impact on the assistance
that is to be given to civilians in zones of conflict. We do
not want those civilians to become the victims of conflicts
or victims of a lack of coordination among the various
United Nations agencies.

Finally, in the same vein, the Security Council must
take practical steps that will change the tragic situation

 

that exists today. As far as civilians in zones of conflict are
concerned, experience has shown us that resolutions and
conventions do not suffice to meet their needs. Legislation
must be followed up by practical steps that provide the
necessary assistance.

