Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The Permanent Representative of Austria will shortly
be making a statement on behalf of the European
Union, which I fully support. I would like to make a
few additional comments.

France is extremely concerned about
developments in the situation in the Middle East.
While we recognize the legitimate right of Israel to
self-defence, we call for the greatest restraint in the
Israeli operations under way, in particular to protect the
Palestinian civilian population. We reaffirm the pre-
eminence of diplomatic paths for obtaining the release
of the Israeli soldier. We call for the speediest possible
end to Israeli incursions in Gaza and in zone A of the
West Bank so as to facilitate the de-escalation of
violence in the region.

It is essential that the Palestinian Authority
urgently take all necessary measures to halt the firing
of missiles and acts of violence of all kinds against
Israel and its citizens. Furthermore, we condemn the
killing of the young Israeli settler who was kidnapped
in the West Bank. We reaffirm that the Hamas-led
Palestinian Government must adhere to the three
principles laid down by the Quartet: renunciation of
violence, recognition of Israel and acceptance of
international instruments and obligations. It is also
essential, however, to protect the Palestinian Authority
as an institution and to guarantee the possibility of
future dialogue and negotiation.

The arrest by Israel of members of the
Government and the Legislative Council and other
Palestinian political leaders is a direct threat to the
very existence of Palestinian institutions. We therefore
call for their release.

As the Secretary-General has said, it is essential
that all the parties urgently take measures with a view
to a de-escalation. It is essential to restore the
conditions for a resumption of negotiations with a view
to a just, equitable and lasting settlement based on law
that will enable the Israeli and Palestinian States and
peoples to finally live in peace and security.

