Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Sir, for giving us
the opportunity on behalf of the whole United Nations
system in Afghanistan to give the Council a brief
update.

Much has happened, as is often the case in
Afghanistan, during these past few months. Since my
last briefing (see S/PV.6351), some key events have
taken place. I would like to review some of those
events, which preceded the recent and highly
anticipated parliamentary elections, in order not to lose
sight of the progress that is being made in Afghanistan.

Let me begin with something the Council is very
familiar with, since many of us attended it at the time -
the Kabul Conference. The Conference, which was held
on 20 July, did indeed reinforce the Government's
commitment to assuming greater control of its own
future. That was the message we got from the
Conference. The substantive preparations undertaken,
and which addressed a lot of varied issues, involved
extensive cooperation between ministries and required a
high level of engagement on the part of the international
community with the Afghan authorities and with civil
society. The Government of Afghanistan, including its
own Afghan National Security Forces - and I am glad
to see that our friend the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan is here with us to hear it publicly - should
10-55499
be commended, because everyone who attended the
Conference was impressed with the way it was organized
and how it unfolded. It required a lot of logistical,
organizational and substantive preparations.

The Conference was a key moment in the Kabul
process, as we call it now, that began with President
Karzai's second inaugural speech. While that speech
set a broad governing agenda, the Conference added
details to that agenda by elaborating a series of joint
commitments. These commitments include the
development of a framework, clear timelines,
benchmarks for national priority programmes, progress
towards the Afghan security lead, improvement in
governance and, of course, the very serious and
important issue of tackling corruption.

Since the Conference, the Government has taken
a number of important steps in terms of technical
planning. First, it has indicated its intention - and we
confirm that this is taking place - to continue, through
the cluster approach - that is, various ministries
working together with the international community -
to pursue agreed priorities. That was the bottom line of
the Conference: trying to identify priorities with which
we could all realign our own priorities. Secondly, it has
begun to roll out the 21 national priority programmes
agreed on at the Conference. Thirdly, the Government
has made an immediate start to public finance
management reforms, which are a concern to everyone,
including a review of 14 line ministries, led by the
Ministry of Finance. Fourthly, the Government has
indicated that it will make a start on tackling the
anti-corruption agenda agreed at the Conference, which
also includes the creation of a joint monitoring and
evaluation committee by the end of this month.

Let us now look at one issue that has been front
and centre for us over the past few months - the
elections. The campaign period for the elections ran
from 23 June to 15 September, and frankly - we were
discussing this just this morning - it was
characterized by a very big change from in the events
of 2005. People were showing their faces, people were
campaigning, and women were present. There was an
active and very creative style of campaigning in these
elections.

More than 2,500 candidates - actually, 2,521 -
stood for re-eIection, including almost 400 women -
398, to be precise. Of those, only one withdrew during
the campaign, while two men did. That also shows the
10-55499

level of courage and determination they displayed in
wanting to be part of this democratic process, as
complicated and, sometimes, as difficult as it might be.
Of the 249 sitting Members of Parliament, 229 sought
re-election, demonstrating their own interest, and also,
to a certain degree, their confidence in the democratic
system in Afghanistan. Of the 2,521 candidates, there
were many new entrants and many new, young faces.
Of course, it remains to be seen where they are at the
end of this process.

We must not forget that one of the main
achievements of these elections is the fact that they
actually took place. Afghanistan is still a country in a
very tense conflict. The fact that an election took place
at all, not least in such a short time after the previous
one and during a comparatively more volatile period -
because security has not improved; in fact the contrary
is true - is an accomplishment in itself.

And, while there were no high-profile incidents,
quite a number of security incidents did occur. They
were not sufficient, however, to disrupt the elections
overall. The proof is that almost 4.3 million votes were
cast. Of course, we will now need to see how many
actual voters were part of that, but this is quite an
achievement compared to the previous and current
environment. While the consolidation of the figures on
security is still going on, election day security
incidents were estimated at about 490, compared to
290 in the previous election. That represents a big
difference, but the impact of those incidents was
basically comparable, if not less. Again, the proof is
that people went to vote. The incidents' intensity was
lower. The overall deterioration of the security
situation from last year to this was in any case greater,
so that also has to be taken into consideration. About
1.6 million of the 4.3 million ballots cast to date - we
have to see how many voters that means i were in
female polling stations, again an indicator of a
direction that we should all welcome.

This is the point. According to all of us, frankly,
it is too early to give an overall assessment of the
elections, except for the fact that they took place and
4.3 million Afghans had the courage to go, and that
according to many people the systems were better. But
the outcome remains to be seen, and that is why we are
being cautious about it.

We also need to see how even or uneven the
actual turnout was over all the provinces and in the
3
country. According to everyone, the Independent
Electoral Commission has demonstrated a significant
improvement compared to last year's presidential
election, despite immense security and logistical
challenges. In contrast to last year, the location of all
polling centres was announced publicly a month before
polling day. The Council will remember that last year,
during the presidential elections, the list of polling
centres was publicized two days before voting, and that
was the biggest reason why there was so much concern
about fraud. This time it was publicized a month
beforehand. That was probably the biggest mitigating
measure that could have been taken to avoid massive
and systemic fraud.

Despite significant challenges, the polling
materials arrived on time in most places, and 5,510
polling centres opened, of the 5,897 that had been
announced on 18 August.

Another major improvement was the security
arrangements for the design, use and movement of
sensitive materials, including ink. I think that Minister
for Foreign Affairs Rassoul and I can still testify with
our fingers that the ink that we used, at least, was quite
indelible, and after 10 days I am still looking forward
to getting rid of it. We publicly put our fingers in some
bleaching products, and it is still there. That does not
mean that in some places there was not some faking,
but the ink that was provided on a massive scale for the
election was quite good.

Having said that, the elections this time had a
major security element, reassuring us that at least they
would be much more monitored than in the past. We
had 397,000 national observers, and they were
observing the interests of each candidate on their own.
They represented, in that sense, quite an impressive
capacity, wanting to make sure that there would be no
massive fraud, at least. The sensitive materials were
also moved quite safely, in spite of the Taliban having
twice threatened to disrupt that.

However, this is just the beginning of the process.
That is why, on the Council's behalf, in Afghanistan
and outside, we are now being cautious. We pushed, we
tried to support the electoral mechanism to go forward,
and we tried to encourage the Afghan people to feel
that it was worth taking a risk because democracy was
moving forward, but now we are being cautious,
because we need to see what the outcome is.
Despite some retail fraud and, certainly, many
problems, the outcome will very much depend on
whether the Independent Electoral Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission will have the
stamina, the courage, the neutrality and the
determination to actually go over the 3,900 complaints
received thus far and be able to say which are right and
which are wrong, and take that decision before
30 October.

There are and there will be 2,000 losers - there
are 2,521 candidates and 249 posts - and those losers
are, unavoidably, already complaining. Again, the
secret will be whether the electoral commissions will
be able to stand in a credible way. We are ready to
sustain and support them, but that is an Afghan
responsibility.

Regarding conclusions on the election, on our
side we should allow the requisite time for the process,
which is until 30 October - 8 October for the
preliminary outcome and 30 October for the final
outcome, more or less, based on the hard work that
they will have to do now. We must not make premature
judgments. We should note that the positive
improvements over last year's elections - from which
we all, including the United Nations, have all drawn
key lessons, by being careful in making any type of
declaration about the outcome before it is clarified -
make us cautious but supportive of the steps ahead in
ensuring the integrity of the process and accountability
to the Afghan people. The final comments will come at
the end of the month.

Once the elections have been successfully
concluded in one form or another, hopefully, the real
discussion regarding the future of the electoral system
and long-term electoral reform needs to be initiated.
We already know that. Many here are already keen on
that, and so are the Afghan people. UNAMA will work
with the Government, with the electoral institutions
and all relevant Afghan and international partners, in
particular the European Union (EU).

The representative of the European Union,
Vygaudas Usackas - with whom, as the Council
knows, we are working extremely closely - has
already indicated publicly the interest of the EU in
having a leading role in supporting the process of the
electoral reform agenda with the Afghan Government.
We will be supporting that ourselves. It will focus,
most likely, on the electoral legal framework; the
10-55499
sustainability of the electoral calendar, because we
cannot have an election every three months; the long-
term status of the Electoral Complaints Commission,
which is only ad hoc, making it very fragile compared
to the Independent Electoral Commission; a single
nationwide electoral roll, because, as the Council
knows, we do not have that; and, the mother of all
issues, building the capacity of both electoral
commissions.

So what is coming up on the radar? Well, the year
began, as the Council knows, with setting a series of
stepping stones. The first was the Istanbul conference.
Then we had the London Conference, followed by the
Consultative Peace Jirga, then the Kabul Conference
and now the elections.

What is next? Well, a broader political process.
We heard this, and yesterday we heard President Karzai
elaborating on launching the high-level peace
commission, with more than 67 members from all sides
of Afghan society. We will focus on supporting that, on
the basis of the mandate given to us by the Security
Council, and on the Kabul process. At the same time
we will watch with interest, and potentially with
substantive support, the transition, which is probably
going to be discussed at the Lisbon summit and then in
Kabul.

I am glad to acknowledge the presence here of
our colleague and friend, Mark Sedwill, who is the
Senior Civilian Representative of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). I have had the
opportunity on other occasions here to say how closely
we have been working together and how important it is
that we are working in that way in order to avoid any
type of confusion and to ensure that the Afghans feel
that we, on the international side, are all together in
supporting the Afghan lead.

Today, I would like to highlight some of key
conditions that are essential for the so-called road map
on our side in the Kabul process. The Kabul process
cannot be just a technocratic exercise. All partners
need to engage politically behind the agenda. We know
that we can count on President Karzai's leadership in
this.

Secondly, we need to avoid new agendas or
competing initiatives. We should focus on identifying
the priorities that the Kabul Conference said that we
need to tackle first, and concentrate our collective
effort behind them. The Government has sent a signal
regarding the priorities they seek to pursue: the rollout
of national priority programmes and public finance
management reform. We need to support that agenda,
and we plan to work on it.

Thirdly, we, the international community, need to
keep our own part of the bargain by aligning
resources - or realigning resources - behind the
Government priorities. The United Nations is
committed in Kabul to a "one-UN" approach, so that
we too contribute to the realigning and not just help in
the realigning of other partners.

Fourthly, we must continue to strive to be more
results-oriented, as the Afghan people are asking of us
and the Afghan Government. I intend to work with the
Government before the next meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board, to be held at the
end of November, to ensure that the Board, without
having to create new bodies or new institutions, can be
revitalized and be a follow-up to the actual Kabul
follow-up conference. Of course, all of that will go
forward only if it is moving towards a consolidated
peace and reintegration programme within a
complementary, structured political process that leads
to a future Afghanistan reconciled on the basis of
mutual respect.

There is a unanimous consensus in the
international community that there is no military
solution for Afghanistan. In the end, the solution can
and should be political and Afghan, a solution that can
only be supplemented with broader regional support
and a solution that we can all work towards. Yesterday,
the Government of Afghanistan took a very significant
initial step, and UNAMA, in accordance with its
mandate, will do all that it can to support it.

The next few months will be critical, first, in
looking at the follow-up to the election, and secondly,
in seeing how transition can become a concrete, well-
organized and fair approach in the eyes of the Afghans
and the international community.

Transition does not mean exit; it means
transition, and the Government of Afghanistan will
continue to receive all possible support from all of us
with a view to bringing about what we are all hoping to
see, namely, a peace and reconciliation initiative.

I will stop there, Mr. President, with your
permission.
