We continue to pay close attention to the situation in Libya. We are concerned that despite the agreement on the humanitarian truce in March, the security situation in Libya has worsened. Attacks on civilians continued to take place, especially targeted ones and those on schools and health-care facilities, as mentioned in the first-quarter report of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) on civilian casualties. The ongoing hostilities will only exacerbate the sufferings of the Libyan people, especially in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Viet Nam is further concerned about the recent lack of progress towards a peaceful political solution in Libya. The best hope for long-term peace and stability in Libya is to achieve a political, peaceful and long-term solution on the basis of respect for Libya's independence and sovereignty and through an inclusive Libyan- led and -owned process in line with the three tracks - political, military and economic - set out in the resolution 2510 (2020) on the Berlin Conference on Libya. In this difficult time of COVID-19, we reiterate the importance of dialogue over warfare and of the implementation of the arms embargo. The role of the United Nations, UNSMIL, regional organizations and the neighbouring countries of Libya will continue to be crucial to promoting peace in Libya. In that connection, Viet Nam wishes to stress the following. First, in the spirit of the month of Ramadan, the relevant parties in Libya should immediately stop the ongoing hostilities, uphold their commitment to the truce, fully respect international humanitarian law, stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, allow unhindered humanitarian access to assist those in need and combat the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, peace talks under the political, security and economic tracks should be resumed as soon as possible. All support should continue, including through remote means if necessary. A new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya should be appointed as soon as possible to effectively assist that process. Thirdly, Viet Nam reiterates its consistent position that the State has the primary responsibility for the implementation of international humanitarian law and the prevention and suppression of serious criminal acts such as war crimes, crimes against humanity and the crime of aggression. The establishment of accountability for serious criminal acts and violations of international humanitarian law shall be conducted in accordance with the fundamental principles of international law on the independence and sovereignty of States. In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm our strong support for the pursuit of peace, stability, development and the national unity of Libya.
