Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom and Mr. Serge Christiane for their
briefings on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Let me also join other Council members in
welcoming and thanking Secretary of State Pompeo for
taking the time to be here with us today.

We have noted from the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/1089) that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to adhere to its nuclear-related commitments.
We have also noted from the report that the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has continued the
verification and monitoring of the implementation of
nuclear-related commitments, the non-diversion of
nuclear materials and the absence of undeclared nuclear
materials and activities by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The fact that the Secretary-General has not received
any report on the supply, transfer or export to Iran
of nuclear and dual-use items, materials, equipment,
goods and technology is indeed encouraging.

We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) stands
out as a demonstration of successful multilateralism.
It is indeed a symbol or, if we may, an embodiment
of functioning multilateralism, with good results.
However, we recognize the challenges and difficulties
in the broader implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), particularly in relation to the reported activities
allegedly undertaken by Iran contrary to the restrictive
measures contained in annex B to the resolution and
the key findings included in the report of the Secretary-
General.

We have noted the communications regarding the
ballistic-missile test by the Islamic Republic of Iran as
reflected in the reports of the Secretary-General and of
the Facilitator (S/2018/1106). We have also noted from
the report of the Secretary-General that the Secretariat
has continued its analysis regarding ballistic-
missile-related transfers or activities on the part of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as arms-related
transfers. In our view, such activities, together with
the ballistic missile launched by Iran, will affect the
broader implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015). It will also increase tensions and have
serious regional consequences.

We concur with the Secretary-General's statement
in his report that "[i]t is essential that the Plan continue
to work for all its participants, including by delivering
tangible economic benefits to the Iranian people"
(S/2018/1089, para. 3). For the JCPOA to continue to
work for all participants and for it to achieve its broader
objective - to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and continued dialogue and collaboration
among the remaining participants - is of utmost
importance. In our view, this will enable the remaining
participants to address the challenges encountered in
the implementation of the JCPOA, particularly with
respect to arms- and ballistic-missile-related transfers
as well as ballistic-missile tests. It will also certainly
contribute to the preservation of the Plan, which the
Secretary-General called for in his report.

