Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States, comprising Fiji, the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, the Kingdom of Tonga.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for your strong leadership in
convening this open debate to discuss the working
methods of the Council. We share the concerns raised
in the note of the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507). We would like to acknowledge the work
of the group of five small States, the S-5. We hope this
debate offers constructive and practical advice for the
Council in the light of the increasing workload and the
competing interests that demand the Council's
attention.

The Pacific small island developing States also
share the concerns outlined in the presidency's concept
paper (S/2008/528, annex) and the focus on improving
the Council's efficiency, transparency and interaction.

The efficiency of the Council is of paramount
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. New conflicts have emerged since the end
of the cold war. As a result, the Council has been called
upon to address these issues and to devote its resources
and attention to meeting the increasing demands for
peacekeeping and conflict resolution.

The Council's workload grew exponentially in
the early 1990s, causing the Council to evolve from a
body that for decades met only sporadically into one
that held 272 formal meetings and 193 informal
consultation sessions in 2006, an increase of 21 per
cent over 2004 levels. Council output, measured by
resolutions and presidential statements, increased by
36 per cent over the same period.

The increase in the demand for the Council's
involvement in conflict resolution is reflective of the
changing times. More than ever, our collective well-
being depends upon how we respond, in multiple
forums, to emerging cross-cutting issues. Both the
traditional and non-traditional kinds of threat deserve
the attention of the Council. We must widen the scope
of acceptance and address the substantial security
implications of certain cross-cutting issues. In our
view, we believe that we should not become so
inflexible that we deny the opportunity for the Council
to analyse and consider the substantial security
implications of certain cross-cutting issues, such as
climate change.

We emphasize that in his 2001 report entitled
"Prevention of armed conflict" (S/2001/574), the
Secretary-General noted that in the last century,
collective security was often pursued by the Council
through reactive rather than preventive means, and was
defined almost exclusively in military terms. The
Secretary-General pledged to move the United Nations
"from a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention"
(para. 4) and specifically referred to creative tools at
the Security Council's disposal to increase utilization
of proactive strategies. The Secretary-General
encouraged the Council

"to consider innovative mechanisms, such as
establishing a subsidiary organ, an ad hoc
informal working group or other informal
technical arrangement to discuss prevention cases
on a continuing basis, particularly in regard to
periodic regional or sub-regional reports as
well as other early warning or prevention cases
brought to its attention by Member States".
(para. 39, recommendation 3)

Bearing in mind the Secretary-General's 2001
report, we note that the Council has a truly unique skill
set that it can engage to address the security
implications of climate change. That can be
accomplished in ways that are outcome-oriented but
which do not overburden the Council's workload and
which complement existing agreements.

The need for the reform and the improvement of
the working methods of the Council is obvious. The
Council has never been static and has always
responded to new challenges to international peace and
security. Examples are found in the establishment of
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding
processes.
Today, new challenges such as climate change
threaten international peace and security. The working
methods have to be flexible to address such challenges
while taking the increasing workload of the Council
into consideration. It is important that the working
methods adapt to the urgent need to address the
security implications of emerging cross-cutting issues
such as climate change and that they take a proactive
approach to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

The Pacific small island developing States would
therefore like to reiterate their position that meaningful
reform of the working methods of the Security Council
should be included in the intergovernmental
negotiations mandated to commence during the current
session of the General Assembly. Open negotiations
will give all Members of the United Nations a voice
and will certainly help the Council to be more
effective, efficient, transparent and democratic in the
future.

The concept paper (S/2008/528) identifies
transparency as one of the major challenges for the
Council in reforming its working methods. We share
the concern about the need to strike a better balance
between private consultations and the commitment to
conduct more public meetings. Several issues,
including the following, need to be considered by the
Council.

First, the Council has increasingly shifted from
open to closed meetings when conducting its affairs.
We hope the Council can take into account the impact
of its decisions on non-members and increase the
number of open debates and meetings.

Other issues include the provision of more
regular structured briefings to help address the
concerns of non-members and increasing the level of
input from the wider United Nations membership in the
decision-making process to determine the format for a
particular Council meeting. The current process lacks
transparency and is not accessible to non-members.

There is a need to improve the effectiveness of
the wrap-up sessions. In 2001, members agreed that
interactive wrap-up sessions at the end of a presidency
would be a useful exercise. Unfortunately, many of the
wrap-up sessions did not take place, with the last
having taken place in 2005. Such meetings would be
useful for non-members, and in particular for smaller
nations with limited resources, to follow the
proceedings of the Council.
There is also the issue of encouraging and
facilitating better interaction with troop-contributing
countries by conducting regular meetings to discuss
substantive matters and concerns. That is particularly
relevant for troop-contributing countries that are not
members to the Security Council.

The growing number of activities undertaken by
the Council has had a great impact on the membership
at large. Issues such as the contributions of troops
required for major new peacekeeping missions or the
imposition of new sanctions regimes by the Council
have produced impacts on United Nations Members
that contribute to the its peacekeeping forces. That is
particularly important for Pacific small island
developing States, as a number of our countries have
been involved in the peacekeeping process. As non-
members of the Council, Pacific small island
developing States support any efforts to increase
transparency and allow greater participation by the
entire membership of the United Nations.

Many of the agreements reached by the Council
are negotiated through experts meetings, which are not
open to non-members. Although the informal
consultations are made public in the Journal of the
United Nations, the summaries of the discussions are
not readily available. Draft resolutions and statements
are often circulated among the members of the
Council. They are often trimmed and edited before
reaching informal consultations. Such a practice makes
it hard for non-members to be readily informed of the
work of the Council. It also makes it difficult for non-
members to provide meaningful input into the process,
even in rare opportunities such as open debates.

Finally, we have raised a number of concerns and
made several observations regarding the working
methods of the Council. We have outlined the
difficulties faced by non-members, such as Pacific
small island developing States, in having timely access
to the Council's work and being able to effectively
participate in its decision-making process. We hope
that the Council's working methods can be improved to
reflect the increasing need for efficiency, transparency
and interaction.

We are confident that the Council will rise to the
challenge and widen its scope to consider the security
implications of cross-cutting issues such as climate
change. It is also our hope that the Council can address
the issues of the veto and increased membership within
the intergovernmental process, rather than through the
open-ended working group mechanism, and, in the case
of working methods, the Security Council.

