Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I will remember
February 2017 as the month in which my friend and
colleague, Vitaly Churkin, passed away. I wish to once
again pass on my condolences to the Russian team and
to his family.

February was also a month in which Ukraine did an
excellentjob presiding over the Security Council, and I
want to commend you, Mr. President, and your team, for
the way in which you did that. I think a number of the
workingmethodsthatyouinstigatedshouldbe continued.
For example, your efforts to ensure the transparency of
our work have been very effective. And, in response to
the question posed by the representative of France, your
involvement of civil society has been noteworthy, and
something that the United Kingdom will continue next
month. You have also made sure that we were focused
on action and that, in particular, some sort of action
came of our conversations in the closed consultations
room, whether that was a bilateral meeting between
you and the Permanent Representative of a country
that we had been discussing, press elements or press
statements. Very clearly, pursuing an action-oriented
approach is something the United Kingdom would like
to follow as well. Moreover, I think you did a good
job of bringing difficult and at times divisive issues to
our attention, including the conflicts in Europe, from
which your country is suffering most particularly. The
manner in which you did that was highly effective, and
I congratulate you and your team.

In addition to our working methods, I would also
like to say a few words about what we do and the content
of our work, and to look both backward to February
and forward to the British presidency in March. The
overarching theme for next month will be preventing
conflicts in Africa. That is something on which the
incoming Secretary-General has placed significant
focus. I strongly agree with him that prevention is
better than the cure, and that investing upstream before
things worsen is a good thing to do in terms of time,
energy, effort and resources, all in the pursuit of saving
lives and preventing threats to international peace and
security from spiralling out of control. We have already
had both good and bad examples of that in 2017.

The Gambia provides a good example from January,
wherein the United Nations, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States all
came together in a highly effective way to prevent a
conflict there. On the other hand, in February we have
heard that the situation in South Sudan has got even
worse and that, on top of the political complexity of
that country and the risk of genocide, there is now a
certified famine - only the second famine anywhere
in the world to have been declared since the year 2000.
One hundred thousand people are starving in South
Sudan, and 1 million are on the brink of famine. So,
building on the work of this month, I think we need
to do even more next month to ensure the Security
Council is doing its utmost to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to bring peace to South Sudan. We
will be holding a high-level briefing on that issue on
23 March.

In February, we have also heard about the worrying
scale of violence against civilians in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is another example of
an area where preventing things from getting worse
should absolutely be at the top of the Council's list of
priorities. In that regard, it is vital that those who are
responsible for such violence be held accountable for
it, and that we see progress in the political process. We
look forward to considering those issues further during
the British presidency.

In all of these issues related to the continent
of Africa, cooperation with the African Union and
subregional bodies will be absolutely crucial. As I
said, that was one of the things that made the Gambian
example a positive one, and it is one of the things that
we are seeking to do in South Sudan.

I would also like to mention Somalia. In March the
United Kingdom will be hearing from representatives
of both the United Nations and the African Union about
progress in that country. And, of course, tomorrow
night, we will be setting off on a visit to the Lake Chad
Basin to have a look at four countries: Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria, where there are a whole set of
factors - political, security, governance, terrorism,
environmental and surely many others - that we need
to re-examine, working in concert with our colleagues
from the African Union. I hope that gives an idea of
some of the highlights - both of this month and next
month - in terms of how we have been working
closely together.

There is one final part of the British presidency
in March that I wanted to mention - the open debate
to be held here on 14 March on modern slavery. That
speaks to the point made by our Chinese colleague
on understanding the root causes, getting underneath
the skin of issues, and trying to find the link between
development issues and security issues. The scourge
of modern slavery is a good example of an issue that
touches on a very wide range of other issues of concern
to the Security Council, and is absolutely a threat to
international peace and security.
I would like to thank everyone for the good wishes
for next month. I look forward to working with everyone
and carrying on Mr. Yelchenko's highly effective
working methods.

