Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): My delegation would like
to join others in expressing our condolences to the
Member States that lost nationals in the helicopter
crash in Sierra Leone. We also express condolences to
the United Nations.

My delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting,
during which we have heard reports from the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).

We would also like to thank and congratulate the
President of the ICTR, Judge Mose, and Prosecutor
Hassan Jallow, for their statements and reports.

Rwanda continues to hope and expect that the
Tribunal will bring to justice the perpetrators of the
1994 genocide, and we pledge our continued support to
ensure that its work runs as smoothly as possible. We
are particularly encouraged by the acknowledgement of
President Mose and Prosecutor I allow that Rwanda has
been cooperating with the ICTR, and we reassure the
Council that we shall continue to extend necessary
cooperation to the ICTR throughout its mandate.

Since we met for the same purpose last year, we
have witnessed a significant level of improvement in
the work of the Tribunal as a result of measures taken
by the Council. We once again congratulate the
Council for the decision contained in resolution 1505
(2003).

The ICTR now has its own Prosecutor. As
anticipated, that appointment has resulted in a better
organized and more focused Office of the Prosecutor.
There is both a qualitative and quantitative
improvement in overall performance. There has also
been a dramatic improvement and broadening of
communication between my Government and the
Office of the Prosecutor. Rwanda is committed to
continuing to work closely with the Office of the
Prosecutor and to provide the support and facilitation
that we have been providing over the years.

We also commend the Chambers, and particularly
Judge Mose, for recent initiatives aimed at improving
the efficiency and effectiveness of their work. We also
note and commend the contributions of the Registry,
particularly Mr. Adama Dieng, for their invaluable
contributions.

There are a few issues of great importance which
we would like to bring to the attention of the Council,
and we request that these issues be given attention by
the Council at this time, when it is considering the
completion of the work of the ICTR.

When the Office of the Prosecutor first presented
its completion strategy, as many as 300 cases of
suspects considered to be the most responsible were
targeted for prosecution before the Tribunal completed
its work. These most responsible suspects are the
persons accused of the greatest level of responsibility
for the genocide. That figure, however, fell soon
afterwards - first to 250 and then to 150. Now it is
less than 50.

While the number of most responsible suspects
being pursued by the Tribunal may have decreased, the
seriousness of the accusations against some of those
suspects, who are no longer being pursued by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, requires
the attention of the Security Council so as to ensure
that they do not evade justice altogether. My delegation
would like to request the Council to seriously consider
this matter with a View to ensuring that there is no
impunity, and that those suspects face justice. We
therefore do not see the Tribunal's completion strategy
as an exit strategy for the international community. We
believe that the international community, and
particularly the Council, has a responsibility to bring
those suspects to justice, whether at the ICTR or
elsewhere.

Rwanda will continue to work bilaterally with the
countries where those suspects currently reside, with a
view to having them transferred to Rwanda for
prosecution.

My Government looks forward to the transfer of
cases from the Tribunal to Rwanda, in compliance with
resolution 1503 (2003). The people of Rwanda, who
have felt alienated from the Tribunal, which is based
hundreds of miles away, would be able to observe the
trials first-hand. We believe that that would contribute
significantly to the reconciliation process by giving a
sense that justice is being done.

There has been concern expressed about the fact
that the death penalty remains on Rwanda's statute
books. I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
assurances that we have given to the ICTR that my
Government is prepared to waive the death penalty
with respect to cases transferred from the ICTR. We
are in the process of exploring the necessary legal
avenues to realize this general principle in a manner
consistent with the wishes of the Rwandan people in
their legislative strategy and in accordance with the
specific demands of the International Tribunal.

My Government would like also to take this
opportunity to state that it would welcome support for
our judicial institutions as we prepare for the transfer
of these cases. While we have made tremendous
progress in rebuilding our judicial institutions -
which, like everything else in Rwanda, were decimated
by the genocide - we would appreciate support in the
provision of additional practical training for our legal
professionals.

The international community is expected to
support Rwanda, as we are making great efforts to
invest in the rule of law based on strong judicial
institutions. We do not expect the international
community, given our resource constraints, to set
conditions against us, not even when the transfer of
cases is being considered. The best legacy that
international involvement in the process of justice can
leave to Rwanda is to build strong judicial institutions
for posterity.

Rwanda would like convicts to begin serving
their sentences in the country. We believe that
sentences should be served where the crimes were
committed. It is difficult to imagine that sentences
could be strictly enforced in countries thousands of
miles from where the crimes took place, where there
may be scant understanding of, or regard for, the
seriousness of the crimes.

Let me give an example. In April, while the
world marked the 10-year commemoration of the
genocide in Rwanda, convicts serving their sentences
in Mali were permitted to leave their detention facility
and make telephone calls around the world, including
one to the BBC Kinyarwanda service. They did an
interview with the BBC in which they denied that the
genocide ever took place, and they promised to return
to Rwanda. Those statements were deliberately
calculated to cause fear among the already traumatized
genocide survivor community.

It has since come to our attention that it is routine
practice for convicted persons serving sentences in
Mali to be allowed out of the detention facility to make
telephone calls. I do not think that I need to remind
anyone here that these are persons convicted of the
most serious crimes imaginable. Not only do we find
this deeply offensive - especially coming, as it did, at
a time when we were remembering the one million
victims of the genocide - but it also calls into
question the notion of convicts serving sentences
outside Rwanda. We call upon the authorities of the
ICTR to ensure that countries compromised by the
events of 1994 are not given the opportunity to
supervise enforcement of sentences. Should this
happen, justice will not be seen as having been done.
This will be the case even if the decision is taken out
of goodwill.

My Government is aware of the fact that previous
requests for sentences to be served in Rwanda have not
been taken seriously, on the grounds that our detention
facilities did not meet international standards. In that
context, my Government, despite many competing
priorities for resources, recently constructed a new
detention facility that meets required standards. A
delegation from the ICTR visited the new facility a few
weeks ago, and my Government was pleased with the
preliminary assessment by that team, which made it
clear that the facility met the required international
standards.

We therefore look forward to convicts being sent
to Rwanda to serve sentences in the country. We
believe that this will contribute to the reconciliation
process, as justice will not only have been done, but
will also have been seen to be done.

We take note of the Prosecutor's remarks
regarding the issue of special investigations, and we
welcome his continued engagement with the authorities
of Rwanda on this matter.

Many of the survivors of the 1994 genocide live
in conditions of enormous hardship. We urge the
Council to recognize the numerous difficulties faced by
those survivors - particularly orphans, widows and
victims of sexual violence. We also urge the Council to
recognize that most survivors are poorer and more
vulnerable today than they were 10 years ago as a
result of the genocide. In particular, we would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the plight of the
thousands of women who contracted HIV as a result of
being raped. While the people who either raped them
or ordered them to be raped can receive the best of care
under the auspices of the United Nations, through the
International Tribunal, their victims are dying in large
numbers. This has not been given the necessary
attention in the context of witness protection, because
these are the people who are expected to testify in the
cases that are under way in Arusha. We therefore
appeal to the Council and to other members of the
international community to provide urgent assistance to
those women and to other survivors of the genocide.

