Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and would also like to commend the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
a useful, comprehensive and constructive briefing on
the Secretary-General's report.

My delegation welcomes and supports the focus
in the Secretary-General's report on the value of
addressing the regional character of protecting
civilians, together with the important aim of building
capacity within regions to ensure the continued
protection of civilians. The Secretary-General's
specific appeal for the establishment of a framework
for the United Nations to engage with regional
organizations on a more systematic basis on
humanitarian issues related to protection is therefore
strongly supported.

My delegation would, however, like to emphasize
the need for regional and subregional bodies to be
closely involved from the earliest stages, not only in
efforts to address the humanitarian needs of civilian
populations caught up in armed conflict situations, but
also in efforts to provide early warning of potential
conflicts, conflict resolution and mediation initiatives
before conflict commences.

We further believe that the Secretary-General's
endeavours to strengthen inter-agency coordination
within the United Nations system in an effort to
promote a system-wide approach in addressing the
issues of the protection of civilians are worthwhile,
since every agency brings distinctive skills and
expertise to each specific situation.

The continued engagement of the international
community is critical when addressing the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict so as to ensure
the necessary political support and other resources.
General Assembly resolution 46/182, amongst others,
highlights the important value that humanitarian
assistance should be provided in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality and
consequently that assistance should not be given based
on geopolitical considerations.

We are therefore convinced that the international
community must continue to address and condemn the
disturbing trend of increased attacks on humanitarian
workers who facilitate humanitarian access to civilians.
In this regard, it is critical to ensure the continued
commitment of Governments to prosecuting
perpetrators of these heinous acts, but also to ensure
that local communities are involved in the planning of
United Nations activities.

One of the most pressing humanitarian crises in
the world today is taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, where
Palestinian civilians continue to suffer the daily
humiliations and restrictions brought about by an
illegal foreign occupation. They also bear the brunt of
ongoing, disproportionate and excessive use of force
by the Israeli military. In the Gaza Strip town of Rafah,
45 Palestinian civilians, including 10 children, were
killed and a further 200 people wounded by the Israeli
army between 13 and 24 May 2004. Hundreds of
homes and shops were demolished and agricultural
land was destroyed ahead of a proposed withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip. We trust that the
United Nations will intervene to ensure that the
Palestinian people receive the humanitarian assistance
they need to reverse this damage.

The suggestion of the Secretary-General that a
study be commissioned on how to improve modalities
for monitoring and reporting cross-border issues in
crisis and post-conflict situations is noted. It is hoped
that such a study will be done by consulting all
relevant role-players. In this regard, stronger
consultations with subregional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern Africa Development Community, as well
as regional institutions, such as the Peace and Security
Council, which is part of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development, become essential. However,
initiatives aimed at the protection of civilians and
humanitarian assistance at the subregional and regional
levels should not lead to an abdication of the
responsibilities of the United Nations system, but
should be carried out in partnership with those regional
mechanisms.

Addressing the specific protection needs of
women and children remains an important matter for
the United Nations system. The important steps of
involving women in all aspects of peace-support
operations and of appealing to personnel-contributing
countries to ensure adequate training of personnel as to
the specific needs of women and children, prior to
deployment, is welcomed and supported.

My delegation looks forward to the report of the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs on
an enhanced monitoring and reporting framework,
scheduled for December 2004, which will provide a
more empirical basis for reviewing emerging
challenges to humanitarian action and their impact on
the protection of civilians. We would urge that
consultations with Member States in that regard be
held on an inclusive basis.

Recognizing that the emergence of these new
challenges demands that the international community
should actively and collectively address these issues,
my delegation hopes that this will be done in a way
that increases respect for the principles of international
humanitarian law, human dignity and the legitimacy of
the United Nations.

