The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Shingiro
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern at the recent confrontations between the
Palipehutu-FNL and the National Defence Forces
of Burundi, following attacks by the Palipehutu-
FNL, and the resulting loss of lives.

"The Security Council condemns the use of
violence, and calls again on the two parties to
scrupulously respect the ceasefire concluded on
7 September 2006. It urges the Palipehutu-FNL to
the

return immediately and without preconditions to
the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
and calls on both parties to resume their dialogue
to overcome the obstacles that hinder the
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement and delay the conclusion of the peace
process in Burundi.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the Regional Initiative, the South African
Facilitation and other partners of Burundi, and
encourages them to sustain their commitment to
bring the parties to overcome the current crisis
and implement the Programme of Action adopted
in Cape Town on 22 and 23 February 2008. It
supports a proactive role of the Political
Directorate in that regard.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to play a robust political role
in support of the peace process and to keep the
Council closely informed of developments in
Burundi, including in the context of his reports to
the Security Council on the United Nations
Integrated Office (BINUB).

"The Security Council stresses that any
attempt to jeopardize peace in Burundi through
violent means is unacceptable, and expresses its
intention to consider possible additional
measures, as appropriate, in support of peace and
stability in Burundi."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6p.m.
08-31753

