Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic voted in favour
of draft resolution S/2019/756, presented by Germany,
Belgium and Kuwait, the humanitarian co-penholders
on the Syrian Arab Republic. We acknowledge the
herculean efforts of the co-penholders to achieve unity
in the Security Council on a draft resolution that is
crucial for the lives of 3 million civilians in Idlib. That
is an aspiration shared by the Dominican Republic, and
for which we have worked actively.

Throughout the negotiation process, the Dominican
Republic remained convinced that the overriding need
to put an end to hostilities and protect the civilian
population in north-west Syria would prevail over
all other interests. Unfortunately, that is not what
happened. Today the Council was not up to the task
of meeting the expectations not only of the United
Nations but also those of a population beaten down by
years of conflict. It is impossible not to feel a sense of
failure and disappointment in the light of what we have
just witnessed.

However, it also compels us to think about how
we are tackling one of the most significant challenges
the Security Council has faced in recent times and its
impact in resolving this conflict - its polarization. The
political process that is finally moving in a direction that
seems acceptable to all parties deserves an unequivocal
response from the Security Council in the form of a
resolution that, first, establishes an unconditional
ceasefire and, secondly, recognizes the need to ensure
its impact on the ground through a monitoring and
accountability mechanism and to maintain as safe a
space as possible for humanitarian assistance to reach
populations in acute need.

We believe that this draft text managed to address
the concerns of all Council members in a balanced way
that respected the humanitarian spirit underpinning it.
We stress in particular the emphasis in the text we all
negotiated on the need for counter-terrorism measures
to be fully aligned with international humanitarian
and international law and for all parties to uphold
their obligations to protect civilian populations
and infrastructure.

The text we have been unable to adopt would have
established a ceasefire starting on 21 September. That
very day sees the beginning of a new school year in
the Syrian Arab Republic. Are the conditions in place
for the children Idlib can got to class without fear?
Are schools protected? Are teachers protected? Are
children protected?

