Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
congratulating the Republic of Korea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. Also allow me to
thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their valuable briefings.

Indonesia would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Iran on
behalf ofthe Non-Aligned Movement and with that to be
delivered by the representative of Norway on behalf of
countries supporting the initiative entitled "Reclaiming
the protection of civilians under international
humanitarian law", resulting from the seminar held in
November 2011 in Buenos Aires, which was sponsored
by the Governments of Argentina and Norway.

Today's debate once more underlines the critical
role of the Security Council in setting out effective
norms on civilian protection through its resolutions,
statements and mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as strengthening the
support and equipment required for those operations.

I am hopeful that today's deliberations will
contribute to clearer guidance for and improvement of
practical measures on the protection of civilians.

Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
1265 (1999), there has been considerable progress on
the subject of the protection of civilians. However,
that progress has not consistently been translated
into more effective, better coordinated and properly
supported protection efforts on the ground. The core
challenges, as identified in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/376), have yet to be fully addressed at
the global, regional and national levels. The figures
given in the report illustrate the urgency of doing better.

On the three issues highlighted in the Council
President's concept note (S/2013/75, annex) - namely,
bolstering accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law; enhancing the
implementation of protection mandates by peacekeeping
and other relevant missions; and ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian and human rights law
to protect civilians in armed conflict - I would like to
offer some of my delegation's observations.

First, on the very important challenge of
ensuring accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, we note that
the Secretary-General's report urges the Council to
encourage and assist States in ensuring accountability
with regard to violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law at the national level.

Achieving that goal will be a daunting task. Apart
from the insufficient capacity to ensure accountability
usually present in conflict-affected countries, tension
usually exists between the justice and political
authorities. Leaders are often pressured politically into
maintaining so-called stability rather than pursuing
accountability, which can easily deepen confrontations.
The traditional method of conflict settlement through a
trade-off between justice and politics has been seen as
an attractive political option.

The best kind of assistance and encouragement that
the Council can provide may be tangible support and
capacity-building to improve the preventive functions
of justice and strengthen the rule of law and education,
which mitigate the culture of violence in the first place.

Nevertheless, accountability must be an
indispensable component of peace and lasting
reconciliation. International and national prosecutions
are not the only methods for ensuring accountability,
however. Our continued dialogue in this and other
United Nations forums can explore all possible options
on viable accountability measures, ranging from the
mechanisms of prosecution to truth and reconciliation
commissions and victim rehabilitation.

Secondly, the mandates on the protection of civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence assigned
within the United Nations peacekeeping operations
framework are vital. Indonesia supports the call of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in its
2012 report (A/66/19) that the protection of civilian
mandates should be implemented without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of host Governments to
protect civilians.

We reiterate the responsibility of the Security
Council and the United Nations peacekeeping secretariat
to furnish the needed equipment, training and resources
to peacekeepers, along with clear guidelines. We also
stress the imperative of close cooperation with national
authorities in the implementation of all mandated
peacekeeping tasks.

There need to be greater efforts in the promotion
of knowledge of, respect for and observance by all
countries and relevant actors of their obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations, international human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian
law. Indonesia fully supports those efforts and continues
to actively participate in the global efforts of protecting
civilians in armed conflict through United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Thirdly, Indonesia concurs that there must be
compliance on the part of the parties to a conflict with
their obligations under international law, particularly in
their conduct of hostilities.
It is a tragic fact that, owing to the lack, if not
the absence, of effective preventive measures and the
exercise of the rule of law, women and children remain
the most vulnerable persons in conflict situations. In the
Council eight months ago, the Secretary-General made
a strong appeal to all of us to do more to protect women
and children. To expect conflict parties to voluntarily
comply with international norms without cross-sector
interventions and monitoring is unrealistic. We hope
that our continued exchanges on that particular issue
will yield concrete proposals and frameworks to better
protect women and children in times of crisis.

Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing
Indonesia's high appreciation and admiration to all
humanitarian actors, operating within and outside the
United Nations system, for their steadfast devotion
and work to ensuring that conflict-affected people
are protected and that their basic needs of living with
dignity are provided.

