Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank Judges Carmel
Agius,VagnJoensenandTheodorMeronandProsecutors
Serge Brammertz and Hassan Bubakar Jallow for
their extensive briefings on the implementation of the
completion strategy for both ad hoc Tribunals. I also
take this opportunity to extend our appreciation to
Ambassador Cristian Barros Melet and his team and
to acknowledge the way in which he has guided the
work of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.

The implementation of the principle of accountability
is a key element in maintaining international
peace and security. The Tribunals have played an
essential role in consolidating the rule of law and in
promoting reconciliation and long-term stability. Their
jurisprudence has had far-reaching effects and has been
a source of inspiration for national and international
jurisdictions, in particular for the establishment of the
International Criminal Court.

The year 2015 has been a symbolic milestone, as
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
is completing its mandate. Since the establishment of
the Tribunal, more than 20 years ago, it has played a
significant role in the development of international
criminal law and international humanitarian law,
including through its jurisprudence, by recognizing
sexual violence as acts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, and by providing model
examination of the role of the media with respect to
incitement to commit genocide. The contribution of the
Tribunal has not been limited only to the development
of international criminal law. It also extends to the
provision of assistance and support to victims and
witnesses, capacity-building and legacy preservation.

While the ICTR is completing its work, several
defendants among those indicted by the Tribunal still
remain fugitives. In order to arrest the fugitives, both
those under the jurisdiction of the Mechanism and those
who have been transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction, the
cooperation of all States, especially those in the region,
is necessary.

With regard to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), that Tribunal continues
to move towards completing its work. We are aware
that a high rate of staff attrition and the advanced
age of some of the accused are factors in the delay in
meeting the established deadlines. We encourage the
ICTY to take all the appropriate measures to complete
its work expeditiously, while ensuring that trials and
appeals are conducted in a manner consistent with fair-
trial standards. It is in our interests that the Tribunal
completes its case work successfully. We are of the view
is that the term of office of the judges of the Tribunal
should be extended until the completion of their cases.

The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide earlier this year (see S/PV.7481) reminded us all of the importance of
holding the perpetrators to account. The fact that those
who were behind that tragedy are standing trial proves
that there is no escaping justice, and that sooner or later
those who committed atrocities will be held to account.

We commend the cooperation of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals with the
Tribunals in taking over their functions, including with
regard to the enforcement of sentences, the protection
of victims and witnesses, the management of archives
and the relocation of acquitted and released persons.
We note the remaining challenges with regard to the
relocation of individuals who have been acquitted or
those who have served their sentences. We need to work
together to find solutions to address the situation of
eight persons acquitted by the ICTR and three persons
released by the Tribunal who need to be relocated from
Arusha.

Finally, since this is the last time that Lithuania
speaks on the subject as a non-permanent member of
the Council, I would like to pay sincere tribute to the
judges, prosecutors and officials of both Tribunals and
their overall contribution to the fight against impunity.

