Mr. Miiftiioglu (Turkey): We, too, thank Togo
for having organized today's open debate.

Transnational organized crime poses a serious
threat to peace, security and stability in all parts of the
world. West Africa and the Sahel region are no
exception. We are concerned that political instability,
food crises, ongoing security challenges and recent
social and political movements that have taken place in
North Africa have further contributed to the
consolidation of criminal networks in the region. The
risk of reversing the peacebuilding progress in this
particular region is yet another source of concern for
us.

Organized crime, coupled with emerging threats,
such as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, necessitates
appropriate political mobilization with integrated
national and regional responses. That said, we are
pleased that some sincere efforts have been undertaken
by countries and organizations of the region, as well as
international bodies, to tackle the adverse impacts of
crime in West Africa and the Sahel region.

We particularly would like to commend the
regional action plan of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to address the growing
problem of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse in West Africa, covering the period of
2008-2011. We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
cooperating with regional countries and the
international community, and encourage UNODC to
further its cooperation with all actors. We believe that
reinforcing international coordination with the United
Nations system will enhance the effectiveness of
international efforts to tackle this global challenge.

While all the parties concerned have been making
relentless efforts to eradicate transnational crime and
criminal networks in the region, there still remain
important tasks to be done and responsibilities to be
taken on everyone's part.

First, we call on the regional countries to
increasingly demonstrate their political will to
consolidate the rule of law and to fight corruption.

Secondly, given the importance of regional
cooperation and coordination, we urge ECOWAS to
renew the regional action plan beyond 2011. This will
not only ensure ownership at the regional level, but
also send a strong message to the international
community that the regional countries remain
committed to fighting transnational organized crime. In
this respect, Turkey welcomes the UNODC Regional
Programme for West Africa for the years 2010-2014,
which was devised to underpin the ECOWAS regional
action plan.

Thirdly, we have to bear in mind that it is
difficult to decouple the regional dimension of
transnational crime from its global dimension, and that
the countries of origin, countries of transit and
countries of destination are all affected by this scourge.
In this regard, all Member States have a responsibility
to fight this menace. Drawing from this fact, the
international community needs a more coordinated and
concerted effort to tackle these problems. In this
regard, Turkey welcomes the lead of the Secretary-
General for the establishment of the UN System Task
12-23696
Force on Transnational Organized Crime and Drug
Trafficking.

Fourthly, recognizing the fact that international
cooperation and support are essential to tackling these
problems, Turkey would like to call on all Member
States to gear up their technical, financial and logistical
support to the countries of the region, as well as to the
regional organizations.

Fifthly, it is necessary to address these challenges
from a holistic perspective. In this regard, initiatives at
the national, regional and international levels should
address also the development challenges of the
countries concerned. We firmly believe that achieving
long-term success in the fight against transnational
crime is only one aspect of the broad strategy to
eradicate poverty and unemployment and to promote
decent living conditions for the entire population.

As one of the strategic partners of the African
Union, Turkey will continue to cooperate with all the
parties concerned to overcome the challenges in West
Africa and the Sahel region.

