Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (Spoke in French):

Mr. President, allow me to thank you for organizing

this open debate. I would also like to thank the

Secretary-General for his report (8/2009/277) and the

Under-Secretary-General, Mr. John Holmes, for his
briefing.

My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement made by the Costa Rican presidency of
the Human Security Network, of which Switzerland is
part.

The concept of the protection of civilians is based
on respect for the rules of international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law. In this context, I
would like to focus on the following aspects of the
report: the challenges with regard to non-State actors,
the fight against impunity, the ways by which the
Security Council can enhance the protection of
civilians, including the commissions of inquiry, and
systematic information on humanitarian access.

First, Switzerland entirely shares the Secretary-
General's analysis regarding respect for international
norms by non-State actors. We believe that it is
indispensable that the international community support
initiatives of humanitarian organizations that engage
non-State groups in order to improve the protection of
civilians. At the operational level, we would like to
welcome the systematic work of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in particular, but also of
the United Nations and certain non-governmental
organizations that are committed to ensuring that
armed groups respect their obligations with regard to
civilians. The organization Geneva Call shows the
potential in this area. In this regard, Switzerland
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
requesting a meeting held in accordance with the Arria
Formula.

Furthermore, it is important to clarify the
international law applicable to other non-State actors in
armed conflict, such as private military and security
companies. In this regard, Switzerland, in collaboration
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, has
taken an initiative that resulted last year in the
Montreux Document. We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his support of this document.

Secondly, the fight against impunity is one of the
pillars of implementation of and respect for international
humanitarian law. States must take the necessary
measures at the national level in order to ensure that
international crimes do not go unpunished. Regarding the
International Criminal Court, Switzerland particularly
welcomes the recommendation that the Security Council
do everything within its power to ensure the full
cooperation of States with the Court.

Thirdly, it is crucial that there be investigations
of any alleged violations of international humanitarian
law, whatever the armed conflict or the perpetrator. We
therefore support the recommendation to
systematically request reports on allegations of
violations of law and consider the creation of
commissions of inquiry. In this regard, Switzerland
recalls the existence of the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission established by the First
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions. We
encourage the Security Council to give a mandate to
that permanent commission rather than appointing ad
hoc commissions of inquiry.

Fourthly, the Security Council should have
instruments to enable it to tackle the aforementioned
challenges. In this context, we hail the establishment of
an informal group of experts on the protection of
civilians within the Security Council and support the
recommendation calling for the group to meet prior to
the establishment or renewal of the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. The group can thus play an
important role by drawing the Council's attention to
any alarming situation with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.

Fifthly, as recent humanitarian crises have shown,
humanitarian access in armed conflicts is central to the
protection of and assistance to persons in distress. The
annex provides systematic information on situations
where such difficulties prevail. We encourage the
Secretary-General to continue to gather and share with
the Council the relevant data.

