Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
convene a meeting on this agenda item, at a time when
the humanitarian situation has deteriorated in an
unprecedented fashion across a good part of Africa,
due to armed conflicts which are often associated with
images and realities of a very tragic sort.
We cannot fail also to thank Mr. Jan Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and

Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the first-hand
information that he has just made available to us. My
delegation is grateful to him for his efforts to find
solutions, which should be a source of inspiration to all
of us in the political and technical efforts that we need
to make in order to put an end to these situations, or at
least to reduce their seriousness.

Obviously, the humanitarian situation, as it has
just been explained to us, is sombre. Our optimistic
assessments do not reflect the realities on the ground.
As our colleague from the United Kingdom said, there
seems to be a disconnect between the diplomatic and
political optimism that has been expressed and the real
situation - the situation as experienced, in particular,
by displaced persons and refugees, who are the daily
victims of acts of violence carried out for reasons that
are unclear, especially in the case of Darfur and the
Sudan.

As for Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army,
we are happy to note that there has been a significant
breakthrough with the implementation, on 29 August,
of a ceasefire agreement, which was further extended
on 1 November. This augurs well for peace and
security in the Great Lakes region. However, we are
waiting for the commitments made by the various
actors to be translated into concrete actions. My
delegation believes that the humanitarian issues
relating to the women, children and non-combatants
who are currently in the custody of the LRA will be
resolved immediately and once and for all in the spirit
of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005).

As I said earlier, my delegation is very concerned
about the events that are unfolding in Darfur, where the
prevailing conflict situation is threatening to
destabilize the entire region. Eastern Chad - already
burdened by more than 200,000 Sudanese refugees
from neighbouring Darfur - is affected by the
situation. An appeal has been made for an international
presence to maintain security in that region, which also
adjoins the Central African Republic. As Mr. Egeland
has said, one of the most difficult aspects is the heavy
price being paid by non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and humanitarian workers, who are apparently
being treated as persona non grata by the armed
groups. That situation will require an extended and
wide-ranging mobilization to enable NGOs and
humanitarian workers to carry out their mission and to
move throughout the entire region without restrictions.

Here, too, with respect to Darfur, the ceasefire, at
least, must be complied with. The region must be able
to implement the Abuja Peace Agreement for Darfur -
if not in a comprehensive manner, at least gradually, by
ensuring that the parties that did not sign the
Agreement at least have the will to join.

Today, we are pinning our hopes on the outcome
of the high-level meeting that took place in Addis
Ababa on 16 November in which the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, took part. That meeting
concluded that a joint United Nations-African Union
force could be established to intervene in Darfur. We
have waited too long for the implementation of such a
formula to begin.

In this regard, we know that this afternoon we
will hear more details about the situation regarding the
Agreement. But we believe that at this stage, we have
an opportunity - in the Council, at least - to try to
implement some of the resolutions that we have
adopted on Darfur. We will also have the opportunity
to hear about ways in which the international
community can support the African Union Mission in
the Sudan, which is clearly overwhelmed by current
events, the scope and multifaceted nature of which are
such that there must be increased, greatly strengthened
efforts on the part of the international community.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the African
Union is still trying to convince the Government of the
Sudan to join in the efforts that all the regional African
communities are endeavouring to organize. In this
regard, the African Union Peace and Security Council
had planned to meet in Brazzaville, the capital of the
Congo, on 24 November; that meeting will now take
place on 29 November in Abuja, Nigeria. We expect
important decisions to be taken at that meeting. We
hope that the Government of the Sudan will give its
consent so that we can give some substance to the
conclusions that might be reached by the United
Nations and by the African Union - the two
organizations that are working with the Government of
the Sudan. It is difficult to imagine that the Sudanese
Government would not be able to respond to the
ongoing appeals of the international community or that
they could not give a positive interpretation of the fact
that the international community is looking for a way
to make the task of the Sudanese Government easier by
giving people an opportunity to hope for a better life.

This is an interpretation that is shared by both the
international community and the Government of the
Sudan and we hope that, with solutions we could
develop through political and diplomatic efforts, which
are becoming more and more necessary at this time,
that the heavy toll paid by innocent civilians, in
particular in Darfur, will begin to mitigate.

