Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Ambassador Llorentty Soliz, in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing.

Last year, the 1540 Committee conducted
a comprehensive review both of how States had
implemented the resolution over the previous five years
and of every aspect of its own work. Resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted unanimously, established
a sound foundation for the Committee's future work.
Recently, the 1540 Committee has done a great
deal to encourage Member States to report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), conducting
outreach and regional training and stepping up technical
assistance, with positive results. China commends the
efforts of the Chair of the Committee and his team.

As the first Council resolution dedicated to the
issue of non-proliferation, resolution 1540 (2004) is an
important part of the international non-proliferation
regime. Over the years, the resolution and the
Committee's work have played an important role in
strengthening the international non-proliferation regime
and enhancing the capacity of all States to prevent
proliferation. The international non-proliferation
situation continues to be challenging and demands
that we all continue to improve their cooperation and
their synergy.

First, we must build a political consensus and
achieve shared security. All countries should subscribe
to the modern concept of security, according to which
we must work to achieve common, comprehensive,
collaborative and sustainable security, build a security
architecture that is fair and just for all and by all,
create a peaceful and stable international environment
and eradicate the conditions that fuel terrorism and
proliferation activities as soon as possible.

Secondly, we should strengthen State responsibility
and promote pragmatic cooperation. The primary
responsibility for non-proliferation lies with
Governments. Countries should be respected and
supported in developing anti-proliferation policies in
the context of their national realities and improving their
non-proliferation legislation. All parties should intensify
their pragmatic cooperation on non-proliferation, based
on equality and mutual respect, and focus on meeting
developing countries' needs by providing international
assistance in this area.

Thirdly, we should maintain fair and balanced
approaches and look to reach solutions through
political and diplomatic means. All parties should
work consistently to find political and diplomatic
solutions to urgent non-proliferation-related issues.
Unilateralism, double standards and discriminatory
practices should be rejected so as to safeguard the
authority and effectiveness of the international
non-proliferation regime.

Fourthly, we must comply with the resolution's
mandate to the letter and conduct the Committee's work
in an orderly manner. The principle of consensus should
continue to prevail, and the Committee's Working
Groups should function in a balanced manner, with the
aim of increasing all countries' capacity to implement
the resolutions and provide a solid foundation for
promoting their full implementation.

China stands firmly against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. We have consistently and diligently met
our international non-proliferation obligations and
taken an active part in international and regional
non-proliferation cooperation. We are committed
to advocating for a political solution to urgent
non-proliferation-related issues and support the rightful
role of the United Nations in this area. As always, we
stand ready to work with all parties to contribute to
advancing the work of the 1540 Committee, strengthen
the global governance of non-proliferation and maintain
world peace and security.

