The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

First of all, I should thank Special Representative
Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing and for his leadership of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan for their dedication and efforts. I also
thank Afghanistan's Permanent Representative,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his update on progress in
Afghanistan's transition and for his always important
engagement in New York.

Three months after the milestone 2013
announcements, significant progress has been made
on the security transition. The Afghan National
Security Forces are now in national security lead
and have demonstrated their increasing capacity to
deliver security and stability for the Afghan people
as Afghanistan progresses through its transition. But
although the insurgency is diminished, it is persistent.
Threats to law and order endure. Therefore, the continued
commitment of the international community to support
the Afghan armed forces and police will continue to be
essential for Afghanistan's long-term security. Equally,
progress in accordance with commitments made in
Tokyo is vital if the legitimate expectations of the
Afghan people are to be met and the unprecedented level
of resources pledged by the international community
sustained. While there has been some progress on the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, more is
needed. In particular, credible inclusive and transparent
elections will be vital for political and economic
transition. The passage of the electoral law and the Law
on the Structure and Duties of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission provide a robust legislative framework, but
strong implementation will be critical. We encourage
work to fully implement those laws.

Strong and inclusive voter participation is
important to the credibility and acceptability of election
results. We applaud the public outreach efforts being
undertaken as fundamental to election preparations.
The United Nations, as supported by countries such as
Australia, is providing vital technical support.

We must build on the improvements in respect
for human rights in Afghanistan over the past decade,
including the rights of women and girls. Constitutional
and legislative commitments to gender equality must
be upheld. The Afghan Government must maintain
momentum in preventing and addressing violence
against women. While gains have been made, gaps exist
in the systematic implementation of the elimination of
the Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women.
Afghanistan's successful transition will increasingly
depend on generating broad-based economic growth
that createsjobs and helps underpin fiscal sustainability.
That requires the Afghan Government to prioritize its
development agenda to reduce poverty and improve
livelihoods. Tackling corruption is an important
commitment under the Tokyo Framework.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2013/535), Afghanistan continues to face significant
humanitarian challenges, including a worrying trend of
growing internal displacement. An increase in civilian
casualties, primarily caused by anti-Government
elements, is of grave concern. And we must condemn
in the strongest possible terms the recent increase in
attacks that have targeted civilians, including senior
female officials, female police, female members of
Parliament and election officials.

Military action alone will not end the conflict in
Afghanistan. A negotiated political solution is needed
to ensure lasting security and to lock in the gains of
the past decade. The process will be long, complex and
inevitably subject to set backs. But efforts at peace and
reconciliation must continue. The Council's Taliban
sanctions regime was established in response to the
Taliban's human rights violations and use of Afghan
territory for terrorist activities. The sanctions regime
will continue to be an important tool, which can operate
flexibly in support of the peace and reconciliation
process.

The Security Council's support for Afghanistan's
transition reflects the broader international community
commitment to Afghanistan's future. Australia looks
forward to working with Council members in chairing
the negotiation of the the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) draft resolution, which is
due for adoption by the Council in the second week
of October. UNAMA will continue to play a vital
role in the active promotion and advocacy of human
rights, including the rights of women and girls, and
in coordinating the efforts of United Nations agencies
and the international community in line with the
priorities of the Afghan Government. We look forward
to shepherding the negotiations on the renewal of
UNAMA's mandate in March 2014, including on the
need for adequate funding.

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General notes in his
report, we now need to protect the gains of the past
decade. As the transition moves forward, the role of
the United Nations and its affiliated agencies remains
important. However, while the international community
remains committed to assisting Afghanistan to ensure
that those gains are sustainable, it is the Afghan
Government itself that has the ultimate responsibility
for seizing the opportunity before it to create a secure
and prosperous future. We are confident it will do so.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.

