The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Costa Rica.
A curious tale from Scandinavian mythology tells
of two kings condemned to fight one another for
eternity. If one succeeded in killing the other, the

Victim would rise again to continue their struggle until
the last day of the world. The story has several
versions, but, in all of them, the kings and their armies
are revived each morning with new weapons, ready to
take to the field of battle once more. This fantasy,
product of a warrior culture, became a painful
premonition of the events that would mark, with blood,
the history of the twentieth century: an escalation of
weapons, enemies, threats and war that ended the lives
of hundreds of millions of people and forced us into
the trenches of international insecurity.

There lies the reason for the creation of this
Security Council: in the search for solutions to the
endless battle within the human species, fed by the
frenzy of the arms race. It is unlikely that any
organization has ever been set a more ambitious task
than that. And it is unlikely that any organization has
faced more difficult choices. Many of those dilemmas
remain to be resolved but their answer can be found,
without a doubt, in the content of the Charter of the
United Nations. In 1945, with the smoke still clearing
after the worst war in human memory, the founders of
this Organization wrote in Article 26 of the Charter of
the United Nations:

"In order to promote the establishment and
maintenance of international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the
world's human and economic resources, the
Security Council shall be responsible for
formulating, with the assistance of the Military
Staff Committee referred to in Article 47, plans to
be submitted to the Members of the United
Nations for the establishment of a system for the
regulation of armaments."

The wording of that Article is no accident. It
makes a statement of which this Council must take
note, to the fullest extent of its meaning: spending on
arms is a diversion of human and economic resources;
that is to say, a use that is not correct. As a minimum,
the Charter asks us to accept that excessive military
spending exacts an infinite cost in opportunity.

These are not the delusions of a citizen of the
first country in history to abolish its army and declare
peace on the world. They are not the dreams of a Nobel
Peace laureate. This is the text that holds up this
building. It is the text that justifies any action of this
Security Council. Article 26 has been, until now, a
dead letter in the vast cemetery of intentions for world
peace. But in that place there also rests the possibility
of reviving that intention; of giving it the meaning
intended by those who precede us in this struggle.

"The least diversion of resources" means, first
and foremost, finding alternatives to excessive military
spending that do not damage security. One of those
alternatives is to strengthen multilateralism. As long as
nations do not feel protected by strong regional
organizations with real powers to act, they will
continue to arm themselves at the expense of their
peoples' development - of the poorest, in particular -
and at the expense of international security. The
Security Council must support, as a guarantor of
collective security, multilateral accords adopted in our
various regional organisms. Costa Rica will work along
these lines during the coming year as a way to generate
an environment that allows for the gradual reduction of
military spending.

Ours is an unarmed nation but it is not a naive
nation. We have not come here to lobby for the
abolition of all armies. We have not even come to urge
the drastic reduction of world military spending, which
has now reached $3.3 billion a day - which is
shameful. But a gradual reduction is not only possible,
but also imperative, in particular for developing
nations.

I am well aware that neither this Organization nor
this Council nor any of its Members can decide how
much other countries spend on arms and soldiers. But
we can decide how much international aid they receive
and on which principles such aid is based. With the
money that some developing nations spend on a single
combat plane, they could buy 200,000 MIT Media Lab
computers for students with limited resources. With the
money they spend on a single helicopter, they could
pay $100 monthly grants for a whole year to 5,000
students at risk of dropping out of school. The perverse
logic that impels a poor nation to spend excessive sums
on its armies and not on meeting the needs ofits people
is exactly the antithesis of human security and is
ultimately a serious threat to international security.

That is why my Government has presented the
Costa Rica Consensus, an initiative to create
mechanisms to forgive debts and support with
international financial resources those developing
countries which increase spending on environmental
protection, education, healthcare and housing for their
people and decrease spending on weapons and soldiers.

In other words, this initiative seeks to reward
developing countries, whether poor or middle-income,
that divert increasingly fewer of their economic and
human resources to the purchase of arms, just as
stipulated in Article 26 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Today, I ask members for their support in
making the Consensus of Costa Rica a reality.

I also ask members for their support for the arms
trade treaty that Costa Rica, along with other nations,
presented to the United Nations in 2006. This treaty
seeks to prohibit the sale of arms to States, groups or
individuals, when there is sufficient reason to believe
that they will be used to violate human rights or
international law. I do not know how much longer we
can survive unless we realize that it is just as terrible to
kill many people, little by little, every day, as it is to
kill many people in a single day. The destructive power
of the 640 million small arms and light weapons that
exist in the world, 74 per cent of which are in the
hands of civilians, has proven to be more lethal than
that of nuclear weapons and constitutes one of the
principal motors of national and international
insecurity.

Costa Rica knows that the members of this
Council include some of the countries that top the list
for the sale and purchase of small arms and light
weapons in the world. But my country also knows that
those nations have recognized terrorism and drug
trafficking as serious threats to international security.
International organized crime depends on arms
trafficking, which until now has flowed with terrifying
freedom across our borders, with the result that these
same powerful nations suffer the consequences.
Although the treaty would not eliminate the existence
of such criminal groups, it would certainly limit their
operations.

If we do not succeed with these measures, if the
Costa Rica Consensus does not win the support of
developed nations and if the arms trade treaty sinks in
the waters of this organization, our pursuit of the
Millennium Development Goals will become nothing
more than the impossible dream of a world that, like
Sisyphus, labours without rest towards an unattainable
goal.

We are working to eradicate extreme poverty and
hunger and, yet, armed conflicts constitute the
principal cause of hunger in our world. We are working
to improve health care, particularly maternal health and
the fight against AIDS and malaria. Yet, military
spending drains millions of dollars from the health-care
budgets of poor countries. The Millennium
Development Goals were brave words, but they will
never be more than words if we do not regulate arms or
devise incentives to reduce global military spending.

Humanity can break the chain that, until now, has
forced us to spend our centuries in an incessant and
fratricidal struggle. That was the belief of those who
founded this Organization. The enormous mission
entrusted to this Council is not a failed expectation, but
it is a rocky path. Maintaining peace will never be a
simple task, nor will it ever be completed. But, I assure
you that strengthening multilateralism, reducing
military spending in favour of human development and
regulating the international arms trade are steps in the
right direction, the same as that marked out 63 years
ago by those who, having survived atrocities, were
nonetheless able to hope.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Renan
Fuentealba, Special Envoy of the President of Chile
and Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the
Chamber of Deputies.

