Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,

Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to address
the Security Council. Allow me first to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I am confident that you will
lead its deliberations to a successful conclusion.

Before addressing the substance of the issue under
consideration, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council to the need for procedures in the Secretariat
that enable representatives of Member States under
discussion in the Security Council to participate more
easily in its deliberations. We know that in some cases,
for one reason or another, a request for participation
may reach the President of the Security Council or the
Secretariat late, because of a shortcoming in one area
or another. However, we have always had a structure in
the Secretariat that allows for an immediate invitation
to participate. Regrettably, this morning, that only
happened long after the meeting had begun.

I would like to thank Mr. Tarek Mitri for his
important and accurate briefing and for all the
information he has provided on the situation in Libya.
I should like to thank my dear friend and colleague
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), for his briefing on the
implementation of sanctions against Libya.

As the Council knows, Libya is in a period of
transition. This is a complicated and sensitive time,
in particular given a bloody conflict that lasted many
months and ended in the fall of a dictatorship. The
country was left with no institutions to speak of.
What is at issue now is the creation of a new authority,
new institutions and, indeed, new leadership for the
country. The Government and the General National
Congress are facing difficulties in this thorny period,
where many different elements are converging. On
the one hand, there is delight at the overthrow of the
dictatorship and the re-establishment of democracy,
with high expectations from the populace. On the other
hand, there is the Government's limited ability to rule,
a lack of institutions and an absence of deterrent force
for the Government to be able to extend its control over
the entire territory.

The Libyan authorities need the support of the
Council. We need the support of every single State
Member of the United Nations at this point. Libya is
moving towards building effective, capable institutions
that will rebuild the State, begin to revitalize the
economy, reintegrate former combatants, ensure respect
for the rule of law and achieve national reconciliation.
There are many objectives to achieved, and they require
strong leadership, strong institutions and a robust
capacity for deterrent force. Of course, the Government
has begun to set up the national army. The Government
is seeking to reform, re-establish and re-arm the police
force. That requires that the Security Council provide
all possible assistance. The Council stood shoulder to
shoulder with the Libyan people during its revolution
and in recent times, and I am sure that it will continue
to stand by us now.

