Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2017/884)
that was submitted today, because of our keen interest
in ensuring that those involved in the use of chemical
weapons in Syria are identified. That requires the
continued mandate of the United Nations-Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), as it has been tasked
by the Security Council to perform its work to the best
of its abilities.
Egypt's interest is based on the need to enhance
the concept of accountability and uncover the facts of
the Syrian crisis, which would also allow us to confront
an urgent threat that the world has yet to deal with
effectively. The use of chemical weapons in Syria and
the growing proliferation and possession that we have
seen is a threat to the security of the countries of the
region and the world.

While the international community has created a
system that deals with the possession of that type of
weapon by Governments, it has not yet established a
system that is able to deter non-State groups from
seeking to possess chemical weapons or acquiring the
technologies for their production. That is exacerbated
by the interconnectedness and coordination that
exists between non-State groups, which are scattered
throughout the Middle East, and their increased ability
to transport and manufacture such weapons.

Egypt voted in favour of the draft resolution
regardless of the final outcome of the voting process.
However, we voted in its favour because we wanted to
express our commitment to naming the perpetrators of
chemical-weapon use in Syria and stress the need to
improve the working methodologies of the JIM.

In the past, the Security Council has discussed the

methodology of the Joint Investigative Mechanism and
the working methods of the OPCW fact-finding mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, of which the findings
directly impact the Joint Investigative Mechanism. It
has become clear to Egypt and many members of the
Security Council that there is an urgent need to work
to improve the methodologies of both mechanisms,
especially with regard to visiting the sites in Syria where
they must investigate the use of chemical weapons.
Needless to say, conducting those visits, inspecting
the sites under investigation, recording and collecting
the evidence and available samples in a timely manner
and examining all possible scenarios would no doubt
contribute to creating a strong foundation for any
findings to be issued by the fact-finding mission or
the JIM.

Despite the draft resolution not being adopted
today, we believe that there is still an opportunity for
the Security Council to renew the JIM. mandate. There
is also a chance for the Security Council to improve the
working methodologies of the JIM, because just as the
Council created the Mechanism, it is also responsible
for guiding and supporting it, without influencing
its work or the outcomes of its reports, which must
remain neutral, independent and out of the clutches of
political manipulation.

I renew our call to Security Council members to
work on preserving the Mechanism and supporting
and developing its working methodology. We stress the
need to maintain the unity of the Council in that regard,
which is in line with our interests and the interests of
all our peoples.

