Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
are grateful for the insightful presentation made by
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children Armed Conflict;
Ms. Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF; and the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank. We are also grateful
to Minister Kalala of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Minister Torstila of Finland.

We wish to begin by placing on the record our
appreciation for the good start made by
Ms. Coomaraswamy since her appointment to the post
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We assure her of our full
support and cooperation as she discharges her duty.

The Security Council has come a long way since
the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), its first
resolution on the subject of children and armed
conflict. Significant progress has been made since then
in identifying major categories of violations against
children and in recognizing the need for concerns about
children in armed conflict to be included in peace
negotiations, peace accords and post-conflict
programmes for rehabilitation and rebuilding, as has
been provided for in the most recent resolution on the
subject, 1612 (2005).

We recognize that some regional organizations, in
particular the Economic Community of West African
States, have gone even further by adopting a peer
review framework on the protection of children and by
establishing a child protection unit in its secretariat.
The European Union has also adopted guidelines on
children and armed conflict. We welcome those
initiatives and encourage their effective
implementation.

We commend efforts by the United Nations
family and by non-governmental organizations that
have dedicated themselves to saving children affected
by armed conflict. We were pleased to note reports that
by 2003 thousands of child soldiers had been
demobilized from armed groups and that the number of
displaced persons had dropped significantly. However,
despite that encouraging news, a significant number of
children are still victims of armed conflict, especially
in Africa. In addition, we cannot ignore reports of the
estimated 20 million children worldwide who have
been forced to flee their homes in the last decade
because of conflicts, or those indicating that more than
2 million have died as a direct result of those conflicts.
At least 6 million children have been permanently
disabled or seriously injured. Reports further estimate
that between 8,000 and 10,000 children are killed or
maimed by landmines every year. Furthermore, the
recruitment of children into armies and militias has
continued, and there are reportedly 300 thousand child
soldiers in more than 30 countries around the world.
That is a tragedy that needs to be stopped.

To curb that trend, Tanzania advocates a strong
monitoring and reporting mechanism to ensure that
appropriate measures are taken against armed groups
and individuals who recruit child soldiers, including
girl soldiers and girl slaves, as well as action to save
those children from their ordeal, including their
rehabilitation into the society and return to school. We
believe that education is the key to their reintegration.

We appreciate the incorporation of the issue of
children and armed conflict into the mainstream of the
Council's work in peace and security, as well as its
inclusion in the Council's fact-finding missions and in
country-specific reports. We fully endorse the aspect of
child protection as part of the mandate of peacekeeping
missions in situations of armed conflict. Yet more has
to be done.

More can be done by comprehensively addressing
the underlying causes of the recruitment of child
soldiers and child abuse in general. In the context of
Africa, those are no different from the root causes of
armed conflict in the first place. We therefore call for
serious, collective and concerted efforts to assist
African countries that are in situations of armed
conflict, those in post-conflict stages, as well as
neighbouring countries that are bearing the brunt of
armed conflict by hosting refugees, including children.
It is in that sense that we welcome the World Bank's
focus on children and youth as part of our collective
strategy to address that problem.
Finally, we wish to thank the French delegation
for having initiated the presidential statement that we
will be adopting and which my delegation is now in a
position to fully support after the agreement reached
among the experts.

