Mr. Zerihoun: As requested, I would like to brief
the Security Council on ongoing developments in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, under the agenda item "The
situation in the Middle East".

As this is the first public meeting of the Security
Council in 2018, I would like, on behalf of the
Department of Political Affairs, to congratulate the
six new elected members of the Council on their
assumption of their important responsibilities. I also
wish the Security Council a successful year.

The protests in the Islamic Republic of Iran started
on 28 December 2017, when hundreds of Iranians
gathered, in a largely peaceful manner, in Mashhad, the
country's second-largest city, chanting slogans against
economic hardships. Over the following days, protests
occurred in other urban centres, including Tehran, as
well as in many rural areas. Some of the slogans also
expressed disappointment at slow or limited change in
social strictures and political freedoms, and criticized
what the demonstrators decried as the privileged
position of the clergy and elements of the country's
security establishment. In other cases, demonstrators
demanded that Iran cease its costly involvements in
the region.

As the protests escalated, some turned violent.
Videos posted on social media platforms, several of
which remain largely blocked by the Government, and
footage broadcast by State television channels showed
the beating of protesters and the burning of government
offices, banks and religious centres. According to
reports carried by official Iranian media, more than
20 Iranians, including a teenage boy and a policeman,
have died during the protests. Iran's Ministry of the
Interior stated that over 1,000 protesters had been
detained, although many may have since been released.

With very limited presence on the ground, the
Secretariat cannot confirm or deny the authenticity of
the images that have been broadcast or the extent of the
violence. However, we have received reports that the
police, rather than military forces, were responding to
the protests.

On 3 January, Iran's Revolutionary Guards
announced the end of the anti-Government protests.
Recent reports indicate smaller and scattered
demonstrations. Meanwhile, from 3 to 5 January, large
pro-Government rallies were reportedly held across the
country, with participants expressing support for the
Supreme Leader and condemning violence.

On 31 December 2017, President Rouhani told
a Cabinet meeting that the Iranian people should be
allowed space to protest and criticize the Government.
At the same time, he stressed that violence would not be
tolerated. Two days later, on 2 January, Supreme Leader
Ayatollah Khamenei accused Iran's enemies, without
naming them, of stirring the unrest. On 3 January, the
Permanent Representative of Iran to the United Nations
wrote to the Secretary-General, accusing the United
States of stepping up

"its acts of intervention in a grotesque way in Iran's
internal affairs under the pretext of providing
support for sporadic protests [in Iran]".

The outbreak of violent protests in Iran has
focused attention on events in the country. A number
of world leaders have expressed support for the Iranian
protesters. Others, including the European Union, have
called on the Iranian authorities to respect the right to
peaceful demonstration and freedom of opinion. Yet
more have supported the Government of Iran in calling
the protests an internal matter.

On 3 January, the Secretary-General issued a
statement deploring the loss of life in the protests and
urging respect for the rights to peaceful assembly and
freedom of expression and that demonstrations take
place in a peaceful manner The same day, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights called
on the Iranian authorities

"to handle the wave of protests that have taken
place around the country with great care so as not
to further inflame violence and unrest"

and to investigate all deaths and serious injuries that
have occurred so far. On 5 January, four United Nations
Special Rapporteurs stated that

"[t]he Iranian authorities should take immediate
action to ensure that all citizens can exercise
peacefully the right to freedom of expression and
assembly, and should ensure that these and other
fundamental rights are not met with violence".

As of today, United Nations development work in
the Islamic Republic of Iran has not been significantly
affected by the recent events. The Secretariat will
continue to monitor developments on the ground and
engage Iranian authorities with a view to contributing
to efforts that address, as the Secretary-General

underscored in his statement of 3 January, the
legitimate concerns of the population through peaceful
means and help to avoid violence or retribution against
peaceful protestors.

