Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express to you, Sir, on behalf of my
Government, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Undoubtedly, your diplomatic
experience and skills are conducive to our
deliberations' achieving the desired results. At the
same time, we express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Mali, for
the excellent and distinguished manner in which he
steered the Council's work during September.

The Security Council is meeting today to
continue a discussion of the utmost importance, on a
serious matter threatening security and stability in the
Middle East - the latest massacre of Palestinian
civilians committed by the occupying Israeli security
forces in Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the other occupied
Palestinian territories.

My country expresses its profound sorrow and
condolences to the bereaved families of the innocent
people of the occupied territories that were victims of
these bloody events. We condemn this military
campaign launched by Israeli forces as a flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which guarantees the
protection of civilians in time of war and which has
applied to the occupied territories since 1967.

What we have witnessed through the media of
Palestinian youth, children and elderly caught up in the
Israeli war machine must move world public opinion
and drive the members of the Security Council to take
a firm and responsible position against those who
commit such acts.

At the core of this serious crisis lies the question
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, specifically east Al-Quds and
the Old City, which Israel has been forcibly occupying
since 1967, along with the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories.

There is no doubt that the international
community, the members of the Security Council and
international public opinion now realize that this
massacre was triggered by the provocative visit by the
leader of Israel's Likud party to Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
defiance of the feelings of Muslims both within and
outside the occupied territories. The Israeli
Government decision not merely to approve that
provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif - which is
the site of the Al-Aqsa mosque and the Dome of the
Rock, which are holy to Muslims worldwide - but
also to provide military protection for it was taken even
though the Government knew its implications and
consequences. That Israeli position inevitably makes us
wonder about the Government's stand on the peace
process and about its seriousness about achieving a
peaceful final solution to the Middle East conflict.

Today more than ever before, the Security
Council must shoulder its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
conformity with the Charter and the principles of
international law, by immediately adopting effective
measures to compel Israel to cease its military
offensive forthwith, to withdraw its forces from the
occupied Palestinian territories, to carry out all its
obligations and to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. It is imperative for the Security
Council to send a clear message condemning this kind
of State terrorism against civilians, and to call for an
end to Israeli military extremism.

In conclusion, we call upon Israel to understand
the sensitivity of the situation with regard to Al-Quds,
which is sacred to Muslims throughout the world, and
to refrain from taking any action that could affect the
holy places - if it wants peace in the Middle East.

