Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Pardon me,
because I have been taken a bit by surprise.
Nonetheless, we are prepared to make our statement.
But before we make any substantive remarks, let me
just say that we believe that Mali deserves praise for its
stewardship of the Council this month. You and your
team, Mr. President, have worked hard and ably against
many odds. You have done your friends, like us, proud.

Because, as Ambassador Mahbubani has said, we
are a departing member, I hope the Council will bear
with us if our comments go beyond the experience of

the past month to the experience of the two preceding
years.

In less than 10 days' time, we will make a
transition from a seat in the Council to the non-
members' gallery. We will be doing so after a two-year
experience of excitement, intensity and reward. The
excitement was induced by the heat of crisis, often; the
intensity by the depth of our involvement in them; and
the reward by the lessons learned.

We came in with expectations. Bangladesh, as a
vibrant, pluralist polity with 130 million people, was
viewed around the world as one of the largest
democracies in the world. A developing country, it was
seen as one undergoing a tremendous societal
transformation, what with the successful partnership
between civil society and the Government in the
crucial area of poverty alleviation. A society that extols
moderation, it became known for its positive and
constructive role in the international arena, emerging
today as the largest contributor of peacekeeping
personnel. As a land of rich intellectual traditions, it
was seen as a spawning ground of ideas such as
microcredit and non-formal education, which helped
achieve such goals as the empowerment of women.

All that rendered us, in many ways, a role model
for others of comparable circumstances. Even within
the parameters of the Council's mandate, we wanted to
share our experience with those who could profit from
it and to propagate our belief that peace is critical to
development, that restraint is the better part of valour,
that violence only breeds violence and that to hope is
better than to despair. These are not grandiose
messages, but simple ones. We saw ourselves not as the
original propounders, but simply as believers and
torch-bearers.

During the two years there were moments of
frustration. We made speeches knowing that sweet
words do not butter parsnips. We voted knowing it
would have little impact on the world beyond. We
joined others to send out strong signals knowing none
would heed them. Sometimes the sound and fury of
informal consultations produced little result, and we
were exposed to the criticism implied in the saying, "If
you're not going to lay an egg, don't make noises like a
chicken".

But then there were also periods of exaltation.
The system we work for received the Nobel Peace
Prize. Our dedication was reflected in the long hours of
work. Our committees produced commendable reports
that advanced our aims in many parts of the world.

The Security Council is primarily responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security, but
that is not its exclusive responsibility. It needs to
develop a more sustained relationship with the broader
membership, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, and other stakeholders, including non-
governmental organizations and the intelligentsia.
Efforts have been made in the past two years in that
regard, and we will need to do more.

Within the Council there is certainly scope for
greater exchange of information and analysis between
the two categories of membership. Some of the elected
members do not have resident missions in and around
many of the conflict areas. Apart from the Secretariat,
they need to depend on indirect sources, including the
media. The permanent members can also fill this need.
Such efforts will contribute to greater understanding
and cohesion within the Council. This is essential for
enhancing its effectiveness. The deliberations in the
informal consultations are not adequate for this
purpose. The informals are virtually formal.

A fuller and more substantive exchange of
information and analysis between the Council and the
Secretariat is both essential and appropriate. The
Council can think of further ways and means. The
working luncheon with the Secretary-General has
emerged as a most useful tool for an exchange of views
with him. Such brainstorming is beginning to produce
some concrete ideas.

There is need, and scope, for further
strengthening the Council's relations with the troop-
contributing countries. We are pleased that this issue
has now been brought to the fore. Resolution 1353
(2001) recognizes the need for effective partnerships
with the troop-contributing countries. Its provisions
need to be implemented. The more we foster this
partnership the better are the chances of success for
peacekeeping operations.

Bangladesh sought to contribute to the
improvement of the Council's working methods,
practices and documentation. We shall refrain from
recounting those contributions. I shall mention just one
case of unfinished business. The Group of Friends, an
extremely useful institution, has become increasingly
controversial. My delegation seeks a more transparent
relationship between such groups and the Council.
Even if such groups are informal, their members often
play a key role in this capacity, and, therefore, it would
be helpful to make their composition public. The
Council should have a more institutionalized exchange
with them.

A gap still persists between the Council's stated
intentions and accomplishments. For instance, rapid
deployment remains largely at a conceptual level. The
Council has an interest in making it a reality. Its
realization would lend greater credence to it. The
capacity of the United Nations to react quickly and put
in place peacekeeping operations remains constrained.
This is deserving of our attention.

We have seen how failed States can cause global
turmoil. The Council could perhaps identify States in
regression, categorize them and develop a methodology
of early warning. Monitoring regional muscle-flexing
could help promote calm. We all remember the famous
dictum of Thucydides: "War became inevitable when
Athens grew powerful and its perception caused unease
in Sparta".

We would do well to encourage the propagation
of certain values for which the United Nations system
is a repository. Among them is the role of women in
peace and security, which is also related to their
empowerment. We believe that gender mainstreaming
with regard to critical global issues has a moderating
and stabilizing effect. In this connection, we recall the
presidential press statement of 8 March 2000, in which
Bangladesh took the initiative. Also, we would urge the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2001) and the
Council's constant focus on this issue. Bangladesh
attaches great importance to greater involvement of
women's groups across the broad spectrum of
peacekeeping and peace-building.

Bangladesh had the privilege of taking the lead
on resolution 1366 (2001), on the prevention of armed
conflict. We built on the Jamaican initiative and drew
inspiration from the Slovene presidency. Follow-up and
continuity are critical to bridging the past with the
present and moving forward.

The work on prevention of conflicts will be one
of our legacies. We leave the burden of unfinished
business with those who remain and with those who
will succeed us, whom we wish the very best. As for
me, personally, I shall always fondly cherish my
association with all of you here, which was, sadly, all
too brief. It will most certainly continue in a different
capacity and in other forums. We depart the Council
firm in our faith that in its membership the world
beyond sees 15 1it candles of hope. They may flicker at
times, but will always burn.

