Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you personally, Madame
President, and the Mexican delegation - the new
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict - for having organized this open debate on
such an important issue as the protection of children in
armed conflict.

We note the presence this morning of the
Secretary-General and thank him for his important
remarks. We convey our gratitude to
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for the presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/ 158) and her personal commitment to
this cause. We also thank Ms. Veneman, Mr. Le Roy
for their statements, and we thank Ms. Akallo in
particular for having conveyed to us how difficult it is
to be a child soldier and for her vivid plea, which I am
sure the Council will have noted.

Although notable progress can be seen in the
protection of children in areas of armed conflict, the
situation remains troubling. As the news shows us, the
violation of children's rights continues in different
forms, all equally serious, regardless of existing
standards on the issue. Recruitment and use of
children, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
murder and mutilation, attacks on schools and
hospitals, abductions and the impeding of humanitarian
access are part of their daily lot.

The recruitment and use of children by both State
and non-State actors continue in violation of resolution
1612 (2005) and of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. In some
regions, their scale, in particular the cross-border
recruitment of child soldiers, including in camps for
internally displaced persons and refugees, is especially
alarming.

With regard to sexual violence, it is traumatic and
has destructive psychological effects both on victims
and on their communities. Unfortunately, socio-cultural
inertia is still an obstacle to their elimination, to
prosecution of their perpetrators and, above all, to
adequate legal, medical and psychological care for the
victims.

Systematical and deliberate attacks against
pupils, teachers and schools are equally unacceptable.
Even in times of conflict, education must continue, and
the parties must shoulder their responsibilities in that
regard, in accordance with international law.

We are also particularly concerned by the
obstacles to humanitarian access. It is essential that the
Council ensure strict compliance with international
humanitarian law, all the more because the current
nature of conflicts makes civilians, including children,
who are the most vulnerable group, the main victims of
combat.

Protecting children in armed conflict is a shared
and multifaceted responsibility requiring concerted,
coordinated and renewed effort. We urge the Security
Council to take the necessary deterrent measures
against those who violate children's rights in situations
of armed conflict by adopting a comprehensive
strategy for preventing conflicts and adequately
protecting all children.

There is also a need to end the impunity
prevailing at the national level. That is why my
delegation also advocates genuine independence on the
part of judicial systems.

The implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism has produced encouraging
results. Given the damaging effects of other grave
violations, the mechanism should be extended. Until a
new relevant resolution is adopted, resolution 1612
(2005) should continue to be a guidepost for our
actions.

The formulation of action plans by a number of
State and non-State actors to put an end to all
recruitment of child soldiers has also proved useful.
Therefore, my delegation urges all parties, in particular
those listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report, to draft clear action plans containing precise
deadlines.

We welcome the initiative to ensure the presence
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations
and political missions. Once again, we urge the
Council to provide a concise and precise child
protection mandate to peacekeeping operations.

Peace agreements; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; and reconstruction
activities should incorporate the protection of children,
including girl combatants or girls associated with
armed groups; the development of basic social services
for them; and professional training for former child
soldiers.

My delegation congratulates the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict on its leadership. We
urge it to improve its working methods and decision-
making procedures. We also believe that the current
increase in its workload should receive appropriate
administrative support. Furthermore, the Council
should develop a system for regular follow-up on the
Working Group's conclusions and recommendations.
The establishment of more fruitful cooperation
between the Working Group and the geographical
sanctions committees should also be incorporated into
that process.

The primary responsibility for protecting
populations in conflict areas lies with the parties. We
urge them to fully shoulder that responsibility, in
particular with regard to vulnerable groups such as
children.

In conclusion, we should like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team,
as well as UNICEF, for their leadership on issues
related to children and armed conflict. We are also
grateful to other United Nations institutions and to the
entire humanitarian community for their commitment
to and multifaceted support for this particularly
vulnerable sector of the civilian population.

Finally, we wish to thank the Mexican delegation
for the draft presidential statement, which my
delegation supports.

