Ms. Mohammed: Allow me first to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to thank you for
convening this timely open debate. The presence of His
Excellency President Duda at this meeting, as well as
the high-level participation from Member States, bears
witness to the critical importance of today's debate
as well as to the Security Council's commitment to
advancing global understanding on the need to uphold
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Today's debate is taking place amid greater
preoccupations and fears about the future of the
multilateral international order. In recent years,
multilateralism has been increasingly challenged by
the growing use of unilateral measures that undermine
the very foundations of the Charter of the United
Nations. We have also witnessed with serious concern
the deepening rifts in international relations that
have already given rise to serious implications for the
fulfilment of existing norms and established practices
in international law.

In the face of those challenges, the international
community must voice its concerns and reiterate its
commitment to a rules-based system, which remains the
best and safest way to enhance cooperation in order to
address the global issues ofpeace and security. We also
need to reaffirm the validity of the founding principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, which have stood
the tests of time and the world's continued upheavals.
More important, the relevant provisions of the Charter
must be strictly observed, especially when it comes to
the use of force in international relations.

Furthermore, the primacy of the United Nations as
the global forum for legitimate, effective and inclusive
multilateralism must be enhanced. But we needto restore
confidence in the capacity of the United Nations to stay
relevant in the face of multiple and severe challenges.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the Secretary-
General's reform agenda, which, in our view, should

be supported and pursued so as to advance meaningful
changes in perspective on adapting the United Nations
to the complex realities of today's world.

The scope of those reforms should not be confined
to the Secretariat aspects alone. Every effort should be
made to conclude the long-stalled process concerning
the reform of the Security Council. The time has come
to make the Security Council effectively democratic,
transparent and truly representative by correcting the
historical injustice done to the African continent.

Africa has been both a major beneficiary of and
crucial contributor to the evolution and functioning of
multilateralism. Iwish to recall in that context the central
role of multilateralism in Africa's decolonization and
post-independence experiences, including the struggle
against apartheid.

Africa has always been supportive of existing
international norms, as well as of genuine processes
of codification and progressive development of
international law in order to promote friendly relations
and cooperation among Member States and the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts. In that
regard, I wish to refer to the recent statements made
by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
on Syria, Palestine and Iran, to say that those positions
were profoundly grounded in our strong belief that,
whatever the circumstances are, international law
must be respected. Through the African Union and
its regional mechanisms, Africa will spare no effort
in countering the emerging erosion of multilateralism
in accordance with the following principles: first,
respect for African ownership and priority-setting
in a spirit of mutual respect; secondly, flexible and
innovative application of the principle of subsidiarity;
thirdly, mutual respect and adherence to the principle
of comparative advantage; and, fourthly and finally, a
division of labour underpinned by complementarity.

Africa will continue to strengthen relationships
with its partners in a structured, strategic and mutually
beneficial manner. The challenging and increasingly
complex situations on the ground require more enhanced
and properly calibrated interventions. Strengthening
our strategic partnership with the United Nations will
therefore continue to be an essential pillar of our joint
efforts to achieve an inclusive, peaceful, prosperous
and better world for all.

