Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
United Kingdom for convening this very important
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General
and The Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, as well as the other
briefers, for their valuable perspectives on advancing
mediation and conflict resolution.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Turkey on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Mediation and by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Secretary-General's report on United Nations
activities in support of mediation (A/72/115) presented
some grimrealities: the number ofmajorcivilwars almost
tripled in the decade up to 2015, with an unprecedented
increase in conflict fatalities and displaced persons.
Another persisting observation in the report is the
substantial increase in the internationalization and
regionalization of conflicts, thus complicating their
resolution. We are pleased that the Secretary-General
has designated conflict prevention as a top priority. We
will assume a leading role on that agenda and call for a
surge in diplomacy.

As mediation is an essential component ofsustaining
peace, we are also encouraged by the recent adoption of
resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, both
in the General Assembly and the Security Council. The
latest endorsement of the Secretary-General's proposed
reform of the United Nations peace and security pillar
by Member States is also very positive. Everyone should
do their utmost to translate the those resolutions and
reforms to ensure concrete outcomes for those affected
on the ground. Let us see to it that mediation, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding are actualized effectively
inside and outside the United Nations.

Indonesia has long called for a greater recourse
to Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
As our Foreign Minister said during elections for
non-permanent Security Council seats in June,
Indonesia - as a true partner for world peace, security
and prosperity - is ready to play its role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In that context, I would like to
emphasize several points.

First, promoting the habit of dialogue and respect
for international law is important. While we fully
support dialogue and mediation, it is crucial that they be
pursued on the foundations of international law, justice
and fair play. That protects the weak and prevents the
mighty from acting on impulse.

Secondly, more engagement and partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations should
be undertaken. The deft matching of United Nations
resources and capacities with unparalleled local
knowledge, expertise and ties can greatly elevate
prospects for the success of mediation. As an example,
in our region, member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and China have finally
agreed on a single draft code of conduct negotiating
text to further settle issues in our region. Such regional
resolutions should be further encouraged within the
United Nations framework.

Thirdly, conflict prevention and mediation should
also be supported by more reliable resourcing and
capacities. The effective and efficient management of
all mediation and conflict-prevention activities by the
Secretariat, particularly the Department of Political
Affairs, is indeed most pertinent.

Fourthly, we underline the resolution of root
causes of conflicts in a just and even-handed manner,
with the Security Council fulfilling its role according
to principles of the Charter, international law and
international humanitarian law. In thatr egard, we agree
with the Secretary-General during his opening remarks
this morning that the Council can play its mediation
role only if it is united.

The United Nations must live up to its promise
to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, but as central as it is, the United Nations
alone - or a handful of countries and civil society
groups by themselves - cannot broker peace. We must
all play our respective roles responsibly and support
United Nations efforts.

Indonesia commends the Secretary-General's
Special Envoys, peace emissaries and the Standby Team
of Senior Mediation Advisers for their vital work, along
with the Secretariat for continuing to strengthen the
Mediation Support Unit. We also appreciate the work
of the Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation. Together with Finland, Indonesia was
pleased to co-host the second meeting of the Advisory
Board, which took place in Helsinki in June.

Allow me to conclude, Mr. President, by
congratulating your delegation on a successful
presidency of the Council throughout this month. Let
me assure you that Indonesia remains fully determined
to help enable credible dialogue, lasting peace and
harmony, be it nationally, regionally or globally.

