Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you
for convening today's open debate, which allows us
to express our points of view on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestine question.

The Government of Ecuador expresses once again
its concern over the Security Council's prolonged
management of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The intransigence of Israel, with its illegal
colonization policy, has closed every door to a bilateral
solution. Therefore, it is time for the parties to seek
an alternative to the conflict in order to achieve peace
between the State of Palestine and Israel.

My country believes that it is time to restart the
peace process, which has been stalled since 2010, and
insists that it be a credible and serious process based on
clear parameters and framed within a specific timeline.
President Abbas has responded that any peace proposal
must first be political and never subsumed by economic
arguments. In reference to the economic plan proposed
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry, he has
been clear in his rejection of temporary agreements and
provisional borders that sidestep political solutions.

President Abbas has called on the Government of
Israel to come to the negotiating table with specific
maps in order to have borders on the basis of which it
will be possible to reach a final agreement. My country
recognizes that these borders should be those of 1967,
in accordance with relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, including Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative
of 2002. Palestine, with the support of the international
community, is committed to peace on that basis.

Israel, the occupying Power, is rejecting a peaceful
solution with its settlement policy, the construction of a
separating wall, land confiscations, house demolitions,
the displacement of civilians and unlawful detentions.
Settler terrorism against the Palestinians on their lands
should be condemned. The Security Council itself
should be called upon to meet its obligations under the
Charter in that regard. The high contracting parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention should also be called
upon to fulfil their responsibilities, as those actions
constitute serious violations.

Finally, Ecuador reaffirms its commitment to
recognizing Palestine as a full Member State, which
is its just status. We need to increase calls upon all
countries around the world to recognize Palestine. That
is the peace that the majority on our planet demands.

