Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): The draft resolution
which the Council is about to adopt, and which the United
Kingdom has been privileged to steer through the Council,
is an important and significant milestone on the long and
challenging road to lasting peace in Sierra Leone. With the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations is making a major
contribution to ensuring that the Lome Agreement can
succeed.

The Peace Agreement signed in Lome on 7 July offers
the opportunity to bring peace to the people of Sierra Leone
after eight years of bloody conflict. The United Kingdom
welcomes the steps that have since been taken to implement
the Agreement, by the Government of Sierra Leone, by the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL), by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and by
the leadership of both the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and the former Sierra Leone Armed Forces/Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council (ex-SLA/AFRC). But there
is still much to do.

It is essential that the international community now
move quickly to support the continuing implementation of
the Peace Agreement. Without international support, the
Agreement will fail, as have previous peace agreements.
You, Mr. President, do not need me to tell you - Special
Representative Otunnu has already done so graphically
enough - of the devastating consequences that that
would have for the people of Sierra Leone.

The current situation in Sierra Leone is a test case.
It will be seen by many as a litmus test of the
commitment of the international community to resolving
conflict. The establishment of UNAMSIL provides a clear
opportunity for the Security Council and the United
Nations membership generally to demonstrate that their
commitment to conflict resolution applies as much to
Africa as to other trouble spots around the world. The
fact that the Security Council is ready today to authorize
a major operation in Africa, with an ambitious and
wide-ranging mandate, shows clearly that the readiness to
act in Africa is there.

But it is also vital that the decisions taken today be
implemented quickly. We cannot afford any delay in the
deployment of UNAMSIL. The force has a crucial role to
play in the implementation of the Lome Agreement. Its
early deployment at key locations throughout Sierra
Leone will create the necessary climate of confidence. It
will also help renew momentum in the peace process. The
present slow pace of that process threatens to endanger
the achievements that have already been made. The
deployment of UNAMSIL will also facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid to areas of Sierra Leone where there
is dire need of assistance. It is vital that all parties ensure
the safety and free movement of humanitarian convoys,
and we call on them to do so.

A crucial element of UNAMSIL's role in Sierra
Leone will be assisting the Government of Sierra Leone
with the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. Special Representative Otunnu has rightly
drawn attention to the key importance of that programme.
The British Government welcomed the symbolic
disarmament and demobilization ceremony attended by
the leaders of the RUF and ex-SLA/AFRC which took
place in Freetown on 20 October. We hope this event will
act as a spur to disarmament efforts throughout the

 

country; there can be no excuse for further delays. Political
will by the parties is still required to get the programme
fully under way. But practical and financial support is also
urgently needed. The United Kingdom is ready to do what
more it can to help, and urges others to do likewise. We
call upon all States to make urgent contributions to the
World Bank trust fund to help sustain the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.

The United Kingdom also calls on the leaders of the
RUF and the ex-SLA/AFRC to do all they can to help
move the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme forward. Both leaders must continue to
encourage their followers to lay down their arms in
accordance with the Peace Agreement, and to ensure the
safety and freedom of movement of UNAMSIL personnel.
All remaining detainees held by rebel groups should be
released immediately.

UNAMSIL must also be able to protect the security
and free movement of its personnel in the discharge of its
mandate. It should be prepared to act to defend civilians
when and where it is able to do so. But ultimately
ECOMOG and the Government of Sierra Leone have
responsibility for security under the Peace Agreement.
The success of UNAMSIL will also depend
significantly on joint deployment and close cooperation
with ECOMOG. Here I should like to echo Special
Representative Otunnu's tribute to the role played by
ECOMOG and by Nigeria. The readiness of ECOWAS to
work in tandem with the United Nations in Sierra Leone is
an important example for cooperation with regional
peacekeeping efforts around the world. As the
Secretary-General's report on Sierra Leone makes clear, we
believe ECOMOG will continue to have a vital role in
maintaining security, particularly around Freetown and
Lungi, and in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process with UNAMSIL. I listened with close
attention to what the representative of Sierra Leone had to
say about the need for a continued ECOMOG presence. We
commend ECOMOG'S efforts and will continue to do what
we can to support ECOMOG in seeing the job through. The
United Kingdom is also currently working with the
Government of Sierra Leone to restructure and train a new
professional and democratically accountable Sierra Leone
army and police force, to protect the people of Sierra Leone
and encourage long-term stability.

