Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Prince Zeid Ra'ad
A1 Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings.

Chad is following with great concern the ongoing
hostilities and the persistent deterioration ofthe security
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. Civilians,
including women and children, represent 80 per cent
of the victims of this war and continue to pay a very
heavy price. The human cost is overwhelming, as we
have just heard: over 6,000 deaths, more than 27,000
wounded, nearly 2.5 million internally displaced.
Further, for more than three months, thousands of other
innocent civilians have been under siege in the city of
Taiz and have been denied the subsistence minimum by
the Houthi and their allies.

Against this sombre backdrop, the destruction of
vital infrastructure and the lack of basic social services
exacerbate the suffering of civilian populations. This
disastrous war threatens the unity of Yemen and, in the
absence of a political perspective, contains the seeds
of a regional conflict with incalculable consequences.
Moreover, it provides a breeding ground for terrorist
groups such as Al-Qaida, thereby threatening
international peace and security.

As a result, the international community and
countries of the region should encourage the fostering
of conditions conducive to dialogue and help the parties
opt for a political solution to the conflict. It is therefore
urgent to make every effort to promote de-escalation,
establish a comprehensive permanent ceasefire and
meet the pressing needs of needy populations in
all affected areas. In this context, we welcome the
recent holding in Switzerland of consultations among
the Yemeni actors under the auspices of the United
Nations and salute the tireless facilitation efforts of
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General. We hope that the parties will
resume consultations shortly, as planned, in order to
adopt measures for building mutual trust that will lead
to starting a peaceful dialogue.

Nevertheless, we deplore the repeated violations of
the ceasefire by the Houthis and their allies and call
on all parties to respect their commitments and refrain
from any action likely to undermine the ongoing peace
efforts. Accordingly, the international community as a
whole must exert all necessary pressure on all parties
to engage in good faith and without preconditions in
the process of exiting the crisis in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism and the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue conference. The Security Council
should continue to monitor the situation in Yemen
closely and give its full support for the Special Envoy's
efforts in order to provide a decisive boost to the peace
process.

