Mr. Argiiello (Argentina): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Steiner for their
statements. I also particularly welcome the presence
here today of His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Nauru, Mr. Marcus Stephen.

I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China in the context of
today's open debate, held in accordance with the letter
dated 1 July from the Permanent Representative of
Germany to the Council (S/2011/408), on the subject of
the impact of climate change on the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Group of 77 and
China wishes to reaffirm its position on this subject.

The Council's primary responsibility is the
maintenance of international peace and security, as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. Other issues,
including those related to economic and social
development, are assigned by the Charter to the
Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly. The ever-increasing encroachment by the
Security Council on the roles and responsibilities of
other principal entities of the United Nations represents
a distortion of the principles and purposes of the
Charter, infringes on their authority and compromises
the rights of the general membership of the United
Nations.

The Group of 77 and China underlines how
important it is that the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council work
within their respective mandates, as set out in the
Charter.

General Assembly resolution 63/281 recognized
the respective responsibilities of the principal organs of
the United Nations, including the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security conferred upon the Security Council
and the responsibility for sustainable development
issues, including climate change, conferred upon the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, and invited the relevant organs of the United
Nations, as appropriate and within their respective
mandates, to intensify their efforts in considering and
addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications. The relevant bodies in the field
of sustainable development are the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the relevant
subsidiary bodies, including the Commission on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme.

The Group of 77 and China is of the view that it
is vital for all Member States to promote sustainable
development in accordance with the Rio Principles, in
particular the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, and fully implement Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of other relevant United Nations
conferences in the economic, environmental and social
fields, including the Millennium Declaration.
We further emphasize the critical role of the
international community in the provision of adequate,
predictable, new and additional financial resources, the
transfer of technology and capacity-building to
developing countries.

We maintain that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the
primary international intergovernmental forum for
negotiating the global response to climate change. In
that context, we would recall that an appropriate
response to this challenge should address not only the
consequences but also the roots of the problem. Let me
emphasize that there is a strong case for emission
reductions and mitigation actions on the part of
developed countries so as to avert the adverse impacts
of climate change.

In this context, we are extremely concerned that
under current climate change negotiations, there has
not yet been any clear indication on the part of the
developed countries that they will adopt a second
commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol.
Moreover, current mitigation pledges from developed
countries participating in the UNFCCC negotiations
are not sufficient to reduce global greenhouse-gas
emissions enough to hold the increase in global
average temperature at a level that would accord with
what is required by science. Developed countries must
be more ambitious in this respect.

We reiterate the need to coordinate international
efforts and mobilize partners to assist the observation
networks through regional initiatives such as the South
Pacific Sea Level and Climate Monitoring Project and
the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre. In
this regard, we call on the relevant agencies and organs
of the United Nations, including the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to reinforce
regional broadcasting systems to help island
communities during a disaster and increase the
effectiveness of observation in those regions. Any
measures taken in this context must ensure that an
integrated approach is adopted in responding to
environmental emergencies.

The response to the impacts of climate change
and disasters must include the strengthening of the
Hyogo Framework for Action for disaster risk
reduction, as well as an increase in assistance to
developing countries and affected States, including by
supporting efforts to enhance their national and
regional capacities for the implementation of plans and
strategies for preparedness, rapid response, recovery
and development.

The Group would like to underline the fact that
developing countries continue to suffer from the
adverse impacts of climate change and the increasing
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.
Developing countries are the most vulnerable to
climate change, and support for their efforts needs to
be stepped up. In this regard, we call for the full and
effective implementation of the commitments under the
Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, the
Mauritius Declaration and the Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States.

We reiterate that sea-level rise continues to pose a
significant risk to small island developing States and to
their efforts to achieve sustainable development and
that, for some, it represents the gravest of threats to
their survival and viability.

The Group of 77 and China will continue to
pursue the achievement of sustainable development
and the eradication of poverty, which are our first and
overriding priorities, as well as the fulfilment of the
commitments made by developed countries in all
relevant bodies.

We strongly reiterate our expectation that the
initiative of the Council to hold this debate will not
create a precedent that undermines the authority or
mandate of the relevant bodies, processes and
instruments that already address these issues in all their
complexity.

