Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Brazil welcomes your initiative of
holding this important debate. We welcome also the
presence of the President of Nigeria, the Deputy
President of South Africa and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France. I should like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and to congratulate
Mr. Michel Sidibe for the outstanding work he has
done at the head of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

(spoke in English)

The fight against the HIV/AIDS epidemic has
been a priority for Brazil at both the domestic and
international levels. We understand all too clearly the
menace posed by the epidemic, and we have dedicated
our political attention and resources to combating it
and supporting those living with it.
Internally, our public health system has
pioneering HIV/AIDS treatment policies that cover
more than 600,000 people living with the virus,
including through the provision of antiretroviral
treatment free of charge. As a result, the incidence of
HIV in Brazil has stabilized and is now starting to
decline.

Internationally, we have helped lead the charge in
favour of universal access to affordable medicine. In
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the World Health Organization, the World
Trade Organization and other relevant bodies, we have
been a firm voice in favour of a strong and coherent
international response to the challenge of HIV/AIDS.

We have sought to share our experience in
dealing with the virus with other developing countries
through technical cooperation. The setting up of a
factory for the production of antiretroviral drugs in
Mozambique and the provision to several nations of
training in dealing with HIV/AIDS are examples of this
cooperation.

In this light, we appreciate Gabon's decision to
bring the issue of the HIV/AIDS epidemic back into
the debates of the Security Council.

The high-level meeting of the General Assembly,
which begins tomorrow, will be a unique opportunity
for the United Nations to make a strong political
statement and step up the fight against the pandemic.

Brazil is of the view that today's debate is an
opportunity for the Council to show support for the
General Assembly meeting and to underline its
readiness to do its part by addressing HIV/AIDS in the
context of international peace and security. In dealing
with this issue, the Council should focus on the impact
of HIV/AIDS on aspects related to its agenda -
conflict and post-conflict situations, peacekeeping
operations, and sexual violence in situations of
conflict.

Over the past decade, our understanding of the
impact of HIV/AIDS on security and conflict has
evolved considerably. Some of the direst predictions of
the past, such as the collapse of entire States as a result
of the epidemic, fortunately have not come to pass.
Nevertheless, we have witnessed the many insidious
ways in which HIV can magnify conflict and aggravate
suffering.
As a cross-cutting issue with an important human
rights dimension, HIV/AIDS is a complex problem that
demands complex solutions. We must address how
HIV/AIDS hampers the emergence of sustainable
peace and how it affects peacebuilding. We must find
creative ways for peacekeeping missions to support

11-3654]
local authorities in combating HIV/AIDS and to help in
the field of prevention and in providing treatment, care
and support to those living with the virus. The human
rights components of peacekeeping missions can play
an important role in that regard.

The issue of HIV/AIDS is also closely linked to
the Council's consideration of the issue of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In particular, the
intersection between HIV/AIDS and conflict-related
sexual violence is real and troubling. We deplore the
grave harm caused to victims of sexual violence who
find themselves infected with the virus as a result of
such attacks, and we underline the need for the Council
to act to help provide assistance to the victims.

We are pleased that the resolution we have
adopted today touches on all of those issues and lays
the basis for a more systematic analysis of the impact
of the epidemic on situations of conflict.

In closing, I would like to underline that today's
debate is part of a larger discussion about how social
and economic factors influence the dynamics of
conflict. This is an issue of particular interest to Brazil,
which we took up during our presidency of the
Council, in February. We remain convinced that
achieving sustainable peace after conflict requires a
broad approach that looks beyond security and takes
into account the need for peoples to fully enjoy
development and human rights. The discussion on
HIV/AIDS and conflict moves us closer to that goal.

