Mrs. Andelie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening an open debate on the important issue of
the working methods of the Security Council. It is the
fourth open debate organized to further discuss the

implementation of presidential note S/2010/507, as well
as to address issues of common concern and benefit in
regard to improving the Council's working methods.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval for her briefing
today and for her able stewardship as the Chair of the
Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.

A former Chair of the Informal Working Group,
Bosnia and Herzegovina built upon the efforts of
the previous incumbents to further promote the
transparency and efficiency of the Council's work,
including the implementation of presidential note
507. When we held the Chair, we especially raised
and promoted the issue of the periodicity of reporting
and mandate cycles so as to redistribute the Council's
annual workload more more evenly and efficiently.
The subsequent Chairs of the Informal Working Group
continued those efforts. Moreover, the redistribution
launched in December 2011 has continued through 2012
and 2013, since the full cycle of redistribution needs 18
months to implement.

Taking into account the calls for enhanced
cooperation by the general membership, Bosnia and
Herzegovina raised the issue of further increasing
the transparency of the Council's work. To that end,
it suggested to the members of the Informal Working
Group that they consider the idea of holding regular
briefings on the Council's working methods for
non-Council Member States. We were and are of the
view that such exercises can be of common benefit.

Therefore we commend the end-of-presidency
wrap-up sessions and invite the Council members
to further intensify informal forms of dialogue with
non-members, particularly in the format of Arria
formula meetings. We call upon the Council members
to fulfil their commitments set out in the presidential
note in document S/2013/515, such as maintaining
regular communication with the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, enhancing cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and encouraging the
subsidiary bodies to enhance transparency in their
activities. We encourage further improvement with
regard to briefings and consultations by the Council
with troop- and police-contributing countries in order
to implement peacekeeping mandates more effectively.

With its experience as a member of the Security
Council in 2010 and 2011, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
mindful ofthe Council's responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security. It recognizes that at
a certain early, sensitive stage of work to resolve an
issue, efficiency necessitates closed consultations
among Council members before views and information
are shared with the general membership of the United
Nations. However, we would like to express our
concern regarding a recent setback in transparency in
the Council's work and even within the Council itself.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has always been an advocate
of the Council's efficiency and accountability, as well
as of its transparency.

In closing, I wish to reiterate the position of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that improving the working methods
ofthe Security Council should not be seen as an inherent
part of the overall reform of the Council, namely, the
increase of the permanent and non-permanent seats.
Working methods must improve notwithstanding the
Council's reform process.

We remain committed to continuing our
engagement, together with Council members and the
Organization's general membership, in initiatives
and dialogue, with a View to improving efficiency,
transparency and interactivity in the Council's work for
the common benefit.

