Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to discuss the working methods
of the Security Council. We believe it is both timely
and appropriate for the Council to have this
opportunity to contemplate this important issue. I
would also like to express my profound appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his interest in and
commitment to enhancing all components of the
Organization.

As shown in the 2006 note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507), it is widely agreed that
the Council's working methods are in need of reform.
In pursuing that objective, consensus should be sought
wherever possible. In particular, if the Council is to
maintain the moral authority necessary to carry out its
primary responsibility under the United Nations
Charter, then it should operate in a manner that is more
open, transparent, consultative and democratic.

In that regard, the Republic of Korea appreciates
the efforts of the Security Council's Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions and welcomes the progress made in fostering
greater transparency and inclusiveness in the work of
the Council.

While private consultations and closed meetings
are necessary in certain situations, we encourage the
Security Council to make more of its meetings and
debates open, while reducing the amount of activity
that takes place behind closed doors. We believe that
participation in the Council's discussions by
non-members that are parties to any dispute under
consideration should be ensured whenever possible.
Similarly, we would like to see more consultations
between Security Council sanctions committees and
those Member States that would be affected by the
sanctions.

Furthermore, transparency would be well served
by more substantive and analytical reports from the
Security Council. Publications and submissions of the
Council could be qualitatively improved to allow the
wider membership to gain more insight into its work.
The Council might start with refining its annual reports
to the General Assembly to add analytical value, rather
than merely giving descriptions of the work of the
Council during a given year.

As a troop-contributing country, the Republic of
Korea finds the Security Council's meetings with such
countries to be very useful and informative. We would
also appreciate having more meaningful and
substantive participation in the early decision-making
process regarding missions in which our troops will be
involved. Likewise, as one of the significant financial
contributors to peacekeeping operations, we would like
the Security Council to keep the General Assembly
informed regarding the budgetary and on-the-ground
implications of the missions that it mandates.

We note with appreciation that the Council has
come up with an inventive way to diversify its working
methods: by establishing working groups on
substantive issues of international concern, such as
children and armed conflict. Such forums allow the
Council to have greater flexibility in undertaking new
tasks as they arise. The Council is encouraged to
continue to use such inventiveness to enhance the
transparency and inclusiveness of its work.

In concluding, I would like to emphasize that the
improvements in the Council's working methods are an
integral part of overall Council reform and that efforts
to improve its working methods should continue.

