Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
will focus on three important activities in the month
of August, namely, the Security Council mission to
Europe and Africa, the briefing on the protection
of humanitarian workers in armed conflicts (see S/PV.7244) and the open debate on conflict prevention
(see S/PV.7247).

The visit to Belgium and the open debate on conflict

prevention, in bringing us back to the origins ofthe First
World War, which began 100 years ago this year, gave
us an opportunity to honour the culture of memory and
to remember that conflicts are avoidable. Accordingly,
the Security Council should do more to prevent
conflicts within the framework of its responsibilities,
but without exceeding the responsibilities entrusted
to it under the Charter of the United Nations, not only
because preventing conflicts is less costly in terms
of the Organization's and its Members' resources for
resolving conflicts, but essentially because prevention
has the potential to save human beings from the
physical, psychological and material devastation caused
by armed conflicts. The Council has enormous power
to respect human beings in their full dignity. However,
we have seenjust the opposite in the situations in Syria,
the Middle East, Iraq, Ukraine, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, among other places.

The visit to Belgium also allowed us to observe that
the consequences of the use of chemical weapons are
lasting, as evidenced by the fact that, nearly 100 years
after the use of chemical weapons in that country, the
international community has still not managed to locate
and destroy all of the weapons, and people continue to
die as the result of accidental explosions. The chemical
weapons attack against the people of Ghouta in Syria
just a year ago reminds us of the lasting nature of the
threat of chemical weapons and the need to eradicate
them completely and definitively, given the magnitude
of the damage they cause and their potential for lasting
negative effects.

The visit to The Hague also enabled us to reflect
on the contribution of the International Court of
Justice to the peaceful settlement of disputes between
States and that of the international criminal tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, which is at
the centre of today's international penal justice system.
Accountability helps prevent a relapse into conflict and
consequently prevents it.

It is important that the Security Council deepen its
dialogue and cooperation with the courts in The Hague
by establishing a specific mechanism to keep better
track of the situations that it refers to the International
Criminal Court. The reminder by the President of the
International Court of Justice that Latin America, my
region, is the Court's main "client", and the fact that
that region is a zone of peace allows us to infer a link
between the use of international judicial mechanisms
and the prevention of armed conflict. It is important that
the Security Council use its powers under Article 36,
paragraph 3, of the Charter to recommend the referral
of disputes of a judicial nature to the International
Court of Justice as appropriate.

Regarding the trip to South Sudan and our efforts
to coordinate positions with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, including our meeting with
the ministers of that regional organization in Nairobi,
one could, as Ambassador Oyarzabal, who represented
our country, stated, write a book about it, and I believe
him. I will say here only that we believe that, while
the Security Council should respect the leadership of
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
resolution by supporting their efforts without hindering
them, it cannot cease seeking to fulfil its own primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

Finally, the trip to Somalia and the meeting with
the President of Kenya shed light on the cost in terms
of human lives and on the deepening of humanitarian
crises, both of which are often the unintended
consequence of counter-terrorism efforts. That extends
beyond the situation in Somalia, as has been observed
in Iraq, Afghanistan and Yemen. The protection of
civilians and respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights must always be part of the fight
against terrorism and must certainly be determining
factors in the Security Council's authorization of the
use of force.

Allow me to say that we must not understand
the fight against terrorism as developing solely on
the military front. Our approach is and needs to be
broader, as can be seen from our work within at least
four subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. One
of the most notable advances in those bodies has been
the establishment of the office of an independent and
impartial ombudsperson to review applications from
individuals, groups and entities wishing to be removed
from the Al-Qaida sanctions list. Due process is a
cornerstone of the defence of human rights, because it
is itself one of the fundamental rights of human beings.
That involves the guarantee of people's right to know
the substantive reasons why the Committee has decided
to delist them or keep them on the list.

Argentina unhesitatingly reaffirms the obligation
for the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, to include the substantive reasons for the
Committee's decision to keep a person or entity on the
list or delist them and any other relevant information
for the Ombudsperson to transmit to the author of the
request, in accordance with annex II, paragraph 16, of
resolution 2161 (2014) and, ultimately, in accordance
with the human right to due process, which is broad
in scope and does not end with the decision to delist a
person or entity.

Finally, the briefing on the protection of
humanitarian personnel (see S/PV.7244) cast light
on the whole world of difference that exists between
rhetoric and the facts when it comes to the protection of
civilians, including humanitarian personnel, and more
generally, respect for international humanitarian law.
Nevertheless, the reaction of the Security Council has
not measured up to the challenge. It is equally serious
to attack humanitarian workers in Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Darfur, Gaza, Syria, Somalia
or South Sudan, and it is significantly more serious
when the attacks come from Government forces, whose
duty it is to protect the people who risk their lives to
bring needed relief to the suffering population. At a
minimum, the Security Council must be able to show
that it has joined in condemning those attacks and
has risen above the legitimate national interests and
geopolitical considerations at stake.

As this is close to the last meeting during your
presidency of the Council, Sir, I thank you and
congratulate you most sincerely for the manner in
which you led our work during the month of August.
I thank you and, through you, your team. I also avail
myself of this opportunity to wish the United States a
good presidency and to offer all the support they may
need.

