The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

I wish to thank the briefers for their presentations,
including Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States and Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General. I also welcome to today's meeting
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, member of The Elders, the
Secretary-General's Chef de Cabinet, as well as
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca.

Bolivia reaffirms its support of the self-
determination of the Palestinian people and its right
to a free, sovereign and independent State within the
pre-1967 internationally recognized borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

Bolivia is constitutionally a pacifist State that
promotes the right of peoples to cultivate and achieve
peace as well as cooperation among the peoples of
the world, and, in the most strident terms, condemns
all forms wars of aggression as means of reolving
disputes and conflicts between States. In that vein,
we believe that the sole alternative for ensuring a just
and lasting peace with regard to the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is through direct negotiations,
using the existing mechanisms enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and in compliance with the
Organization's own resolutions.

Bolivia would like to take this opportunity to recall
that, on 22 of November 1967, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 242 (1967). The
resolution states that one of the fundamental principles
for achieving peace in the Middle East is the withdrawal
of the Israeli armed forces from the territories they
have occupied since that time. Similarly, we would like
to highlight that there have been various initiatives
in recent years to try to resolve the situation through
dialogue: the Camp David talks, led by then-President
of the United States Jimmy Carter in 1978, the Madrid
Peace Conference in 1991, the Oslo Accords in 1993,
the Arab Peace Initiative in 2002, advanced by the
League of Arab States, and, in 2003, the Quartet, made
up of the United States, Russia, the European Union
and the United Nations, drafted the road map, which
laid the foundation for negotiations between Israel and
Palestine and the recognition of the Palestinian State.

The issue, however, is not of a purely bilateral
nature. The entire international community has voiced
an opinion on this subject. In that regard, I would like to
join the Heads of State and Government of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in what they expressed in the
declaration of the seventeenth Summit of Heads and
State and Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries on the Island of Margarita, just a few months
ago. I would like to recall that the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries brings together approximately
two thirds of the international community. This is a
topic that does not only concern the Security Council
but, as I said, the entire international community.

Allow me to read out the relevant paragraphs from
the declaration.

(spoke in English)

"The Heads of State or Government express
their hope for genuine, rapid progress to be made
to resolve the final status issues regarding the
question of Palestine, namely, refugees, Jerusalem,
settlements, borders, security, water and prisoners,
underscoring that the just resolution of all of
these issues is imperative for conclusion of a
comprehensive and final peace agreement. They
call for international efforts to support peace
initiatives to overcome the obstacles that have
repeatedly caused the failure of negotiations,
stressing in this regard their grave concern about the
critical political, economic, social, humanitarian
and security situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as a result of
ongoing unlawful policies and practices by Israel,
the occupying Power, as well as the negative
impact on peace efforts. They express grave
concern in particular at the dramatic deterioration
of the situation in the Gaza Strip due to the Israeli
military aggression in July and August 2014, which
caused widespread human trauma and destruction
amounting to a humanitarian disaster.

"The Heads of State or Government condemn
Israel's continuing military occupation of the
Palestinian territory in breach of international law
and United Nations resolutions. They condemn the
continuing brutal Israeli military campaign against
the defenceless Palestinian people, by which the
occupying Power has continued to commit grave
human rights violations and reported war crimes,
including by use of excessive, indiscriminate force
that over the years has killed and injured thousands
of Palestinian civilians, including children, and has
caused vast destruction of properties, infrastructure
and agricultural lands. They also condemn
illegal Israeli settlement activities, by which the
occupying Power has continued to colonize the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to forcibly displace Palestinian
civilians, in grave breach of international law. They
further condemn the provocations and incitement
by groups of extremist settlers, including against
the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem and the
vandalization of mosques and churches, which are
fuelling tensions and religious sensitivities that
risk further destabilization. They also condemn
Israel's imposition of collective punishment
on the Palestinian people by various illegal
measures, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which
has been subjected to an illegal Israeli blockade
since 2007. The Heads of State or Government
reiterate their demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease all such violations
of international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and fully
abide by its legal obligations, including under the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
"The Heads of State or Government stress the
incompatibility of peace negotiations with Israeli
colonization activities and demand an immediate
cessation and reversal of all such illegal activities.
They express deep concern about the extensive
physical, economic and social devastation being
caused by the Israeli settlements, wall and network
of checkpoints,which are severing the Palestinian
territory into separate areas, including several
walled cantons, isolating East Jerusalem from the
rest of the territory, forcibly displacing thousands
of Palestinians from their homes, including many
Bedouin families, particularly in the Jordan Valley,
and completely destroying some communities.
They stress that such actions gravely undermine
the contiguity, integrity, viability and unity of the
occupied Palestinian territory and jeopardize the
prospects for physically achieving the two-State
solution for peace on the basis of the 1967 borders.
They recall, in this regard, the United Nations
Register of Damage caused by the Construction
of the Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
and call for the speedy fulfilment of its mandate
in order to redress the losses and suffering being
endured by the Palestinian people as a result of
the wall."

(spoke in Spanish)

This is a matter of global importance and is at
the heart of the serious situation that the Middle East
is experiencing. Bolivia believes it an inescapable
duty to recall that for 50 years - half a century - a
systematic occupation has been deployed in violation of
international law. This meeting must be scene through
two prisms. First, it must first be seen as a call for
peace and as support for all peace initiatives. Secondly,
it must be seen as recognizing that, for 50 years - if
we are talking just about the occupation - there has
been a collective failure on the part of the Security
Council and the international community, during which
time we have failed more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees. Today is the International Day of Refugees.
Those children who arrived in the first refugee camps
50 years ago have seen their children and grandchildren
born as refugees. The past 50 years have been marked
by the failure of the international community because
the Palestinian situation, the occupation and the sped-
up construction of settlements show how we have acted
according to double standards. In practice, there are
resolutions that are not being complied with and about
which we do not want to talk. It is a 50-year collective
failure because, today, in this very Chamber, we have
been alerted to the fact that we are on the brink of a
humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza. And there is a silence
of complicity in the shadow of the impending tragedy.

It is a 50-year failure on the part of the Security
Council because the construction of settlements
has not only not ceased, but has increased, and our
resolutions, including the latest recently adopted by the
Security Council (resolution 2334 (2016)), have had no
effect. For 50 years we have failed the Palestinian as
well as the Israeli people because, without any doubt,
both peoples want to live in peace and security. For
50 years the international community has similarly
failed itself because we have not been able to comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
