Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank the president for
convening this meeting on Aleppo. I would also like to
extend my appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General
Feltman and O'Brien for their detailed briefings.

It was almost two months ago that we unanimously
adopted resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing in full the
United States-Russian Federation joint statement on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria. After the adoption of
this resolution, we saw some remarkable developments
in the Syrian political process and considerable
improvement in humanitarian access. Since the crisis
is far from coming to an end, however, we cannot be
satisfied with these temporary achievements.

At the same time, we should admit that the cessation
of hostilities gave hope to the Syrian people. Now such
hope is being lost in Syria, especially in Aleppo, an
important Middle East cultural heritage site. We see
an escalation of violence and fighting in Aleppo. In
this context, we welcome the latest news of agreement
between the United States and Russia towards extending
the cessation of hostilities to Aleppo. We hope this
welcome effort will be implemented.

Japan strongly urges all parties to fully implement
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016). Yesterday,
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2286 (2016), which addresses the protection of medical
personnel and facilities. That resolution does not
focus on any specific conflict area. However, Syria,
in particular Aleppo, is a typical situation that the
resolution envisages.

For the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016)
in Aleppo, the role of States with influence on the
ground is critical. Japan urges all State, in particular
the Syrian Arab Republic and the States members
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to
thoroughly implement this resolution.

On the draft press statement circulated a few
moments ago by the United Kingdom, I support the
idea of sending a clear message of the Council. The
draft seems to capture all important points.

In conclusion, I would like to state the Japan will
continue to work with members of the Council and
the ISSG for a lasting political settlement through
assistance that gives the people of Syria hope for a
better future.

