Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for having convened
today's debate. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on measuring the
effectiveness of rule of law programmes (S/2013/341).

We are glad to see progress in establishing a culture
of measurement across the Organization in response to
calls both by this body and by the General Assembly,
while also recognizing that there are limits as to how
precise that exercise of measuring the United Nations
impact on the rule of law can be. Ensuring maximum
value for the money invested is of course an important
factor in improving the impact of rule-of-law mandates.
Perhaps an even more important factor, however, is
the political will to prioritize rule-of-law programmes
as a means of addressing conflict and post-conflict
situations. That is needed in particular at the country
level but also among donors, international organizations
and, certainly, the Security Council itself.
The Council's commitment to and increasing
practice of promoting the rule of law, in particular by
including rule-of-law activities in mission mandates,
are encouraging and need to continue. But it also needs
to be more consistent, as is evident from the Council's
own challenges in living up to rule-of-law principles, in
particular in the following areas.

The first area is ensuring the proper conduct of
United Nations personnel in the field. Peacekeeping
missions and other operations mandated by the Security
Council undertake crucial activities, many of them in
direct support of the rule-of-law architecture in the
respective host country. The importance of ensuring
that United Nations peacekeepers and other personnel
abide by the applicable laws and do not commit crimes
cannot be overstated. Much remains to be done to
effectively prevent such crimes and to ensure that the
perpetrators are brought to justice. Repatriation alone
is insufficient to bring about accountability. Greater
efforts must be made to prevent impunity for the sake
of the victims of such crimes and for the credibility and
effectiveness of support for the United Nations in the
countries concerned.

The second area is improving relations and
cooperation with the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Criminal accountability for the worst crimes
under international law is a core element of the rule
of law. More than 20 years ago, the Council itself
became the pioneer of international criminal justice
by establishing the ad hoc tribunals. Since then, it
has supported accountability mechanisms, such as the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. With the establishment of the ICC and the
possibility of Security Council referrals, the Council
received a powerful addition to its repertoire.

In theory, the power to refer makes it easier than
ever for the Council to promote the rule of law and
accountability by simply requesting the services of the
Court, which so far are free, in appropriate situations.
But practice has shown that the Council is still not fully
comfortable with the Court in several respects. The
Council has therefore refrained from referring to the
ICC several situations that cry out for criminal justice,
such as the crisis in Syria. The findings of the United
Nations commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea challenge the
Council to seriously discuss a referral of that tragic
situation to the Court.

Where referrals have been made, the Council
tiptoes around urgently needed follow-up measures, in
particular regarding the Darfur situation. Where States
refuse to cooperate with the ICC in relation to Security
Council referrals, they effectively refuse to comply
with the Council's own decisions. Nevertheless, the
Council has regularly failed to respond to notifications
of non-cooperation by the Court. It must do more to
address thatproblem. Making institutional arrangements
to improve communication and cooperation with
the Court would be a step in the right direction.
Furthermore, the Council should make greater use of
its own operations, such as peacekeeping missions and
Sanctions Committees, to support the Court's work, in
particular regarding arrest and surrender.

The third area is improving due process standards
for sanctions listings. The European Court of Justice
recently reminded us in the Kadi Il case about the
continuing difficulty of reconciling the Council's
sanctions listing and delisting procedures with
international human rights law. We recognize that the
Council has made great progress in that regard as far
as the Al-Qaida sanctions are concerned thanks to the
improved legal mandate and the tireless efforts of the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost. It is becoming
increasingly clear that the Council cannot continue
to apply vastly different due process standards in
the various sanctions regimes. We therefore once
again call on the Council to consider expanding the
Ombudsperson's mandate to other sanctions regimes
step by step and where appropriate.

Before concluding, I would like to briefly turn to
an issue that relates to the core of today's topic, namely,
the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Since the last open debate on this
issue, the Rome Statute's amendments on the crime
of aggression have been ratified by 13 countries,
including my own. If the trend continues, we will
reach the required 30 ratifications within the next two
years. Once the Court's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression is activated in 2017, the Council will have
a new policy option for addressing the most serious
forms of the illegal use of force, in contravention of the
Charter of the United Nations. We continue to actively
promote ratifications of the Kampala amendments and
stand ready to provide technical assistance to any State
interested in ratifying them.

