Mr. Toure (Guinea) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in organizing this
meeting, an indication of the Council's willingness
to continue to mobilize the international community
in a comprehensive and urgent response to the Ebola
haemorrhagic fever virus. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Anthony Banbury, Under-Secretary-General Herve'
Ladsous, and Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook
Zerihoun for the pertinent information they have just
shared with us, confirming the extent and complexity of
the health and socioeconomic crisis that is threatening
peace and security in the countries affected.

A number of meetings have been held since the
historic one on 18 September that acknowledged that
the Ebola epidemic is a threat to international peace and
security (S/PV.7268), including, among many others,
the high-level General Assembly meeting on Ebola
organized by the Secretary-General (A/69/PV.3), at
which the Secretary-General's resolution on deploying
the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response was unanimously adopted (resolution 69/1).
My country also welcomes the many announcements
of assistance and interventions in the field by bilateral
and multilateral partners, aimed at identifying the best
strategies for stopping the furious spread of the disease
as quickly as possible.

However, it is clear that the number of victims
continues to grow alarmingly and the economic, social
and humanitarian consequences are worsening, with
one of its effects being a general panic among the
populations of the affected countries and beyond. Apart
from the loss of life and the dislocation to society, we
risk seeing the collapse of our economies over the next
few years, since the epidemic affects every aspect
of people's lives, including health services and the
production, sale and export of food.

The exponential spread of the epidemic, coupled
with the weakness of our health systems and our lack
of resources, has prevented States from responding
effectively to its challenges. That gap between people's
expectations and the States' actual capacity to protect
them and fight the disease has created a crisis of
confidence and mistrust between Guinea's authorities
and its citizens, which in turn has contributed to the
panic and ungoverned movement that has aggravated
transmission of the disease. Being badly informed, some
people have behaved inappropriately or dangerously,
sometimes denying the disease's very existence
or accusing the Government of offending cultural
norms and attempting to carry out ethnic cleansing.
Such attitudes and perceptions threaten our country's
stability, and major political tensions are to be avoided,
especially in view of the upcoming elections.

In order to respond effectively to the most pressing
needs of the affected countries, the Government of
Guinea urges the international community to prioritize
its efforts in the following way. First, we need a
comprehensive and urgent response. The sooner the
international community acts, the more successful
we can be in overcoming this epidemic, which has
the potential to spread rapidly to other African
countries and beyond the continent. That is why my
Government is asking for a forceful, speedy assistance
effort. For our part, we are committed to minimizing
administrative procedures in order to expedite the
delivery and distribution of aid and above all to ensure
the process's complete transparency. Faced with the
ongoing spread of the virus as it has been described by
health agencies such as the World Health Organization
and the United States Centers for Disease Control,
as well as by several of this afternoon's speakers, my
delegation believes that for the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response to be able to rise to the
challenge it is vital that it take a new approach through
an accelerated deployment that differs from that of
classic peacekeeping missions.

Secondly, we must strengthen the weak local health
systems of the countries affected, including by training
local medical staff and by providing mobile treatment
centres, helicopters, vehicles, personal protective
equipment and qualified medical staff.

Thirdly, we should take a new approach to
communication, globally as well as locally, in order to
improve the way we convey our messages of awareness.
We therefore emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response includes a strong communications component
that will work to improve the locals' awareness of the
best practices to adopt and also to overcome their
reluctance to cooperate with humanitarian staff.

Fourthly, we need financial aid for the countries
affected, whose economies have been hard hit by the
epidemic, as the international financial institutions
have acknowledged. In acting to stop the spread of the
virus and care for the sick, the affected countries have
been forced to make expenditures that their budgets
did not provide for. Investments in some sectors have
simply come to a halt. The World Bank has estimated
that economic growth in the countries affected by
Ebola will be significantly reduced if the epidemic is
not quickly quelled.
In order to benefit from first-hand, helpful
information, my delegation suggests that the Security
Council invite to its next meeting doctors who are
on the front line and are the first responders in the
countries affected. The time for talk is over. We must
act quickly, not only to stop the advance of this health
crisis and save lives while there is still time, but above
all to preserve the stability and the gains made in
recent years by the three countries most affected by
the epidemic, particularly in terms of peacebuilding
and social tranquillity. In order to achieve that, we
must isolate Ebola itself, not the countries affected by
it. We need hardly remind the Council that those three
countries are still on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission of the United Nations.

The Security Council will therefore understand the
urgency of a robust response to eradicate this terrible
epidemic, which is spreading death and despair, while
undermining the gains ofour States in terms of creating
an environment for peace, stability and sustainable
development. It is an issue of collective security that
requires a comprehensive and coordinated approach.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the deep gratitude
of Guinea, and in particular of the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Conde', to all
partners for their valuable support and to the courageous
health-care workers, who strive daily to combat the
epidemic, often risking their lives.

