Mr. Arnault: I thank the members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to introduce to the first
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Columbia (S/2017/lll7), which began its operations on
26 September last year, following the completion of the
agreement on the ceasefire, the cessation of hostilities
and the laying down of arms.

Before going any further, let me say that it is a
great pleasure to share the floor with Vice President
Naranjo, who was a key actor during the protracted
negotiations that brought the conflict between Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the State to an end a little
over a year ago. Since then he has been key to the
implementation of the peace agreement. The Mission
has been privileged to have him as an interlocutor since
the beginning and he, together with the President, as
well as the PARC, are to be credited for many of the
achievements recorded in the Secretary-General's
report against the difficult background in which the
implementation process unfolds.

The Secretary-General's report was issued a couple
of weeks ago in the middle of the holiday season, but
I am glad to inform the Council early in the new year
of follow-up on some of the measures adopted late last
year. On 8 January, the Interior Minister convened the
first meeting of the interagency body responsible for
ensuring that the early warning by the Ombudsman's
Office of impending violence against individuals or
communities is quickly acted upon in accordance with
an important decree issued on the 18 December.

On 5 January, the National Protection
Unit - which, among other tasks, looks after the
security of FARC members outside the training and
reintegration areas - decided to establish additional
protection teams in those areas so that a greater number
of ex-combatants can travel safely outside those areas.
The Council will recall that while no serious incidents
took place in those training and reintegration areas as a
result of protection measures by the security forces, the
number ofkillings outside those areas has been a matter
of growing concern in recent months. While there is no
clear pattern behind those incidents, the increase in the
number of protection measures is very appropriate.

Finally, the Council should also note that on
President Santos' instructions, the disposal of FARC-
EP arms caches has resumed, under the responsibility
of the military and with the cooperation of former
combatants of the FARC. The outcome is still modest,
with approximately 60 caches. It will therefore be
important that the operation continue in order to keep
weapons out of the reach of illegal groups.

I stress that security in conflict zones must be
enhanced because, as the Council is aware, an upsurge
in violence in those areas in recent months, widely
acknowledged and condemned by the Government,
civil society and the international community alike,
has brought about several of the most significant
developments noted in the Secretary-General's report.
Among those, first and foremost, we stress the decision
to proceed with the long-term deployment of security
forces and about 600 of the more vulnerable rural
districts in the areas most affected by the conflict,
including the district where community leaders, human
rights defenders, promoters of crop substitution and
land restitution advocates were assassinated.

In our View, it is difficult to overestimate the
importance of that decision. The control of the territory
by the State is inseparable from the permanent physical
presence of State institutions those areas. An occasional
presence is bound to leave the old or new illegal power
structures intact. Of course, the deployment of security
forces is not a panacea. One of the specific objectives
of such deployment is precisely to pave the way quickly
for more proactive social and economic support by
civilian State institutions.

The demands of the communities that have borne
the burden of the war are simple, few and well known.
They call for tertiary roads to break the isolation, health
and education services and the titling of their land,
without which integration into the legal economy is
seriously hampered. That is the objective and we, along
with the President and the Vice President, are convinced
that the recovery of the zones of conflict, the reduction
of violence against communities and their leaders and
the long-term success of counter-narcotics efforts
start with the stabilization programme undertaken last
month. As outlined in the new plan, the Mission will
regularly and carefully assess progress, together with
the Government and the security forces. As mentioned
in the report, we are making slight adjustments to our
deployment to that effect.

While the building blocks of stabilization are being
put in place, we cannot lose sight of the challenges of
reintegration. The political reintegration of the former
guerilla organization is on course in the context of
the parliamentary and presidential elections this year.
It is hoped that local and department elections in less
than two years from now will be the opportunity to
consolidate further the political integration of the new
FARC political party, but we continue to view with
concern the socioeconomic reintegration of the 14,000
former combatants.

We are fully aware of the challenges and we
praise the efforts that have been made by Government
agencies, the Office ofthe High Commissioner for Peace
and the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
in relation to several reintegration measures referred
to in the report. However, we must not forget that we
are dealing with a large group of former fighters whose
level of accumulated frustration with their reintegration
process, illustrated by the number of members still in
jail, is not easy to overcome All of us - Government,
United Nations agencies, international community and
civil society - must be diligent and thorough in our
support for their reintegration and the development of
communities in which they are inserted.

The President has taken the important step of
recognizing the need for access to landownership as
a major incentive for reintegration and as a staple of
many reintegration processes. For their part, many
FARC members have demonstrated on the ground that
they are willing and able to engage in agriculture,
environmental protection and crop substitution. Those
are promising developments - but only that. The next
few months must be the opportunity to turn the corner
and establish what continues to be a fragile process
upon a more durable foundation.

Let me now turn briefly to the temporary ceasefire
between the Government of Colombia and the Eje'rcito
de Liberacion Nacional (ELN). A few weeks ago, and
even more so today, we would have liked to be in a
position to make recommendations with regard to the
Mission's involvement in the supervision ofthe ceasefire
beyond 9 January. We are not yet in that position. The
ELN voiced very strong reservations concerning the
implementation of the temporary ceasefire and the
humanitarian commitments attached to it. Although
the ELN leadership has proposed negotiating a firmer
ceasefire, they have remained, until only recently, silent
on their posture following the temporary ceasefire's
expiration yesterday. Barely 24 hours have elapsed
since the two delegations resumed their discussions in
Quito, and it is therefore perhaps a little too early to
venture estimating what the future holds for the long-
term in terms of negotiations.

In the country, the call for the continued suspension
of military action has been unanimous, notwithstanding
the many imperfections of the ceasefire. Social
organizations, members of academia, the private sector
and local authorities hailing from various regions have
called on both parties to maintain the ceasefire. In a
statement issued the day before yesterday, and in line
with the appeal contained in the Secretary-General's
report, the Mission and the Episcopal Conference of
the Catholic Church, who were invited as members of
the ceasefire monitoring mechanism, stressed the need
to maintain the reduced levels of violence that have
prevailed over the past three months.

We had hoped that the talks in Quito would have
delivered an outcome consistent with those aspirations,
and we would have suggested allowing some - but not
too much - time for the Secretary-General to make
his recommendations to the Council based on those
discussions. Unfortunately, it was just announced only
a few minutes ago that ELN attacks against pipelines
have just resumed. We will follow developments closely
in that regard, and keep the Council informed.

In conclusion, let me convey to the Council
the following.

First, there is a conviction that, at the highest
level of the Colombian Government and within the
leadership of the FARC, the commitment remains to
moving forward with the peace process regardless of
the many difficulties that have been in evidence - and
sometimes dramatically so - during the past few
months. Much is still needed to keep the process on
track and make it stronger, but, with such political will,
the appropriate resources and a sustained effort, much
can be accomplished.

Secondly, although the outcome of peace
negotiations has generated controversy and divisions,
and continues to do so to an extent, building peace is
a project for which its constituency goes beyond the
signatories. We see that in the efforts of many from
local authorities to universities, the private sector and
civil society, who are eager to partake in opportunities
offered by the peace process. The recent meetings
held by the commission on truth, coexistence and
non-repetition, under the inspiring leadership of Father
Francisco de Roux, with prominent representatives of
the private sector, victims, civil society and the high-
command of the army, are one of many examples of the
broader ownership that the process of peacebuilding
is developing.

Lastly, let me reiterate the conviction that in these
promising and trying times, the unanimous support of
the Council, and through it, that of the international
community remain a great source of encouragement,
resilience and strength.

