Mr. Ruiz Rosas (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes your presence, Mr. Minister. We
congratulate you on the way in which the delegation of
Ghana has been presiding over the work of the Security
Council and on this initiative to address peace
consolidation in West Africa within the Council. We
also appreciate the presence this morning of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of C6te d'Ivoire and the
Secretary-General in the Ministry of State in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Guinea, as well as the statements
made by the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa.

This is an opportunity to comprehensively
consider this problem in a region where political,
social, economic or security changes in one State can
immediately affect its neighbours. My delegation
wishes to limit its statement to highlighting five
aspects related to the achievement and consolidation of
peace in this part of the African continent.

First, we believe that we must not confuse calm
with peace. Calm is superficial and consists only of the
fleeting absence of armed violence. Peace transcends it

06-4607]

and implies harmonious basic social interaction.
Recent history has shown us that this erroneous
perception has meant that peacekeeping forces are
withdrawn prematurely, that conflicts seemingly
overcome have reappeared and that the peoples
involved lack confidence in the effectiveness of peace
processes.

Secondly, such harmonious social interaction can
be sustained only through a constant focus on
overcoming the root causes of conflict - that is,
through greater attention to the people's most basic
needs and to the long-term sustainability of their
economies. These economies are based mainly on the
production of goods with limited added value.
Moreover, tax revenues often do not meet the needs of
the administrative apparatus, limiting a State's control
over its territory, and population growth often exceeds
economic growth. Disputes over natural resources,
which are also a factor in conflict, intensify when they
occur in a context of social or cultural heterogeneity.

While this situation of poverty continues, as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire said, there
will be no lasting peace consolidation process. The
international community undoubtedly has an obligation
to provide the utmost assistance and support.

In that connection, the problems of peace
consolidation in this region can be divided into three
areas: security; public institutions and the rule of law,
two areas that have been the primary focus of the
Security Council's attention through peacekeeping
operations; and the socio-economic sphere, which in
most cases has received scant attention. In practice,
that has delayed the economic recovery of these
countries as a means to satisfy basic social needs and
contribute to political stability. The recently
established Peacebuilding Commission faces that
challenge.

Therefore, in order to achieve a balance in these
areas, it is essential that concrete measures be taken to
strengthen initial steps aimed at economic stabilization
and the promotion of development in West Africa, such
as, inter alia, broadening tariff exemptions and
favourable treatment in other markets; the total write-
off or reconversion of foreign debt; promoting and
assisting foreign investment; commitment on the part
of the international financial institutions to improve
basic public services and infrastructure; and access to
science and technology.
Thirdly, with regard to the illicit exploitation of
natural resources as a source of financing for armed
groups - a recurring phenomenon in the region - the
implementation of certification mechanisms for the
production and commercial chain for raw materials,
including rubber, timber and cocoa, could redirect the
benefits from those activities towards the people and
contribute to tax revenues. The Kimberley Process is
undoubtedly a model for the implementation of such
mechanisms.

All of that must accompanied by the adoption of
measures to strengthen public institutions, the judicial
system, democracy and electoral mechanisms and to
promote respect for human rights and security sector
reform. Included in this area is the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. In that connection, we must
strengthen mechanisms for political dialogue -
including those of ancestral traditions - and
implement educational curricula promoting peace and
development.

Finally, Peru is convinced that the leadership and
commitment of these countries' authorities and of their
civil societies is essential throughout the peace
process. To that end, the involvement of regional
forums - such as, in this case, ECOWAS, focusing on
socio-economic development, and the African Union,
emphasizing peace and security - must continue to be
very active. These forums have consistently helped to
alleviate crises in the region and must continue to be
promoters of peace consolidation in West Africa.

