Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Government of Brazil and also in my own
name, I wish to say how pleased we are at seeing you,
Sir, presiding over the Council at such a critical
moment for this Organization and for multilateralism in
general. I am certain that the interests of all of who
aspire to a fairer world in which the institutions of
international law can prevail will be in good hands in
the course of your Presidency.

I wish also to associate myself with the statement
just made by the Permanent Representative of Peru on
behalf of the Rio Group, which I shall strive not to
repeat in the short statement that I shall be making in
my national capacity.

I would be remiss if I failed to convey to
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock our sincere
appreciation for the determined and skilful way in
which he has conducted the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee since its establishment following
the tragic terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. His
efforts to promote transparency in the work of the
Committee have been an important factor in the
unprecedented impact that the work of the Committee
has had among the membership of the Organization.
To conclude my words of gratitude, I would also
like to express my thanks for the praiseworthy work of
the team of independent experts and the Secretariat.

The creation of the Committee at that moment in
time attested to the Council's prompt capacity for
reaction. The widespread cooperation of Members of
the Organization shows not only the crucial importance
that the international community attaches to combating
terrorism, but also the capacity of the Security Council,
when it works in unity to pursue a common purpose, to
find the right response to every situation.

Terrorism is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security, human rights,
fundamental freedoms and democratic institutions, and
it also has a grave effect on the economic and social
development of States.

The people and the Government of Brazil oppose
terrorist acts in all their forms and manifestations. By a
constitutional provision, repudiation of terrorism is one
of the principles by which Brazil carries out its
international activities. Combating international
terrorism must be undertaken by all means compatible
with the Charter and the instruments of international
law. In the context of this struggle, Brazil has ratified
nine of the 12 global agreements negotiated within the
scope of the United Nations, specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, which have
all now been enacted into domestic law. The National
Congress is considering the ratification of the three
remaining conventions, the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Fixed Platforms located on the Continental Shelf,
which were negotiated within the framework of the
International Maritime Organization, and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.

The fight against terrorism cannot be waged to
the detriment of due legal process, human rights and
civil liberties. Any sacrifice of fundamental freedoms
that allows scope for arbitrary or discriminatory acts
marks a step backwards, and caters precisely to the
interests of the very groups that sponsor terrorist
activities. The protection of human rights should guide
the execution of our counter-terrorism security
policies.

Similarly, the Government of Brazil believes that
above and beyond suppression and eradication, priority
should also be given to preventing terrorist acts by
combating the deep-rooted causes, many of which may
be social and economic in origin. Accordingly, there is
a need for increased cooperation among judicial bodies
and financial and police intelligence agencies, in order
to repress possible association between terrorist groups
and other criminal organizations. There is also a need
for promotion of the values of democracy and tolerance
and of cooperation for the purposes of economic and
social development.

As a universal threat, terrorism has compelled us
all to take measures to combat it on the national,
regional and multilateral levels. The multiple facets of
the problem of terrorism and the multidimensional
scope of the campaign against it call for a high degree
of coordination. An initiative of such magnitude can
only be successful if it is carried out with the
transparency and universality that only the United
Nations can provide.

Through the holding of its meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
March, the Committee has taken the first steps towards
that coordination. As is noted in the work programme
for this quarter, it intends to further pursue this course.

The scourge of terrorism, tragically, is a reality
that we will have to face in the long term. Thus, it is of
crucial importance for the Council to maintain its unity
of purpose in this regard.

