Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Let me start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and by thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2015/684) on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
for their briefings, as well as Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his statement. I also take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Ambassador Tanin for his work on behalf of
Afghanistan and to wish him every success in his new
endeavours.

We welcome the successful continuation of the
political transition in Afghanistan. In that context, we
believe that the latest appointments at various levels of
the State's bodies will further advance the productive
and result-oriented functioning of the National Unity
Government. We also welcome the Afghan National
Unity Government's efforts to implement various
reforms in the field of good governance, with special
emphasis on the rule of law and fighting corruption.
Those reforms will undoubtedly strengthen social
cohesion in the whole country and help to strengthen
trust in State structures.

Electoral reform is another area where the Afghan
Government has initiated an important process. We
expect the parliamentary elections to be held following
the completion of the relevant reforms, which will
further strengthen the functioning of democratic
institutions.

Inorderto safe guardthe achievements inAfghanistan

over the past 14 years and to be able to build upon them,
the international community's continuing support for
Afghanistan during the 2015-2024 transformation
decade is of the utmost importance. We commend the
role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in coordinating the efforts
of the international stakeholders in Afghanistan. We
hope that the international community will continue to
support the valuable efforts of UNAMA.

We fully support the Afghan Government's
initiatives vis-a-vis the peace and reconciliation
process. For the sake of lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan, we hope that those efforts will yield
positive results.

With the understanding that the problems faced by
the countries of the region, which include terrorism and
organized crime, are of a transboundary nature, close
cooperation among the regional countries is crucial in
tackling those challenges. We therefore believe that the
existing multilateral platforms should be used more
effectively. In that regard, the Istanbul Process is as an
effective cooperation model that is capable of providing
practical solutions to the current challenges in the Heart
of Asia region. When a climate of cooperation and
solidarity prevails, it will be possible for the regional
countries to benefit from the important economic
potential of the region.

Turkey will continue its support to the Afghan
Government in its endeavours to bring about peace,
stability and prosperity to Afghanistan. Turkey's
commitment to Afghanistan is long-term. With
this understanding, Turkey makes comprehensive
contributions to Afghanistan on both a bilateral level and
through the United Nations and NATO. In the security
area, Turkey will continue with its capacity-building
programmes, both within the NATO framework and
on a bilateral basis with the Afghan National Army
and the Afghan National Police. Turkey's development
assistance programme for the Afghan people, which is
the most comprehensive development aid programme
directed towards another country in its history, will
continue in the years ahead with a commitment of
$150 million for the period of 2015-2017.

To conclude, I would like to underscore that lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan can be possible only
within a regional framework that taps into the positive
energy and increased cooperation of its neighbourhood.

