Mr. Boureima (Niger) (spoke in French): I am
speaking on behalf of Ambassador Moutari, who is
unable to be present at this meeting. Let me begin,
Mr. Minister, by conveying the regrets of your
counterpart, my Foreign Minister, Ms. Aichatou
Mindaoudou, who, despite the best of intentions, was
unable to come to New York to participate in today's
meeting.

I wish at the outset to welcome the initiative of
the Republic of Benin - and of the United Nations,
through the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict - to
convene this meeting on war-affected children, an item
to which my country attaches great interest. As
members know, the issue of child soldiers remains a
source of great concern for the international
community, which in recent years has continued to take
steps to protect children in conflicts and to include
them in programmes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

Yet the adoption of a number of legal
instruments - the 1989 Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its 2000 Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict among the
most important among them - has not prevented
children from falling victim to armed conflicts. Indeed,
in recent years we have observed living conditions
deteriorate for many children, especially in conflict
zones, where children account for a great proportion of
civilian victims of armed conflict.

Over the past decade, some 20 million children
have been forced to flee their homes because of armed
conflicts, which have killed more than 2 million and
injured three times that many. Moreover, each year
between 8,000 and 10,000 children are killed or
maimed by landmines.

In addition to all those problems, an even more
repellent phenomenon has emerged: that of child
soldiers - boys and girls under age 18 - who are
estimated to number more than 300,000 and who are
embroiled in more than 30 conflicts throughout the
world, and particularly in West Africa. Here, it is
important to note and to decry the increasing number
of violent conflicts, especially in Africa, with their
attendant desolation: including loss of life, mass
displacement, rape and ethnic cleansing.

As a rule, women and children are the main
victims of armed conflict, because conflicts confine
them to places where they have no access to their basic
needs for survival. In such places, children are forcibly
snatched from their schools or from their homes - or
even in the street - to be enlisted in armed factions.
Sometimes they enlist voluntarily, either seeking a way
to improve their lives or out of ignorance. This
phenomenon arises in most African countries with
ongoing conflicts.

Such participation by children in conflicts led the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to address the issue by holding a
ministerial conference on war-affected children, held at
Accra, in April 2000. The outcome of the conference
gave rise to the adoption by ECOWAS heads of State
or Government, at Abuja, Nigeria, in May 2000, of the
Accra Declaration and Plan of Action on War-Affected
Children, which call for and outline strategies for child
protection in situations of armed conflict. Among the
important decisions that were adopted, we can be
proud of the decision to hold annually, in all States
members of ECOWAS, a West African Week of Truce
for War-Affected Children, coinciding with the annual
16 June Day of the African Child declared by the
African Union. They also include the convening of a
meeting of ECOWAS Ministers for Foreign Affairs to
consider the role played by national Governments and
ECOWAS in the protection of war-affected children.

For its part, Niger is grateful that it has not been
ravaged by major conflict. I can affirm that Niger has
not experienced the phenomenon of child soldiers. But
that does not prevent it from standing in solidarity with
other Africans - particularly those of West Africa.
Like other countries of the subregion, Niger is
concerned at the instability that prevails there. Porous
borders, migration and transboundary exchanges mean
that a conflict in one country can have repercussions in
neighbouring countries, both near and far. Thus, during
the tragic events in Sierra Leone, many people of the
Niger with dual nationality who knew Niger only on
paper had to be repatriated as a matter of urgency. That
is also the present situation in Cote d'Ivoire, where a
large Niger community is directly affected by the
conflict.

But, as it is concerned about the future and the
well-being of children, Niger has ratified all the
international conventions and treaties relating to the
rights of the child, including the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the African Child, the 1989
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its 2000
Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict, the 1999 International Labour
Organization Convention on the worst forms of child
labour and the Declaration and Plan of Action adopted
at the 1990 World Summit for Children.

I would note that my country has also adopted
national legislation and regulations relating to those
instruments. Among them I might mention the ruling
creating a national commission on penal and civil
legislative reform. Moreover, Niger is a signatory to
conventions relative to the protection of child refugees
and children in conflict situations.

We have adopted several other judicial and
institutional measures that relate to children. Among
such judicial measures, I am pleased to recall the
establishment of some 40 children's courts and the
training of judges for minors, which has been under
way since 1999. The penal code and the code of
criminal procedure include provisions specifically for
the administration of justice with respect to minors.
Turning to institutional measures, there are numerous
structures concerned with children in Niger, such as the
Ministries for the Advancement of Women and Child
Protection, Youth, Sport, Basic Education and Health,
among others, which work to improve the situation of
children and young people in Niger.

As members know, in 2001 in Dakar, ECOWAS
heads of State or Government declared the period 2001
to 2010 the Decade of a Culture of the Rights of the
Child in the ECOWAS area. The Decade should make
it possible to consolidate progress in the sphere of
safeguarding the rights of the child and in improving
awareness of the problems of war-affected children by
making children a priority in all development
programmes.

