Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
Sir, on behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I would
like to thank you for chairing this important meeting.
We acknowledge the presence of the high-ranking
officials around the table and in the Chamber. My
delegation wishes to welcome in particular the Foreign
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive presentation on the situation in
Somalia.

On a number of occasions, my delegation has
expressed its deep concern about the worsening
political, security and humanitarian crisis in that war-
torn country. In fact, there are ample reasons to believe
that there is a very close linkage between security,
reconciliation and humanitarian aid.

In our view, what is now needed in Somalia is
simultaneous action on both the political and the
security fronts. Without any doubt, the primary
responsibility for resolving the political and
humanitarian crisis rests with the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Somalis themselves.
However, we believe the international community
could, and should, focus their efforts on the political
and security fronts, in which the establishment of a
unity Government and a safe and secure environment
for it to function in is the key to lasting peace and
stability in Somalia.

In that regard, we call upon the leaders of the
TFG to make serious efforts to work together towards
the strengthening and enlarging of the transitional
federal institutions. We also urge all other Somali
stakeholders to renounce violence and to join the
Djibouti peace process, so that Somalia will soon be
able to stabilize itself for the sake of the Somali
people.

In view of the gravity of the problems of piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia, the
Security Council has devoted much attention to finding
ways and means to address those grave threats to the
security of international maritime navigation in the
region, including the delivery of humanitarian aid to
the people of Somalia. Two resolutions that introduced
a number of measures to combat those criminal
activities have been adopted by the Council in the last
six months.

Viet Nam strongly condemns all acts of piracy
and armed robbery against vessels at sea, including
those in the waters off the coast of Somalia. We have
engaged constructively in the concerted efforts of the
Security Council in that regard. We commend the
initiatives undertaken by many countries and regional
and international organizations to counter piracy in
Somalia pursuant to those resolutions. It is our
conviction, however, that the problems of piracy and
the lawlessness at sea off the coast of Somalia will not
be solved if their root cause - lack of peace and
stability in the country since 1991 - is not squarely
dealt with.

Piracy and armed robbery in the waters off the
coast of Somalia exacerbate the situation in the
country, which is a threat to international peace and
security. Therefore, my delegation wished to stress the
need for the international community, with the
cooperation of the United Nations and the African
Union, to engage more actively in Somalia with a view
to developing an integrated and comprehensive
approach in the interests of peace, stability and
development in that country. We also support the
request of the TFG, as reflected in the letter of
9 December 2008 from the President of Somalia for
further assistance from the international community in
combating the scourge of piracy.

By way of conclusion, my delegation wishes to
emphasize that any action or measure taken in relation
to Somalia, including fighting piracy, must respect
fully the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. They must also be
in conformity with relevant United Nations resolutions
and international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law.

