Mr. Kriihenbiihl: I thank you for this opportunity,
Madam President. I am especially grateful for the
outstanding and repeated expressions of support and
trust offered by numerous members of the Security
Council present at today's meeting. It is extremely
important both for Palestinian refugees and the staff
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to have
such very strong expressions of trust and confidence in
the work, results and contributions of the organization
to regional stability and human dignity.
I will first address the question that was raised by
the Permanent Representative of Germany regarding
the pledging conference. The meeting, otherwise
known as the Ad Hoc Committee of the General
Assembly for the Announcement of Voluntary
Contributions to UNRWA, is an annual feature in
the calendar. The particular week of 24 June was
identified in December 2018, and any suggestion of
ulterior motives in the decision about the date would
be mistaken. The pledging conference fulfils a very
important role in seeking - at a very critical juncture
in the year, in particular just before the summer - to
mobilize additional resources that are needed to keep
our different activities running, installations open and
community served. We therefore appeal, as several of
the participants highlighted, for renewed engagement
and strong additional commitments to be announced at
that moment. We would be very grateful for that.

I would like to briefly react to some of the remarks
that were made by the representative of the United States
in relation to UNRWA. When the original decision
of the United States to cut funding to UNRWA was
announced in early 2018, as those present can imagine,
it was a matter of deep regret and disappointment at my
level and the level of the Agency because it affected one
of the most robust and rewarding partnerships in the
history of humanitarian and development work.

At the same time, of course, we are extremely
conscious that the decision of a Member State to
contribute or not, and if so at what level, to funding
humanitarian organizations is a voluntary and entirely
sovereign decision, ofwhich we need to take note. At the
same time, I want to say here, repeating something that
I said in the course of last year, that while recognizing
that fact - in other words, that it is a voluntary and
purely sovereign decision whether Member States
support or not humanitarian organizations such as
UNRWA - I unreservedly reject the accompanying
narrative and the suggestions that the UNRWA model
is "irredeemably flawed".

I think that it is very clear that the responsibility for
the protracted nature of Palestinian refugeehood, the
increasing number of refugees and the growth in needs
lies squarely and clearly with the parties themselves
and the international community, in particular because
of the lack of will sometimes or, at other times, the utter
inability of the political actors to once and for all bring
about a solution in political terms to that long-standing
crisis, which everybody in the region - Israelis,
Palestinians and others - deserve and have deserved
for very long. The suggestion that one could simply
deflect attention from the political responsibilities and
somehow make a humanitarian organization responsible
for the unresolved crisis is therefore something that I
believe to be misguided and certainly unhelpful.

The Permanent Representative of Israel addressed
a question to me specifically, so I will just take a few
minutes to address some of the points he made. The
question that was specifically addressed was: For
how long? Indeed, I return the question - for how
long? - because it was never the intention of any
member of the General Assembly, and most certainly
never the intention of anyone in UNRWA, to see the
organization in existence and operation for as long as
it has been.

Once again, our ongoing activities are the
illustration of two things, one of which is positive in
terms of what can be done with regard to investing
in the capabilities, the aspirations and the hopes of a
long-term refugee community and, the other of which,
as I said, is the abysmal failure in political terms to
bring about a solution. The way in which UNRWA was
mandated has to be recalled here.

The question addressed to me as to how long it
should continue was not addressed to the right entity. It
is the responsibility of the General Assembly to answer
that question because, when we were tasked, we were
not a self-created organization that one day decided
that this would be an important issue to address. We
are an organization mandated by the General Assembly
and, until a decision is made that that should change,
we will continue with resolve, determination, pride
and humility to implement the mandate that we were
given. Given the attempt to delegitimize our actions
with general statements about the nature and definition
of refugeehood in ways that I have really never come
across in terms of the misrepresentations of actual
situations, let me talk and address the question of the
definition of "descendants".

It is well known to the members of the Council and
General Assembly - and, therefore, I repeat it here
with great clarity - that under international law and
the principle of family unity, the children of refugees
and their descendants are also considered refugees
until a durable solution is found. Both UNRWA and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) recognize descendants as refugees
on that basis - a practice that has been widely accepted
in the international community, including both donors
and refugee-hosting countries.
Palestine refugees are not distinct from those of
any other protracted refugee situation, such as those
from Afghanistan or Somalia, for example, where
there are multiple generations of refugees considered
by UNHCR to be refugees and supported as such. As I
have said, protracted refugee situations are the result of
the failure to find political solutions to the underlying
political crisis.

Let me now just briefly address the comments
that were made by the Permanent Representative of
Israel concerning UNRWA's neutrality. I can simply
not accept that the efforts that UNRWA undertakes
every single day, in one of the most - if not the
most - polarized contexts on the planet, to preserve
the integrity, dignity and neutrality of its operations be
questioned in that manner. I reject it robustly, and the
Permanent Representative knows it because we have
had such conversations before. During the war in 2014,
UNRWA discovered weapons components in some
of its schools during the conflict. We found that out.
We informed the parties - Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. We informed the world and condemned the
fact that those weapons components had been found.

When two of our staff members were elected to
positions two years ago and allegations emerged that
they had been elected to positions in Hamas, we not
only immediately investigated the matter, but as soon
as we found the truth we dismissed them. They did not
leave of their own accord. When, the same year, during
repair work carried out by UNRWA under our schools,
we discovered that tunnels had been dug by Hamas, we
not only condemned Hamas publicly for that, but we
also sealed the tunnels by injecting cement into them,
which is fairly extraordinary in terms of the measures
of the robustness of what humanitarian organizations
are prepared to do in a conflict environment where
its staff is at risk every single day, not because we
invented the mandate, but because we were tasked by
the General Assembly.
Therefore, it is with great determination that we
will uphold the integrity of this organization, use and
work with the immense generosity and support of States
Members that trust our work, and seek and continue to
engage in dialogue both with the United States, Israel
and other parties on aspects of critical review that we
are always and have always been prepared to look into.
The integrity with which we approach such situations
is a matter of public record, and we have received
widespread recognition for it.

I apologize that I took a little bit longer than intended.
I remain available for any further elements that members
might require during the informal consultations.

