Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
join others in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency this month. You can be assured that you
will have the full cooperation of the United States. I
should also like to thank Ambassador Churkin and the
delegation of the Russian Federation for their skilful
stewardship of the Council in May.

I welcome Presidents Robinson and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow to the Council
today and thank them for their briefings. Let me
commend them and the Tribunals' judges, registrars
and staff for their dedication to justice.

We also note the importance of the Informal
Working Group on criminal tribunals, and I should like
to commend the work of its Chairman, Ambassador
Mayr-Harting of Austria, as well as the efforts of the
United Nations Office of the Legal Counsel.

The International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia have carried out the vital
tasks of fighting impunity and creating a lasting record
of atrocities not long past. We recognize the
importance of drawing down the Tribunals smoothly
and efficiently. We applaud the work that the Tribunals
have done thus far to create a durable residual
mechanism, and we urge both Tribunals to continue to
strive to complete their work at the earliest possible
date.

The goal of completing the trials by 2008 has not
been met, but we recognize that efforts are under way
to increase efficiency and to wrap up the work through
the use of ad litem judges, extensions and the
redeployment of trial judges to the Appeals Chamber.
My Government supports these initiatives. We believe
that the Tribunals' requests to extend the terms of
judges should be honoured by the Security Council, at
least through the upcoming biennium.

Those indicted by the Tribunals for committing
some of history's worst crimes should not be allowed
to escape justice. We must search vigilantly for the 15
indicted individuals who remain at large. The United
States calls on all States to fulfil their legal obligations
to fully cooperate with the Tribunals.

Let me pass on our concern about reports that a
fugitive from the Rwanda Tribunal, Felicien Kabuga, is
at large in Kenya. We are particularly troubled by the
Tribunal Prosecutor's assessment that the Government
of Kenya has not complied with requests set out in
March 2009, including calls for Government records
about Kabuga's assets and details of the Kenyan
Government's claim that Kabuga has left the country.
The United States calls on the Government of Kenya to
act immediately on the Tribunal's recommendations
and to take additional steps to deny Kabuga access to
his networks of support.

We understand the Government Rwanda's desire
to receive transfer cases from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We appreciate the
Tribunal Prosecutor's support for that effort and we
commend the work done by Rwanda and other
countries to build up the capacity the Rwandan legal
system needs to make such transfers possible. Ensuring
that the Tribunal can transfer cases to Rwanda and
other States, as appropriate, is an important step
towards fulfilling the Tribunal's strategy for
completing its work. The Tribunal transferred
information on some of its Rwandese Patriotic Front
(RPF) investigations to Rwanda's domestic courts in
June 2008, and four RPF officers face trial. We ask the
Tribunal to share whether it expects any further cases
that deal with the RPF.

Regarding the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we once again call on States to
cooperate fully with its work. We recognize the
Government of Serbia's efforts to apprehend and
transfer those indicted by the Tribunal, including the
capture of Radovan Karadzic' last July. The United
States calls on Serbia to locate, arrest and transfer the
two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic' and Goran
Hadzie. The arrest of those two fugitives is crucial to
completing the Tribunal's mandate.

We also recognize Croatia's efforts to fulfil its
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal. The
Government of Croatia has facilitated the arrests of all
Croatian suspects and established a solid record of
cooperation with the Tribunal. We urge Croatia to
continue this record, and we remain hopeful that there
can be a swift, satisfactory resolution of the issues of
the documents sought by the Tribunal Prosecutor in the
Gotovina case.

We urge the countries of the region to continue to
improve cooperation among themselves. Balkan and
African States must share information better, allow the
transfer of war-crimes proceedings between States
where appropriate, and break down the barriers that
obstruct the extradition of accused war criminals.
Regional cooperation is crucial to bringing such
criminals to justice.

Finally, the United States remains committed to
creating an efficient, cost-effective residual mechanism
that will ensure that war criminals cannot escape
justice. We thank the Presidents, Prosecutors, registrars
and their staff for their work to fight impunity, and we
urge this Council and the parties to work vigorously
together to fulfil the demands of justice and create an
enduring record of crimes that we dare not forget.

