Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
My comments will be brief, since we already briefed
the Security Council on 15 June on our visit to the
Sudan and Chad. I shall, therefore, not repeat in detail
what I have already said concerning the visit to Chad.
But I should like to thank the Chad authorities for the
welcome they gave us and to emphasize three points
today.

I believe that, in the next few weeks, we should
examine very closely the effects of the question of
Darfur on the situation in Chad. In that regard, I should
first like to recall that, during our contacts in Addis
Ababa with President Konare, the problem of the risks
posed by a destabilization in Chad were discussed. The
African Union people told us, through President
Konare, how much they were concerned by the risks
that a destabilization in Chad could have for the entire
subregion. I believe that, when we consider the
situation in the Central African Republic in two weeks'
time, we should bear that issue in mind.

Secondly, the relationship between the Sudan and
Chad has greatly deteriorated. In our recommendations
at the end of our report, we have dedicated a section to
that subject. I believe that one of the issues posed for
the Security Council is the matter of the border. If, as
we hope, the United Nations takes over from the
06-41082

African Union in Darfur, there will be the issue of
implementing the Tripoli Agreement - an agreement
that is not being implemented. I think that it would be
good if, when Mr. Guehenno and the Secretary-General
make proposals to us, they include the issue of border
control. For the time being, the recommendation we
have made is that we study that issue.

Thirdly, I should like to stress that the
humanitarian situation is very worrisome in the camps
for refugees and displaced persons. We have also
devoted a number of recommendations to that issue.
We were struck by the question of forced recruitment
and the problem of ensuring security for humanitarian
workers. In our recommendations, we say that the
Council must study ways to deal with problems
concerning the refugee camps. Here, again, I believe
that, when the Secretary-General submits proposals to
us, that concern should be borne in mind.

I must say that I am concerned because there is
an immediate and urgent problem. The Secretary-
General may take the points I mentioned into account
in preparing the transition from the African Union
Mission in the Sudan to a United Nations force, all of
which will take place in due course. Today, however,
there is an urgent problem that we should be well
aware of: we must find a solution to the issue of
protecting the camps.

