The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Rwanda for his kind words
addressed to me.

(spoke in English)

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Germany.

My Government was pleased to support the
resolution, just adopted, extending the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) for a further six months. UNAMIR can thus
continue to play its crucial role in Rwanda's
reconciliation and rehabilitation process.

Since we last decided on the mandate of UNAMIR,
the situation in Rwanda has changed considerably. Given
these changed circumstances, the Council has decided to
adjust both the mandate and the size of UNAMIR.
 

UNAMIR needs a solid basis for its work; this basis will be
provided by the mandate and by force level which we have
agreed upon. UNAMIR will conduct its work in close
cooperation with the Government of Rwanda. Likewise, we
expect the Rwandan authorities to give their full support to
UNAMIR.

Stability, genuine national reconciliation and
reconstruction remain the ultimate goals for Rwanda.
UNAMIR will help achieve national reconciliation between
all Rwandans by continuing to exercise its good offices.
However, without the return of the refugees, there will be
no lasting stability in the country. In this context, UNAMIR
will assist the Government of Rwanda in facilitating the
voluntary and safe return of refugees to their home
communities.

Another precondition for genuine national
reconciliation is the attainment of justice. Those who are
guilty of genocide must be brought to trial. We therefore
strongly support the emphasis that the resolution places on
supporting an early and effective functioning of the
International Tribunal and on rehabilitating the Rwandan
judicial system. Rwanda still needs urgent and substantial
assistance for its rehabilitation efforts in this area.

In his report, the Secretary-General called for action
to prevent military activities by Rwandan nationals in
neighbouring countries aimed at destabilizing Rwanda.
The Security Council has now requested the
Secretary-General to consult the neighbouring countries
on the possible deployment of United Nations military
observers in order to monitor the arms embargo directed
against these individuals, and we look forward to his
report.

The scars of the horrible tragedy which afflicted
Rwanda last year are still visible. But, slowly, Rwanda is
returning to the stability and normalcy it seeks. The
international community is called upon to continue to help
the Rwandan people on their way. My Government will
do its part and will further support Rwanda's
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.
