The Deputy Secretary-General: The situation in
eastern Ukraine remains tense and volatile. Since the
ceasefire began on 1 September, fighting throughout
the conflict zone has generally subsided. However,
in recent weeks, sporadic fighting has resumed, with
varying degrees of intensity, around parts of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions. The parties have started
to implement the agreement to withdraw so-called
lighter weapons from the contact line. But the process
remains incomplete. The Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has observed the use of weapons, including
mortars, throughout the conflict zone. I commend
the Mission, under the leadership of Ambassador
Apakan, for carrying out its mandate under challenging
circumstances. It is critical that the Mission be granted
full and unfettered access to all areas covered by its
mandate. I am deeply concerned about the continuing
incidents ofharassment and intimidation ofthe Mission.
Such harassment must end immediately.

I recognize the sustained efforts of the Trilateral
Contact Group and its four Working Groups, the
Normandy format leaders and other partners. On the
diplomatic front, modest but tangible progress has been
made following the 2 October meeting of the leaders
of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine. The rebels
in eastern Ukraine have announced a postponement of
the self-declared local elections. The parties have also
committed to finding a compromise on the modalities
for local elections in rebel-held territory that respects
Ukrainian law and is in line with international best
practices. As we know from the Minsk meetings of the
four Working Groups, failure to find a compromise on
the remaining critical issues has prevented the parties
from reaching a viable solution. That includes issues
related to the local elections in rebel-held areas.

We welcome the discussions held in Berlin during
and after the 6 November meeting of the Normandy
Foreign Ministers. We also welcome the improvements
that have occurred in the security sector. But much
work lies ahead. The majority of the provisions of
the Minsk agreements remain unimplemented. There
are divergent interpretations of the sequence of
implementation, and the same is true of some of the
provisions in the Minsk package of measures, including
those related to the conditions for holding local elections
in rebel-controlled areas, control over border areas
and the departure of foreign armed groups. Amnesty
and special status constitutional changes are also on
that list. These problems threaten the whole political
process.

The conflict zone remains highly militarized, and
there is an ever-present danger of serious escalation.
The Special Monitoring Mission continues to note the
presence of weapons, including heavy weapons, along
the contact line. There is also an urgent need to address
the matter of explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices, which are now the leading cause of
death and injuries in eastern Ukraine. The problem
requires sustained attention through increased
awareness-raising, education and humanitarian
mine-action programmes. Such action would alleviate
risks, reduce suffering and build confidence.

Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, who is
joining us from Kyiv, will provide more detail on the
humanitarian situation. I appeal strongly to all sides
to provide unrestricted and unconditional access for
critical humanitarian assistance and guarantee freedom
of movement for civilians throughout the country. I
also urge all those with influence over the actors to
ensure that all bureaucratic and political impediments
to humanitarian assistance are removed. I would like
to remind all parties of their obligation to guarantee
free and unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance
throughout Ukraine.

I am also concerned about how the residents
of Crimea have been affected by the cutting off
of electricity from mainland Ukraine. On 21 and
22 November, electric pylons in the Kherson region of
Ukraine supplying energy to Crimea were destroyed,
leaving much of the peninsula without power. I trust
that the electric power will be fully restored and that the
incident leading to the disruption is being investigated.

Last month we passed the two-year mark for the
Ukraine crisis. I recall my own good-offices visit to
Kyiv in early March 2014 and my subsequent briefing
to the Council from there. At the time I appealed to the
Council for dialogue, diplomacy and for cool heads to
prevail. Today, with no comprehensive political solution
in sight, I reiterate that appeal. During those difficult
first days and weeks two years ago, we spearheaded the
establishment of a United Nations presence through the
United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine and, later, a large country team. That Mission
continues to perform critical monitoring, reporting and
prevention work, and we will hear more on that from
Mr. Simonovie, the Assistant-Secretary-General for
Human Rights.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
Minsk agreements remain the best available viable and
accepted path to resolving this conflict. They must be
implemented in full. All parties must work towards a
durable political solution without delay, and greater
political will and flexibility must be demonstrated by
all concerned. Millions of women, children, the elderly
and persons with disabilities are directly affected on
both Sides of the contact line. Further delays will mean
further suffering for far too many people who are
hoping for a peaceful holiday season.

The United Nations, through the good offices
of the Secretary-General, remains fully committed
to supporting and promoting peace and stability in a
manner that upholds Ukraine's sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity. The vital work of the human rights,
humanitarian and development actors on the United
Nations country team in Ukraine will remain critical.
Let us together intensify our work so that we do not
have to meet here for yet another briefing next year
on the third anniversary of this crisis. Let us ensure
that we meet the aspirations of Ukraine's citizens for
stability, peace, reform and prosperity.

