Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): At the outset let
me thank the Secretary-General for the report he has
circulated to us and also thank Mr. Annabi for the remarks
he made introducing this report. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly indicates to us the progress that
has been achieved since the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the
problems that exist. It also provides us with proposals for
how to move forward. We are very grateful for these. We
also want to thank Ambassador Greenstock for the briefing
he gave us.

The people of Sierra Leone have experienced
unimaginable horrors. Only a process of reconciliation,
accompanied by the demobilization of combatants and
military integration, can help instil peace and security in
Sierra Leone. We therefore thank those who are helping
with this difficult process, and we welcome UNAMSIL's
readiness to assist in this regard.

The security situation certainly worries our delegation.
In this connection, it should be emphasized that it is very
important to ensure that peacekeeping operations are always
carried out under appropriate mandates and that the size
and strength of the force is commensurate with the
problem. We think that these two go together. It is one
thing to have the appropriate mandate, but if the size does
not conform, then this in itself presents a problem.

The fact that the areas with extensive UNAMSIL
patrols are seeing improved security, in our view, speaks
volumes. We understand from the report that the conflict
had a major impact on institutions of law and order. In this
regard, we appeal to the international community to assist
Sierra Leone in the training of police as well as in
providing essential facilities and equipment. The work of
UNAMSIL and the Commonwealth Police Task Force in
this field is highly commendable.

In all conflict situations, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process has proved to be
the most difficult. Indeed, it depends not only on the
commitment of the parties but also on the extent of support
from the international community. The programme by
UNAMSIL for the disposal of arms and ammunition, to be
commenced soon, should therefore be assisted.

Similarly, we welcome the launching of the
community rehabilitation and reintegration programme, and
we thank the World Bank and the African Development
Bank for their contribution to this programme. It is
programmes such as this one which will serve as
incentives for ex-combatants to surrender their weapons,
despite the reluctance of their leaders.

The report clearly points out that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process is being
set back by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We
need to examine how UNAMSIL can maximize its
progress in this area. Hence, and as the Secretary-General
clearly proposes in his report, one of the main priorities
for the United Nations in Sierra Leone remains the speedy
establishment of a credible peacekeeping presence
throughout the country to create the necessary climate of
confidence and security conditions for the implementation
of various aspects of the peace process. The report also
points out, in a very clear manner, the impediments to the
DDR programme, which need to be examined further.

Our delegation believes that we have a real chance
to succeed here and so we must at all costs avoid
repeating the experience we had in Angola with regard to
the DDR of UNITA combatants. Here again we believe
that some collective thinking needs to be exercised and
past experience taken into account.

We note that the human rights situation is most
disturbing in the RUF-held areas. We wish to underscore
that the perpetrators of violence against civilians and aid
workers are not covered by the amnesty under the Lome
Agreement, as mentioned in the report. Here again we
commend UNAMSIL for its work in the area of human
rights.

Furthermore, we concur with the steps proposed by
the Secretary-General. Indeed, the early disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of all ex-combatants; the
extension of State authority, including law enforcement,
throughout the country; national reconciliation and
democratization; and the improvement of Sierra Leone's
capacity to ensure its own security is what is needed to
restore peace and stability to Sierra Leone.

With regard to national reconciliation and
democratization, we support the steps proposed by the
Secretary-General. We Wish to underline that for national
reconciliation and democratization to prosper in Sierra
Leone, all parties, especially the RUF, should cooperate,
and the international community should lend its assistance
in this regard.

 

Namibia supports the proposed donor conference,
scheduled for 27 March this year in London, and we call on
all to contribute generously. We thank the United Kingdom
Government for this initiative.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, the men and women of
UNAMSIL, and the personnel of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) for their courageous work in Sierra Leone.

Finally, our thanks go to all those countries that
contribute troops to UNAMSIL, and we also are in
agreement with the proposal that you, Mr. President, speak
to the press after this meeting.

