Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council.

Well before the latest developments in the Sudan,
humanitarian needs in Darfur and other parts of the
country were already growing due to the economic
crisis. People who had been receiving humanitarian
assistance now require greater support. The broader
population has also been affected by the worsening
economy. There is a risk that more people might slide
into greater vulnerability and poverty.

The direct impact on humanitarian operations
from the recent political events has so far been limited,
and regular operations have continued. That includes
a major campaign to vaccinate children against polio
and measles being carried out in South Darfur and
other states. However, the humanitarian community is
monitoring the situation closely.

We are very concerned about the protection of
civilians, particularly in Darfur, where localized
fighting continues. Reports of incidents of violence
involving internally displaced persons - including
internally displaced persons killed in Kalma camp in
South Darfur on 13 April - are worrisome. In addition,
the start of the school year in Darfur, scheduled for
1 April, has been delayed, impacting education and
services tied to school attendance.

The economic crisis in the Sudan has had a
significant impact on humanitarian needs and
operations, including in Darfur. That includes rapid
currency devaluation, rampant inflation, increasing
prices for food and medicine, a marked decline in
purchasing power and intermittent shortages of daily
bread and fuel supplies. The World Food Programme
reports that the price of sorghum is 70 per cent higher
as compared with the same time last year, impacting
people's purchasing power for a staple food. According
to the latest analysis, 5.8 million people are presently
food-insecure, up from 3.8 million the year before. That
includes 1.9 million people in Darfur. With the start of
the lean season in May, the number will increase.

Shortages of imported commodities have also
impacted health care and other services. According to
the Central Bank of the Sudan, imports of medicine
in 2018 dropped by a third as compared to 2017. With
increases in costs of medical services ranging from 50
to 100 per cent, households are less able to afford health
care and are more vulnerable to health risks. Shortages
of food and high prices also worsen protection risks,
as people turn to negative coping mechanisms, and
fewer children attend school. Women and the elderly
continue to be particularly affected, as households
are prioritizing food for their children. This situation
adds to what were already high and long-standing
humanitarian needs.

There have been significant improvements in
security in recent years, with some people displaced
by conflict returning home. Yet 1.9 million people
remain displaced by conflict, more than 1.6 million
of them in Darfur, and many of them have been
displaced for well over a decade, as members well
know. Hundreds of thousands of children in Darfur
are acutely malnourished. In Central, East, North, and
South Darfur less than half of the population has access
to clean water. The World Food Programme reports
that a growing proportion of internally displaced
and refugee populations - already among the most
vulnerable - cannot afford enough to eat.

For those reasons, and thanks to the generous
contributions of Member States, the United Nations
Central Emergency Response Fund last week
allocated $26.5 million to assist vulnerable people
in areas that have seen some of the largest increases
in food insecurity linked to the economic situation,
including in East, North, South and West Darfur. The
Sudan humanitarian fund is also providing more than
$20 million in complementary funding.

But more support is needed. This year humanitarian
partners are appealing for $1.1 billion to assist
4.4 million of the most vulnerable people, which
represents a bit more than half of the overall needs
identified in the country, including 2.4 million people in
Darfur. Humanitarian needs and response requirements
will also be reviewed in the coming months to reflect
the ongoing impact of the economic situation, as well
as any impact that might emerge from the current
political events.

Sustaining humanitarian support is particularly
important, as there continue to be significant constraints
on longer-term development assistance for Darfur and
other parts of the Sudan. Without expanded social
safety nets, the ongoing economic situation will have
serious consequences. Greater support for development
activities is needed, alongside scaled up Government
investment in crucial services such as social protection.

The situation in the Sudan also has implications
for the broader region. I would like to recognize
the Government's generosity in hosting refugees,
including nearly 150,000 South Sudanese in Darfur.
I hope that support continues. The Sudan has also
been a vital route for the provision of humanitarian
assistance - particularly food aid - into South Sudan.
With critical life-saving assistance to be provided in
the coming days and weeks, we hope the Government
will continue to facilitate those movements.

Ensuring that the most vulnerable are supported
requires sustained humanitarian access to all people in
need. Recent years have seen significant improvements.
Partners are able to move more easily and assist people
in more areas, particularly in J ebel Marra. However, we
continue to call on all parties in the Sudan to allow the
humanitarian community to assist people in need. We
also call on the Government to take further measures
to improve the operating environment for humanitarian
organizations, especially by lifting bureaucratic
impediments to movement and facilitating impartial
needs assessments and protection activities. At this
critical time, it is essential to ensure that the people of
Darfur and the rest of the Sudan receive the assistance
and the support they need.

