Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro; and
the European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Council. I would
also like to thank Ambassador de La Sabliere for
leading the Security Council mission and preparing the
report that is before us today.

The visit of the Security Council mission to the
region took place at a very appropriate moment, as it
came only days after the heads of State of the core
countries of the Great Lakes Conference signed the Dar
es Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes Region. By
signing the Declaration, they have committed
themselves to jointly putting an end to the endemic
conflicts and persistent insecurity in the Great Lakes
region through dialogue and confidence-building
measures.

The European Union welcomes the outcome of
the summit as clear evidence of the preparedness of the
countries of the region to move from confrontation to
consultation and cooperation. It is now imperative that
all signatories respect the principles they have agreed
upon and start implementing them without delay. The
European Union acknowledges that it will be
impossible to tackle all the problems of the region at
once. Therefore, the inter-ministerial committee awaits
the difficult but important task of setting clear
priorities and sequences. The European Union
reiterates its readiness to continue its support for the
conference through the Group of Friends.

The European Union is very concerned about
reports concerning the military incursion by Rwandan
armed forces into the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which took place only days after the Dar es
Salaam Declaration was signed and the Security
Council mission had left for New York. The
threatening declarations made by Rwanda have a
destabilizing effect on the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The European
Union condemns any violation of the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
calls upon the Rwandan Government to abide by the
Declaration of Principles, to respect the sovereignty of
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to withdraw its forces. The European Union calls
upon the Transitional Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to react with restraint to avoid a
military escalation. It calls upon both countries to
resolve the crisis within existing mechanisms, such as
the Tripartite Commission and the Joint Verification
Mechanism, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

At the same time, the European Union shares the
View that the problem of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda and the former Forces armees rwandaises
(FAR)/Interahamwe should be urgently addressed. First
and foremost, the continued presence of ex-
FAR/Interahamwe elements on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo poses a threat to the
local population. The ensuing tensions risk
undermining the Congolese peace process. The
European Union therefore calls on the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to intensify its
efforts to disarm and demobilize such elements, with a
view to their repatriation or resettlement. It also
encourages MONUC to support the Government in
whatever way it can. The imminent deployment of an
additional brigade to North Kivu will provide
additional security for the region and increase
MONUC's capacity to prevent spoilers, both from
within and outside, from derailing the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Every chain is only as strong as its weakest link.
Peace and stability in the Great Lakes region will
therefore remain elusive as long as one or more of the
countries of the region has not been stabilized or
reached a stage where the peace process is irreversible.
The European Union, like the Security Council
mission, is therefore heartened by the progress that has
been made in the transitional processes in both Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In both
countries the focus is now on elections, which are to be
held next year.

The situation in Burundi is particularly
encouraging. The acceptance of the Constitution by all
parties is a major step forward towards completing the
transition period and the holding of elections, for
which a clear calendar has been established. Voter
registration is well under way.

The European Union welcomes the recent
adoption of laws on the reform of the armed forces and
the police, and calls upon the Burundian authorities to
adopt the remaining key legislation, including the
electoral code and the communal law, as soon as
possible.

Another encouraging development is the recent
launch of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. However, the continued
support of the international community for the
transitional process remains crucial for it to remain on
track.

The European Union supports the mission's
recommendation to reflect deeper on possible ways to
effectively prevent spoilers like the Forces nationales
de liberation of Agathon Rwasa from undermining the
peace process. The European Union also agrees with
the mission's conclusion that, in order to prevent
conflict from recurring, Burundi needs international
assistance in the areas of security sector reform, DDR,
reconstruction and development.

The European Union is less optimistic about the
progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Last August, the Secretary-General outlined the
political strategy that he believed should be
implemented to reduce the role of spoilers and build
confidence in the transition. MONUC was reinforced
and further expanded to support the Transitional
Government in the implementation of the so-called
critical path. In addition, the international community
reiterated its willingness to assist the Transitional
Government. That assistance would be facilitated by
more regular contacts between the espace presidentiel
and the International Committee in Support of the
Transition, as well as through cooperation between the
Government and international actors in the three joint
commissions, which should be established as soon as
possible. However, the primary responsibility for
implementing the core tasks of the transition rests with
the Transitional Government.

Elections should be held in 2005. Failure to do so
could destabilize the country. The European Union is
very concerned about the lack of progress in key areas
during recent months, most notably with regard to
legislation, DDR and security sector reform. As far as
security sector reform is concerned, the training of a
number of integrated brigades before the holding of
elections seems essential. The European Union has
supported, and is planning to support, the Transitional
Government in virtually all of those areas. With regard
to police, the European Union has provided training for
an integrated police unit. A follow-up mission will
guide the unit in the exercise of its new duties.
Additional support for police reform, as well as for the
integration of the army, is currently being considered.

The European Union is one of the main
contributors to the multi-country demobilization and
reintegration programme trust fund. With regard to
elections, the European Commission has pledged €80
million, while several of its member States have also
pledged significant contributions.

The struggle against corruption is another
important element of the transition. In that regard, the
European Union welcomes recent indications of a more
forceful approach.

The Transitional Government needs international
assistance, and the European Union is willing to do its
part. However, international assistance cannot
substitute for political will and sustained commitment
on the part of the Transitional Government. The
Government owes nothing less to its people, who are
counting on their leaders to bring them the peace they
so richly deserve.

There is no peace without justice, and there is no
justice without the rule of law. The recent history of
both Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is also a history of widespread human rights
violations and impunity. That cycle needs to be broken,
as peace, democracy, good governance and sustainable
development are unthinkable without respect for the
rule of law. There are additional challenges to the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict societies: at the
very moment when the need for justice is greatest, the
legal structures necessary to deliver that justice may
well be absent. Efforts at the national level should,
where necessary, be complemented at the international
level through cooperation with relevant international
institutions, notably the International Criminal Court.

