Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Botswana congratulates
your country Sir - Venezuela - on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. We assure you of our support as you
discharge your mandate.

We commend the Security Council for continuing
to engage us in debates like this one, as they provide
Member States an opportunity to share views on various
themes - for example, like today on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. We also thank the briefers
for providing us with vital information this morning.

Pursuant to the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions that called for a
comprehensive review of the peacebuilding architecture,
the need to continuously re-examine and strengthen
peacebuilding frameworks at national and international
levels has become even more apparent. We applaud
the efforts by the Secretary-General to institute such a
review by appointing an Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, whose
report (see S/2015/490) is the basis of our discussion
here today.

It is the considered opinion of my delegation that
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office collectively
play an important role in building and sustaining peace
and international security. As we examine history,
we acknowledge the fact that our continent, Africa,
which has had its fair share of internal conflicts
and strife, remains an integral part of the peace and
security architecture. However, we believe that the
fact that the majority of our post-conflict countries
still remain fragile and increasingly vulnerable to be
of significance. They very often have weak, or no,
institutions of governance, the rule of law has broken
down, any socioeconomic development capacity is
absent and they need to be supported over long periods.

As history has shown, peacebuilding processes
are themselves very complicated and need time to be
consolidated. They need extensive and comprehensive
patience to avoid the resurgence of violence and the
reopening of healed wounds.We therefore regret that,
even up to now, no proper or predictable funding
mechanisms are established at regional and international
levels to ensure that the seeds of sustained economic
growth are safeguarded through reconstruction
and a recovery period. We call on the international
community, especially the United Nations system, to
ensure proper coherence and coordination in promoting
an efficient peace and security funding framework.

We note that the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts has identified many shortcomings in the
work of the peace and security architecture, not only
at international and national levels but also within
the United Nations system. My delegation therefore
appreciates the contents of the report and believes that
its recommendations deserve due consideration.

My delegation believes that, in order to promote
growth and development, countries that are emerging
from years of sustained conflict must as a matter of
fact invest in instruments of peace, capacity-building,
inclusive governance and very strong institutions.
Therefore, we believe that the international community
can share experiences and lessons with post-conflict
countries in order to cultivate a culture of post-conflict
reconstruction, maintaining peace, reconciliation and
institution-building. In that regard, Botswana remains
ready and willing to contribute in its own small way
towards the strengthening of institutions of governance,
particularly within the African continent.

We also note that the United Nations system is
increasingly experiencing dwindling resources as it
grapples with the rising tides of conflict across the
globe. We therefore need to find creative ways of
introducing predictable funding methodologies for
peacebuilding initiatives to support the Peacebuilding
Fund.
In conclusion, we commend all the work that has
been achieved thus far with respect to the review of
the peacebuilding architecture. While the achievement
of international peace and security has at times proved
elusive, Botswana remains firmly convinced that that
can be achieved with concerted effort at the international
level. In that respect, we reaffirm our abiding faith in
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

