Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): Allow me to thank
Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for
his report to the Council and to commend him for a
successful stewardship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

On 20 July, the Security Council unanimously
adopted the landmark resolution 2231 (2015) endorsing
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA) agreed
by the E3+3 and Iran. We strongly believe that a deal,
which is based on Iran's implementation of changes to
its nuclear programme in return for the phased lifting
of sanctions, has offered a real, durable and verifiable
path to resolving the decade-long dispute.

At this crucial moment, Lithuania reiterates that all
Security Council sanctions remain in effect and must
be robustly implemented by all Member States and,
in particular, by the members of the Council. In this
connection, we welcome the Committee's readiness
to give guidance to Member States and international
organizations on the implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We also reiterate our concern that Iran, while
taking steps in complying with the JCPOA, continues
to disregard certain provisions of the Security Council
resolutions, in particular those related to its ballistic
missile programme and transfers of conventional
weapons and related materiel. Iran should without
delay extend cooperation with the 1737 Committee,
inter alia, by providing information requested by the
Panel of Experts in conduct of its investigations.

Lithuania welcomes the reappointment of the
experts to the Panel and strongly supports their
ambitious programme of work submitted to the
Committee on 28 August. We encourage the Panel to
continue its investigations, particularly on new reported
episodes of non-compliance.

Iran's continuous and full cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is a vital
element in restoring much needed trust between Iran
and the international community. We note the report
by which the IAEA confirmed that Iran has taken steps
of nuclear-related actions in accordance with resolution
2231 (2015). We call on Iran to provide the international
community with verifiable guarantees of the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

In conclusion, Lithuania believes that, if
implemented fully and in good faith, the JCPOA
will become a fundamental element in building trust
between Iran and the international community. It will
open the door to a steady improvement of relations and
greatly contribute, in a positive manner, to regional and
international peace and stability.

