Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation, together with the
other member States of the Contact Group, is a co-
sponsor of the draft resolution before the Security
Council, which sets up the implementation machinery for
the Basic Agreement on Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium. The signing of the Basic Agreement
has paved the way for a peace settlement in this part of
Croatia that takes due account of the rights and interests
of the local Serbs, who constitute a significant proportion
of the population. In this way, it has been possible to
create conditions to prevent a recurrence of a scenario
involving the use of force, which would be fraught with
the danger of destabilizing the situation in the region and
of giving rise to new mass flows of refugees.

Having consistently favoured a United Nations
format for the operation in Eastern Slavonia, we are very
pleased to note that this approach has prevailed generally
in the Security Council. Consequently, we have been able
to come up with a balanced draft resolution which takes
due account of the interests and concerns of the parties.

 

It seems to us that the civilian and military
components of the forthcoming operation will complement
each other and that they are being given appropriate
mandates to perform the tasks deriving from the Basic
Agreement. The Basic Agreement provides for restoring the
security guarantees of the entire population of the region,
which were disrupted during the years of the conflict, as
well as looking out for basic human rights and conditions
for the return of refugees and the normalization of
community life as a whole, which places a very serious
responsibility on the shoulders of the Transitional
Administration.

We have learned from the Yugoslav crisis that a lack
of thoroughness in this particular area results in additional
humanitarian setbacks. Even now we can see that in
Sarajevo, another region of the former Yugoslavia that has
been a traditional bone of contention, there are initial signs
of an exodus of the Serbian population. Every effort should
be made to prevent such a turn of events in the former
Sector East. The situation in that part of Croatia should be
carefully monitored by the Security Council so that it can,
if necessary, promptly consider any further steps to fully
implement the provisions of the current draft resolution.

In a broader context, the settlement of the situation in
Eastern Slavonia should create the necessary conditions for
a complete normalization of relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia. This will be of
decisive significance for a comprehensive settlement of the
Yugoslav crisis.

The Russian delegation supports the extension of the
mandate of the group of military observers of the United
Nations on the Prevlaka peninsula in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 779 (1992) and resolution 981
(1995) and with the relevant sections of the Secretary-
General's report (S/1995/1028*) dated 13 December 1995.
We welcome the intentions expressed by the parties
regarding the demilitarization of that territory, which will
help to create an atmosphere of mutual trust in the region
and will also create conditions for them to achieve a final
settlement of outstanding disagreements.

In this context, the draft resolution, which has been
presented by the President of the Security Council, is an
appropriate reflection of the situation as it now exists. The
Russian delegation believes that the Security Council will
take a final position on its further activities in this area
after the Secretary-General, in accordance with operative
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, has submitted his report
on the situation in the peninsula and on the progress
achieved by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Croatia in their bilateral negotiations.

