Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank all the briefers for their
valuable contributions. I would like to especially thank
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their moving and very
courageous testimony and for today recalling today
of what is at stake in this debate. It is not a question
of talking or holding philosophical, unproductive and
academic discussions. We are talking about real lives,
people's lives and the lives of thousands and thousands
of children who are victims of armed conflict.

This open debate marks the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), as a number of
speakers have mentioned. While considerable progress
has been made over the past decade, this year's annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) reflects
a number of unprecedented serious violations against
children since monitoring began. Belgium is deeply
concerned by the particularly high number of child
victims and calls on all parties to take measures to
protect children in accordance with the principles
of distinction and proportionality. The increase in
protracted conflicts around the world, and long-lasting
wars, causes greater indirect damage and affects more
and more children. The shift of conflict to urban
areas and the use of long-range explosive weapons in
populated areas have devastating effects on boys and
girls. Belgium is particularly alarmed by the use of
the refusal of humanitarian aid as a weapon of war,
preventing children from having access to life-saving
assistance. At the same time, the data on the serious
violations committed against children are considered
underestimates due to lack of access, stigma and the
fear of reprisal. Our work is therefore far from over.

In its capacity as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, Belgium helped to build
consensus on two sets of conclusions. One concerns
serious violations of children's rights in Syria and the
other in Myanmar. The unity of the Security Council on
those two situations is an important signal.

Belgium supports the mandate and work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. As such, we mobilize
all the instruments at our disposal. We have organized
joint meetings with the sanctions committees focused
on following up on the Working Group's previous
conclusions and have organized videoconferences with
field missions before the renewal of their mandates.
Finally, we want to integrate the dimension of children
and armed conflict in all the work of the Security
Council. We propose that the Special Representative
regularly address the Council on national situations, as
has already been the case for Yemen and the Central
African Republic. The United Nations monitoring
and reporting mechanism is essential to that mandate.
The annual report of the Secretary-General, based on
factual and verified information, is a fundamental tool
for engaging in dialogue with the parties to conflicts
and for achieving concrete commitments through, inter
alia, national action plans. Such an approach is essential
to maintaining the credibility and independence of the
children and armed conflict mandate. That would be
the best way to make real change for children affected
by conflict.

The effective implementation of the children and
armed conflict agenda is a responsibility that we all
share. That implies the maintenance of a specialized
child protection capacity within United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions. It also means
prioritizing child protection concerns. But let us
not forget prevention. It is in the name of prevention
that we must work for the long-term comprehensive
reintegration of children, investing in programmes that
provide individualized support that address protection,
psychosocial support and education needs. Experience
shows that children who have gone through such
programmes become less vulnerable to re-recruitment
by armed groups. Through reintegration, boys and girls
have an opportunity to build a life away from conflict
and to move towards the future without being haunted
by the past. While prevention is obviously preferable,
Belgium also recalls the need to bring to justice those
responsible for war crimes and other serious violations
of international law and human rights law, including,
where appropriate, through full cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that Belgium

fully associates itself with the statements of the

European Union and the Group of Friends on Children
and Armed Conflict to be delivered later.

