Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by welcoming
Ukraine on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and expressing our
appreciation for its organization of today's open debate
on the protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist attacks.

Given the insightful briefings provided by those
who have spoken before the Security Council today,
and in the interests oftime, I shall limit our intervention
to four key points, relating in particular to the need to
take an integrated and coordinated approach in the
protection of infrastructure against terrorist attacks.

First,itis essentialthateffortsto improvethe security
of critical infrastructure with respect to the threat of
terrorism be part of a broader, institutionalized whole of
preventing violent extremism and the counter-terrorism
agenda at the national level. That is only inevitable,
given the complex and interlinked nature of today's
terrorist threats and modern infrastructure networks
alike. Work carried out on the basis of strengthening
such protection will almost always rely on the strength
of counter-terrorism efforts in other areas, coinciding
with the aims of other initiatives seeking to prevent
acts of terrorism. Duplication needlessly undermines
our national efforts and wastes what are usually limited
financial, physical and human resources.

Secondly, the need for coordinated efforts is
especially strong for small countries, including small
island developing States (SIDS) such as the Maldives.
Cognizant of those facts, the Government of the
Maldives has developed a robust institutional framework
for taking a coordinated and whole-of-society approach
to countering terrorism and violent extremism through
concrete measures and cross-cutting policies. Last
year, we implemented a State policy on terrorism and
violent extremism and are currently in the process of
formulating a national counter-terrorism strategy and
counter-terrorism response plan as part of that policy.
The implementation ofthose programmes will be guided
by the National Counter-Terrorism Centre, which was
also established last year, with an express mandate to
lead and coordinate the work of all State institutions
with respect to terrorism and violent extremism.
A key component of that State policy is the
development of programmes aimed at safeguarding
tourist resorts and the travel industry, which is a critical
sector of our economy, and security programmes for
sea ports, airports and sectors of major economic
infrastructure. Those are focal points of policies for
protecting critical infrastructure in any country, but
their importance is only magnified for SIDS given their
small size, geographic isolation and limited resources.
A terrorist attack on critical infrastructure would be
devastating regardless of where it took place. But
whereas an attack, while tragic, would ultimately be
local in its impact for a large country in which such
infrastructure exists in abundance, for a small island
country that relies entirely on one or just a handful of
such infrastructural facilities, such an attack would be
systemic in its impact. For SIDS, an attack on a sole
international airport, sea port, major power plant or
water distribution network would not merely exact
a costly human toll but cut off an entire people from
their livelihoods, material necessities or even the rest
of the world.

Thirdly, in the light of the amplified magnitude
of the threat for countries, such as SIDS, that face
considerable geographic, economic or social constraints,
capacity-building and the exchange of best practices
are critical if all nations are to be able to effectively
respond to such threats. The Maldives is fortunate to
have benefited from cooperation with international
partners with regard to capacity-building in the
security, health-care and public utility sectors in areas
that serve to improve its ability to address and respond
to those emerging threats to critical infrastructure.

Fourthly, the transnational and increasingly
multisectoral nature of contemporary terrorist
organizations, particularly with respect to transnational
organized crime, requires us to increase, at the bilateral,
subregional, regional and global levels, cooperation
in countering terrorism and protecting critical
infrastructure. Likewise, it means that we must improve
the ability of intergovernmental organizations - first
and foremost among them the United Nations - to assist
in the coordination of counter-terrorism strategies.

In that respect, we must collectively rededicate
ourselves to finalizing the comprehensive convention
on international terrorism so that we may, at long
last, be able to address those issues in the framework
of a detailed and comprehensive international legal
instrument. We need to deepen both our respective
national participation in regional initiatives aimed at
countering terror and preventing violent extremism,
and our support for multilateral efforts on the part
of the United Nations and other intergovernmental
organizations, such as the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. In that regard,
we take note of the efforts of the Working Group on
Protection of Critical Infrastructure Including Internet,
Vulnerable Targets and Tourism Security

Just as the threats posed by terrorism to all parts of
our societies, including critical infrastructure, continue
to evolve, so too must the methods with which we are
to respond to those threats. That is and must continue
to be a collective, collaborative and coordinated
effort for the dangers that we will face. In that aim,
Sir, we assure you that you can rely on the Maldives'
wholehearted support.

