Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): At the outset, please allow
me to extend my sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on the occasion of your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May.

Let me also welcome to His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to thank him for his briefing and his report (S/2013/263, annex).

As members have heard, Croatia also aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union (EU).

The stability and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is crucial for the stability of the whole
region of South-East Europe. Croatia therefore
wholeheartedly supports the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a fully functional State for the
benefit of all its citizens and strongly supports the
prospect of the country's full membership in NATO
and the European Union.

However, we note with regret that, despite some
positive developments in the rest of the region, such
as the agreement between Belgrade and Pristina and
Montenegro's progress in the Euro-Atlantic integration
processes, in Bosnia and Herzegovina progress has
stalled in almost all areas, including the EU agenda.
Since the High Representative's previous report (see S/2012/813) in November 2012, there has been no
significant progress in the strengthening ofinstitutions,
the constitutional framework or the implementation of
the necessary reforms.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a crossroads. On the
one hand there is the Dayton Agreement, and on the
other the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdie-Finci case. We believe that the democratic
equality of all citizens and the institutional equality of
the three constituent peoples are both crucial for the
viability and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
our view, political and national representation should
not result in any form of ethnic majorization, but in a
balance of individual and collective rights.

We would also like to reiterate once again Croatia's
strong support for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We sincerely hope that political dialogue and
readiness for compromise will yield concrete results
and allow for the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union, which would
mark an important step forward in the process of
European integration and would offer Bosnia and
Herzegovina an additional tool for accelerating reform
processes. We hope that political elites will manage to
reach an agreement, which will show that they put the
interests of the country and all its citizens above the
interests of their parties.

Furthermore, for Croatia, as a neighbouring country,
the progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path
towards NATO membership is of vital importance. We
therefore call on political leaders in the country to make
additional efforts on the implementation of the political
agreement reached by the six political parties regarding
the resolution of the outstanding issue of military
property, in order to enable the implementation of the
first round of the action plan for NATO membership. In
the meantime, the existing cooperation between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and NATO should be maintained and
enhanced.

The principle of the early fulfillment of
conditionality, even before the process of institutional
negotiations, might not be at all times fully applicable
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support an approach
that would take into consideration the still-existing
need for a build-up of the necessary decision-making
capacities in Bosnia-Herzegovina, taking into account
its distinct complexities.

Croatia has been, and will continue to be, ready
to provide all possible assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its Euro-Atlantic path. Part of those
efforts includes the preparation of the agreement
on Euro-Atlantic partnership between Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as talks regarding
the economic and other impacts of Croatia's EU
membership as of 1 July.

Let me conclude by saying that the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is first and foremost the responsibility
of its people. But, at the same time, the international
community needs to bear its part of responsibility with
an active and sustainable engagement, which remains
vital for the progress and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

