Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the delegation of Viet Nam, I would like to congratulate
you and your country, Indonesia, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
warmly welcome your initiative to hold a debate on
this important topic and highly appreciate your
substantive concept paper on the topic. I am confident
that, under your skilful leadership, this meeting will
arrive at a very successful conclusion.

At a time when the contemporary world faces a
wide array of interconnected, transnational and
transregional threats, the international community has
increasingly recognized the pivotal role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

My delegation wishes to recall that Chapter VIII
of the Charter, while reaffirming the principles of
subsidiarity and complementarity in the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
underlines the importance of pacific settlement of local
disputes through regional arrangements. As also noted
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the multidimensional
nature of the challenges facing the Organization calls
for a multidisciplinary approach involving multiple
actors at both the diagnostic and the treatment phases
of crises and thus opens up new venues for interaction
and for contributions by regional players to collective
security.

It should be underscored that by resolution 1631
(2005) the Council resolves to expand the involvement
of regional organizations in the work of the Council
and to encourage their proper contributions to conflict
prevention and peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations. At the same time, multifaceted cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and the means to develop such cooperation have been
substantially reflected in various resolutions and
reports adopted by the General Assembly.

On the implementation front, we are convinced
that geographic proximity and close historical and
cultural ties among their members give regional
organizations the advantage in better understanding the
root causes of regional conflicts and in finding
peaceful solutions to those problems. Recent
experiences in Asia, Africa, Latin America and the
Balkans underscore the growing importance of regional
organizations as partners of the United Nations in the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts as
well as in peacebuilding and stabilization processes.
Resources from regional players also strengthen global
action to counter the spread of weapons of mass
destruction and the illegal circulation of small arms
and light weapons, to combat the drug trade and
organized crime and to resolve other destabilizing
cross-border issues.

While it is true that not all regional organizations
work in the same manner and that regional perspectives
should be respected, Viet Nam recognizes certain areas
in which the contributions of regional organizations to
international peace and security can be further
elaborated and strengthened. Based upon their unique
experience within their own sphere of action and their
rich knowledge of local cultural conditions, regional
organizations should further concentrate on preventive
diplomacy, early warning mechanisms, institution-
building and the promotion of development and well-
being. Regional organizations should be encouraged to
assume a key role in providing information from the
field and in helping to formulate the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies of the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other organs. In the
field, for example, the expertise and resources of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Organization of American States, the League of
Arab States, the European Union, the Commonwealth
of Independent States, the African Union and the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
among others, have made commendable contributions
to peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction activities of the United Nations.

Equally important, possible modalities of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations must be further explored and expanded
on the basis of equality and mutual reinforcement,
taking into account the differing characteristics of
regional organizations in terms of membership,
resource availability and institutional capacity, as well
as the uniqueness of each conflict situation.
Regional organizations, particularly those in
Africa, should be able to count on political, financial

and logistical support from the United Nations in
actions they initiate to resolve conflicts in their
regions. On the same note, regional organizations
should maintain closer contacts with the Security
Council in order to provide the Council with timely
and comprehensive updates on their undertakings. In
that connection, Viet Nam welcomes the important
contribution towards achieving these goals made
through the Secretary-General's regular high-level
meetings with the leadership of regional organizations
and looks forward to his upcoming report offering
specific proposals on how the United Nations can
better support arrangements for further cooperation and
coordination with regional organizations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter.

Since its inception in 1967, ASEAN has
concluded many initiatives which significantly
contribute to peace, security and stability in the region.
Those include the declaration of a Zone of Peace,
Freedom and Neutrality in South-East Asia, the Treaty
of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, the
Declaration of ASEAN Concord, the Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone and the
Declaration of Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea, as well as regional actions undertaken in
cooperation with the United Nations with regard to
Timor-Leste and Myanmar.

The establishment of the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the ASEAN+3 process - ASEAN plus
China, Japan and the Republic of Korea - have helped
expand regional capacity in dealing with some
traditional and non-traditional security challenges,
including counter-terrorism and combating
transnational crime. ASEAN has also attached great
importance to fostering consultations, exchanging
experiences and best practices with other regional and
subregional organizations in Asia, Europe and Latin
America and promoting multilateral endeavours for
peace, stability and development.

My country notes with satisfaction that ASEAN
has very recently been granted observer status in the
General Assembly and has signed an ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation agreement. We believe that there
is great potential for expanding cooperation between
the United Nations and ASEAN. It is also our sincere
hope that the multifaceted relationship between the two
organizations will continue to achieve steady progress
in all areas of common interest and concern.
