Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is an honour to have you,
Mr. President, presiding over this Chamber. I would
also like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti, Mr. Bocchit
Edmond; and my brotherly neighbour, the Minister for
Legal Reforms and Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-
Leste, Mr. Fidelis Leite Magalhaes.

We thank our briefers - the Secretary-General and
our colleagues from the World Bank and the African
Development Bank - and the Peruvian presidency for
convening this important meeting.

Peacekeeping and special political missions are
among the most effective tools at the disposal of the
United Nations to promote peace and stability, but they
are not a magic wand. There is a limit to what they
can achieve. Many of today's conflicts are intractable.
The departure of such missions often takes place
when challenges to sustaining peace remain - some
with the potential to cause a relapse. Improving the
management of transitions is imperative to laying the
groundwork for lasting peace. Today's discussion is
timely as we proceed with the transitions in Darfur
and Haiti. I wish to underline four important points for
successful transitions.

First, we must change the way we perceive
transitions. Transitions must not be seen as an end
in themselves, but rather as a long-term process that
starts before and stretches beyond the closure of a
mission. No United Nations entity can single-handedly
sustain peace throughout a transition. We need early
and integrated planning, harnessing the strengths of
different United Nations entities and developing a clear
division of labour, including between the mission and
the United Nations country team. Partnership with
actors beyond the United Nations, including regional
organizations and international financial institutions,
is also key.

Secondly, we must recognize the primacy of
national ownership and leadership. Peacebuilding must
be home-grown. There is no one-size-fits-all formula.
A successful transition requires strengthening local
and national capacities to build on the mission's gains.
The inclusive participation of relevant national actors
in peacebuilding is essential. International support can
play a catalytic role, but must be provided in line with
the country's peacebuilding strategies and needs, in
full respect for its sovereignty.

Thirdly, we need adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing, especially beyond the mission's
withdrawal. More investment in peacebuilding-
related official development assistance is needed.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) should
further explore options on innovative financing for
peacebuilding, including to unlock domestic financing
resources. The outcome of the first PBC policy task
force on private sector partnership, facilitated by
Indonesia, remains valid.

We are pleased that the report of the Secretary-
General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2019/448) gave appropriate recognition to the
valuable contribution of South-South cooperation
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. South-South
cooperation enables the participation of traditional
donors and international financial institutions through
triangular arrangements. The senior leadership of the
United Nations must further explore the potential of
South-South cooperation. The Peacebuilding Support
Office and the United Nations Office for South-South
Cooperation could initiate joint projects to support
countries under the agenda of the PBC. Development,
economic growth, improved quality of life and the
eradication of poverty should also be our main focus in
order to maintain lasting peace.

Fourthly, we should strengthen the advisory role of
the PBC to support the Council's work in transitions.
The PBC has been providing observations to the
Council ahead of the mandate renewal of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. These best
practices could be replicated in other missions. Context-
specific and tailored advice from the PBC would ensure
that national priorities are factored into the Council's
mandate formulation.

We see the merit in improving the Secretary-
General's report for each mission by including
recommendations to minimize risks related to the
mission's departure and key benchmarks that must be
achieved to ensure a responsible transition. The PBC
should make the most of its convening role to facilitate
synergy and coherence in peacebuilding throughout
transitions by actively engaging with all relevant
United Nations entities and implementing actors on
the ground.

In conclusion, as one of the largest troop- and
police-contributing countries, in our humble view
the indicator of success of a peacekeeping mission
or a special political mission is when it is no longer
in situ and the country can grow peacefully with no
peacekeepers on its territory.

