Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): I shall
read out am abridged version of my statement. The full
version will be distributed afterward.

I would like to express Senegal's support to the
African members of the Security Council in trying
to find solutions for the predictable funding of the
African Union-led operations authorized through the
Council's contributions.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate care d'Ivoire on the topics chosen for
today and yesterday (see S/PV.8413), which are of great
importance for the continent and the world. We also
highly appreciate the efforts made by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in trying to find solutions to conflicts. This
is a crucial issue insofar as, when a State is threatened
in its foundations by the imminent outbreak of conflict,
or is already in the grip of conflict, only assistance
from other States and regional and international
organizations can prove to be life-saving. Moreover,
the upsurge in conflicts in recent years makes it even
more imperative to reflect on the contribution of those
entities to conflict resolution and prevention.

A 2018 report published by the United Nations
Development Programme emphasized that, after a long
period of calm, violent conflicts are now on the rise,
with real risks of spreading beyond national borders.
For example, of the 47 conflicts recorded in 2016, 18
have become international in nature. Those conflicts
lead to major population movements, and at the same
time asymmetrical threats such as terrorist attacks
have become frequent. Therefore, the involvement of
all actors is necessary - Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations - in
order to find together, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the most appropriate
responses to political and security challenges.

The responsibility for ensuring peace, security
and sustainable socioeconomic development lies first
and foremost with States - through sound political
governance, transparent democratic rules and respect
for human rights. Indeed, most conflicts have their
roots in poverty, exclusion, social inequalities, poor
governance, human rights violations, monopolization
of political power, and impunity - in summary,
inappropriate management and sharing of power and
resources. Hence it is clear the role that must fall to
leaders to take the necessary measures to ensure
inclusion and social cohesion.

As Secretary-General Anto'nio Guterres mentioned
this morning, no country, particularly in Africa, can
address the many challenges and threats to stability
alone - terrorism, violent extremism, maritime piracy
and so on. Consequently, partnerships are essential for
pooling efforts and means of action in crisis prevention
and resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
respect, it would be wise, as a matter ofpriority, to focus
on prevention in order to minimize the possible costs,
which are often more expensive than those associated
with conflict resolution and reconstruction. That gives
full meaning to the statement of the Secretary-General
that prevention is not just a priority, it is the priority.

With regard to cooperation between the United

Nations and the Africa, it is important, as recalled by
Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat, to contribute to
the implementation of the African Union's initiative of
Silencing the Guns by 2020, its Agenda 2063 and 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The relationship
with the United Nations, which has a unique experience
in this area, should also work to strengthen African
capacities in early warning and response with a more
dynamic role for the African Union's Peace and
Security Council, the Continental Early Warning
System and the Panel of the Wise, which will make
prevention the cornerstone of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

Along the same lines, we welcome the key role played
by subregional organizations. For example, ECOWAS
is one of the subregional structures most proactive in
prevention and conflict resolution, having adopted
various strategic instruments that have equipped it with
effective early-warning mechanisms that authorize the
taking of life-saving preventive action. Recent history
gives us successful examples, whether in the Gambia,
where the African Union, the United Nations and
ECOWAS worked in close collaboration to defuse a
potentially dangerous crisis in the region, or elsewhere
where other subregional organizations have acted in
other countries.

My delegation welcomes the relevance of the
Secretary-General's reform, in particular with regard
to the peace and security pillar, including peacekeeping
operations. We think that the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its Declaration of Shared Commitments
should lead to a revitalization of efforts aimed at
inclusiveness and mission performance by prioritizing
conflict-prevention mechanisms through mediation
and giving priority to early warning at the international
and regional levels. In launching that initiative, the
Secretary-General called on Member States to work
resolutely to make those operations more effective
and efficient in the service of international peace
and security by basing them on a well-articulated
political strategy with targeted, clear, realistic and
achievable mandates.

Whether in subregional or regional contexts, Senegal
will continue its work in concert with other actors, such
as the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS,
which have demonstrated their effectiveness, so as to
make prevention and mediation priorities in ensuring
lasting peace, particularly in Africa. As part of that
preventive approach, which requires in-depth reflection
for a better understanding of crises in Africa, President
Sall has also invested his efforts in establishing the
Dakar International Forum, which was recently held in
Senegal. My country stands ready to share its unique
experience in peacekeeping, including through South-
South and triangular cooperation, and in particular by
way of its dedicated training centre, established along
the lines of United Nations standards.

In conclusion, the success of our efforts requires

a renewed joint commitment to multilateralism as
an essential mechanism for preserving international
peace and security and promoting economic and social
progress. In keeping with the guidelines and principles
of its foreign policy, Senegal reaffirms its constant
commitment to work for international peace and
security, particularly in Africa.

