Mr. Mutaboba: I am pleased to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General (8/2012/554) on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). My briefing will focus on
major developments in the country since the report was
issued and on key challenges related to the restoration
of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.

As members of the Council are aware, national
and international opinion is divided over the current
transitional arrangements in Guinea-Bissau. The
country is politically split between those supporting the
Transitional Government, notably the Party for Social
Renewal (PRS), the military, the five candidates who
contested the first round of the 18 March presidential
elections, and the forum of opposition political parties,
on the one hand, and those who do not recognize the
transitional authorities, especially the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
and the anti-coup front, on the other. This split is also
visible within Guinea-Bissau's civil society and could
worsen even more if the parties do not engage in
dialogue to find a way out of the political impasse.

Furthermore, the National Assembly has been
paralysed since the fourth parliamentary session
started on 29 June, due to disagreements among
parliamentarians over the session's agenda. The
Interim Speaker, Ibraima Sori Djalo, and his PRS party
have objected to the motion tabled by the PAIGC for
the inclusion of the election of a new Speaker and a
new First Deputy Speaker on the agenda, in line with
the recommendation issued on 3 May by the heads of
State of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). This has created an impasse that
has resulted in the closure of the session. In a public
memorandum issued on 20 July, the Permanent
Commission of the PAIGC Political Bureau stated that
the Interim Speaker should allow parliamentarians to
vote for the agenda of the parliamentary session, in
accordance with the National Assembly's rules and
procedures, in order to end the deadlock in Parliament.

In an attempt to reach out to the international
community represented in Guinea-Bissau, on 12 July the
Transitional Government launched a bi-weekly forum
of the Government and international partners to discuss
issues related to the transitional process. Transitional
Prime Minister Rui Duarte de Barros, who opened
the meeting, highlighted the need for international
partners to support the Transitional Government's
efforts to implement its mandate, including the conduct
of a biometric voter registration process scheduled for
15 August to 15 September, the prosecution of those
responsible for the 2009 political assassinations, and the
convening of the long-overdue national conference. On
19 July, Transitional President Nhamadjo announced in
an interview that general elections would take place in
April 2013.

On the international scene, Guinea-Bissau's
partners remain deeply divided over the current
transitional process. From 28 to 29 June, Transitional
President Nhamadjo attended the forty-first
ordinary session of the ECOWAS heads of State and
Government in Yamoussoukro, Cote d'Ivoire. In their
final communique following the meeting, ECOWAS
leaders endorsed the transitional organs established
in Guinea-Bissau and called on the international
community to recognize and support the Transitional
Government. They also decided to suspend the general
sanctions imposed on Guinea-Bissau, and urged all
political actors and civil society organizations to work
together to achieve a truly inclusive Government in
order to ensure a consensual transition. Furthermore,
ECOWAS leaders encouraged the Transitional President
and Prime Minister to intensify their efforts aimed at
conducting a presidential election in the course of the
transitional period. Finally, they directed the ECOWAS
Commission to take all necessary measures to intensify
consultations with Guinea-Bissau's partners in order to
forge an international consensus on the transition.

Shortly thereafter, following the meeting of its
Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa on 14 July,
the African Union released a communique in which
it encouraged ECOWAS to pursue its efforts, in close
coordination with the other relevant international
actors-notablytheCommunityofPortuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), the African Union, the United
Nations and the European Union (EU) towards the
implementation of the decisions relating to the return to
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. It also welcomed
the ongoing consultations towards the early convening
of a meeting of the International Contact Group on
Guinea-Bissau.

 

On its part, on 19 July the CPLP issued a statement
following the meeting of its Council of Ministers
in Maputo, Mozambique, in which it reaffirmed its
recognition of the deposed elected authorities of
Guinea-Bissau. It also reiterated its call for the full
restoration of constitutional order and the completion
of the presidential electoral process in Guinea-Bissau.
The CPLP further called for close coordination between
the African Union, ECOWAS, the EU and the CPLP,
under the aegis of the United Nations, in establishing
a partnership for the stabilization of the country, and
pledged to work towards the holding of a high-level
meeting to develop a comprehensive and integrated
strategy aimed at the restoration of constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau.

Pursuant to an invitation from the CPLP, deposed
Interim President Raimundo Pereira represented
Guinea-Bissau at the CPLP summit of heads of State
and Government on 20 July in Maputo. The President
of the European Commission, Jose Manuel Barroso,
who also attended the summit, stated that the European
Union would not tolerate more coups in Guinea-Bissau
and that constitutional order must be respected.
Meanwhile, elements of the ECOWAS Mission in
Bissau Force have been deployed to the port and airport
and all ministries in Bissau, with the exception of the
Ministries of Defence and the Interior, as part of their
mandate to secure State institutions. The deployment of
other elements of the Force to the National Assembly,
on 5 July, was suspended after members of the PAIGC
objected, arguing that the presence of armed individuals
in Parliament was in contravention of parliamentary
rules.

The humanitarian, social and economic situation
in the country remains fragile. While most economic
activities have returned to normalcy, economic
performance has reportedly slowed down, and
indicators are being revised downwards. The lack of
support from Guinea-Bissau's traditional partners,
such as the African Development Bank, the European
Union, the World Bank, the CPLP and the International
Monetary Fund has also affected the country's
socio-economic conditions. According to the President
of Guinea-Bissau's farmers' association, the cashew
production will drop from 200,000 tons in 2011 to
approximately 100,000 this year, as a result of the
12 April coup d'etat. That is particularly disturbing
when one considers that cashew production accounts
for 90 per cent of the country's income and that the
sector employs almost 80 per cent of the labour force,
according to official sources.

The transitional authorities have reported a wave
of criminal activities in Bissau and have blamed the
lack of policing resources for the situation. There have
also been reliable reports that since, 12 April, drug
trafficking activities have increased in the country.

In accordance with resolution 2048 (2012), the
Secretary-General has continued to engage actively
with ECOWAS and other international organizations
in support of efforts to ensure the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. In Bissau,
UNIOGBIS has held regular meetings with international
partners to discuss the challenges facing Guinea-Bissau
and to determine the way forward in arriving at a
common approach to the transition. However, all efforts
aimed at harmonizing the positions of international
partners have yet to produce the desired results.

I have personally conducted consultations with
a wide range of stakeholders, including political
parties, civil society organizations, religious leaders,
trade unions, youth and women groups, as well as
business associations, on the need to engage in an
inclusive dialogue aimed at creating the conditions
for a successful transition. All the groups consulted
stressed the need for the people of Guinea-Bissau and
the country's leadership to engage in an inclusive and
frank dialogue aimed at agreeing on the key challenges
facing the country, as well as on the short-, medium-
and long-term solutions. My meetings with national
stakeholders have also addressed the need for the
people of Guinea-Bissau to tackle the root causes of the
recurring problems in the country.

In the coming weeks, UNIOGBIS will continue
to create the space for key political actors to come
together to agree on the conditions required to move the
transition forward. It is, however, critical that ECOWAS
and the CPLP, in collaboration with the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations,
overcome their prevailing differences and agree on a
common position. That will help to lay the foundations
for a more meaningful and inclusive dialogue among
national stakeholders, who are watching us. There is
room for everyone to be useful in Guinea-Bissau, and
the population needs us all now more than ever before.

Going forward, it will be important to ensure that
all political actors and civil society in Guinea-Bissau
work together to achieve a truly inclusive Government
in order to ensure a consensual transition as called
for by ECOWAS in its communique of 29 June, as a
step towards the restoration of constitutional order. In
addition, national political actors must work towards
ending the deadlock in Parliament if that institution is
to function during the transition.

The implementation of reforms in the defence,
security and justice sectors and the fight against
impunity and drug trafficking are key challenges facing
Guinea-Bissau at this critical juncture. Concrete actions
must be taken to fight impunity and ensure that those
responsible for politically motivated assassinations
and other serious crimes, such as increasing illicit
drug trafficking-related activities and breaches of
constitutional order, are at last brought to justice, which
is overdue.

As stated by the Secretary-General in the report
before the Council, the United Nations stands ready
to explore possible options to facilitate and support
the investigations and prosecution of those responsible
for the 2009 assassinations, the 1 April 2010 military
events, the incident of26 December 2011, the killings of
27 December 2011 and 18 March 2012, as well as drug
trafficking activities and breaches of constitutional
order.

I reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal to
the Security Council to send the right message to
Guinea-Bissau's leaders that they must place above
all their country and the interests of its people, whose
living conditions have continued to worsen since the
coup. Indeed, the people of Guinea-Bissau alone have
responsibility to shape the future of their country, but
equally, regional, continental and international partners
must arrive at a common position on how best to assist
the country in moving towards the full restoration of
constitutional order. Time is of the essence and we must
take further concrete steps if we want to achieve that
goal.

