Mr. Martinez-Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation thanks the Secretary-
General for his thirteenth progress report on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), which
contains his recommendations on the new mandate and
operational concept for UNOMIL based on the experience
acquired since UNOMIL's establishment by the Security
Council under resolution 866 (1993)
of 22 September 1993.

The signing of the Abuja Agreement in August this
year gave a new impetus to the Liberian peace process as
it made possible the entry into force of the cease-fire and
the installation of the Council of State. However, we
believe that there has not been full compliance with the
timetable for applying the Abuja Agreement. True, the
cease-fire in Liberia has been re-established, but it is
neither complete nor completely effective given that
sporadic confrontations between rival forces of the United
Liberation for Democracy in Liberia and the National

 

Patriotic Front continue. Nor were the complete
disengagement of the opposing factions and the dismantling
of all their checkpoints complete by the dates set out in the
timetable.

The commitment by the Liberian factions to re-
establishing peace and stability in their country must be
demonstrated by their laying down their arms and
withdrawing their combatants from all areas in which
confrontations might occur, and by their eliminating all
their checkpoints, as provided for under the Abuja
Agreement. Disarmament and demobilization are key
elements for the peace process and for national
reconstruction, and the Liberian parties must therefore abide
faithfully by the agreements they have put their names to.

My delegation does recognize, however, that the
political situation in Liberia has improved substantially. The
actions of the Council of State to ensure that the
Transitional Government is effective have all been very
positive. The formation of a Cabinet and the appointments
to the Supreme Court; the impending re-establishment of
local governmental institutions and of the judicial system
throughout the country; the joint preparations with the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
for a status-of-forces agreement; and, in general, the
recognition by the National Transitional Government that it
is up to the Transitional Government itself to ensure the
effective implementation of the Abuja Agreement, including
the disarmament and demobilization of combatants - these
are all events that we welcome with great satisfaction.

It is also encouraging that the Vice-Presidents of the
Liberian National Transition Government have indicated to
the Secretary-General's Special Representative that the
Government wishes to work closely with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and the
international community to achieve implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. This is an important decision, for
ECOWAS has played, and is still playing, an important role
in the peace process in Liberia; and the work of the Cease-
fire Monitoring Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG) is
essential as a means of helping the Government to
implement the provisions of the Cotonou Agreement and
the other two complementary agreements - those of
Akosombo and Accra.

In Liberia, ECOMOG and UNOMIL still have to carry
out very important tasks in connection with the
implementation and monitoring of the Abuja Agreement.
The success of the activities will depend on ECOMOG's
having sufficient resources to fulfil its functions. We hope
that the outcome of the Conference on Assistance to
Liberia, which was held here recently, will contribute
significantly to the peace process.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General's
recommendations, contained in paragraphs 23 and 72 of
his report, on adjusting the mandate of UNOMIL and
with those on the new concept of its operations, as
described in paragraphs 24 to 34. Accordingly, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council, which we believe will be a valuable
contribution to the peace process in Liberia. However, we
repeat that only respect for faithful compliance with the
agreements arrived at and a firm resolve on the part of
the Liberian Transition Government and the leaders of the
Liberian factions will make it possible for that country to
move along the road to peace and national reconciliation.

