Mr. Amorim (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first of all like to congratulate you, my dear friend
Foreign Minister Rafael Bielsa, on your excellent
conduct of our work and, in particular, on the initiative
to convene this public meeting on Haiti. I should also
like to highlight the exemplary cooperation between
our delegations in the Security Council, with the novel
inclusion of an Argentine diplomat in the Brazilian
delegation. This is unprecedented in the Council, and
attests to the degree of trust between our peoples and
Governments.

I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Juan Gabriel Valdes, for the wealth of detailed
information that he has provided about the situation in
the Caribbean country. I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate to Ambassador Valdes our
grateful acknowledgement of his efforts and dedication
at the forefront of the work being carried out by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) - whose military contingent Brazil has
the honour to contribute to in a significant way.

The briefing provided by Ambassador Valdes
encourages us to continue our work, and I believe his
comments about a resolute and level-headed approach
in the use of force were truly inspired and should
continue to guide our action.

The independence of Haiti - the first country in
Latin America to gain its independence - testified to
the strength and courage of the millions of Africans
who had been transplanted to the Americas as slaves.
Since then, for a number of reasons that we have
hardly begun to address, the hope embodied by Haiti
has not been fulfilled. On the contrary, that brotherly
country has occasionally been treated with arrogance,
or simply neglected. We - the United Nations, the
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and
Haitians themselves - all have a duty to contribute to
the fulfilment of that hope.

It is often said that the success of MINUSTAH is
based on three interdependent and equally important
pillars: the maintenance of law and order, the political
dialogue with a View to bringing about national
reconciliation, and the promotion of social and
economic development. I was happy to hear both the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Foreign Minister of Haiti, my friend Mr. Yvon
Simeon, refer to the need to support the three pillars
together. Those are not three distinct or sequential
steps. Simultaneous attention to all three pillars is an
indispensable prerequisite for the reconstruction of
Haiti. The most important ingredients for peace in
Haiti, as anywhere, are hope, trust and legitimacy.

Disarmament is a priority in Haiti. But at the
same time, we need to create a disarmament mindset -
and that requires political dialogue. Stability in Haiti
will not be achieved merely by means of repression.

The challenges that we are facing in Haiti are
complex. The crucial responsibility of the Government
is to create basic conditions, with the help of
MINUSTAH, to strengthen the three pillars to which I
referred. We welcome the liberation of three politicians
from the Fanmi Lavalas as a fundamental step towards
involving all Haitians in the effort of national
reconstruction. We must persevere on this path.

We encourage all political parties, all the political
forces and all civil society organizations and interest
groups in Haiti to join together in this national political
dialogue, launched by President Boniface Alexandre
with the support of the Government of Prime Minister
Latortue. The authorities, in turn, must ensure
conditions that allow everyone to participate in the
political and electoral debate, without having to fear
for their safety.

Simple gestures can be important factors for
normalizing life in Haiti. The "Match for Peace" - an
initiative by the President of Brazil and the Prime
Minister of Haiti - which took place in August
between the national soccer teams of Brazil and Haiti
demonstrated that, despite all the problems and the
seriousness of the situation in Haiti, Haitians have lost
neither hope nor the capacity to dream.

The progress achieved over the past three months
also demonstrated that the pessimistic analysis of
MINUSTAH's security capacity was groundless. We
should commend MINUSTAH for the proof that it has
provided of its ability to reduce violence while
continuing, in a level-headed and resolute manner -
as Special Representative Gabriel Valdes said - to
discharge its mandate, in accordance with resolution
1542 (2004).

As bad as other tragic situations are elsewhere -
which we are following closely, such as current events
in Asia, where Brazil, like many others, is trying to
help, and which deserve an urgent coordinated

response from the international community - we must
not allow the degree of priority given to Haiti to
diminish. If we consider infant mortality rates in Haiti,
for example, it is not an exaggeration to say that, over
the past two centuries, that brotherly country has
suffered the effects of a genuine social and economic
tsunami - and the indifference of the world has had a
great deal to do with it.

We must combine the various immediate impact
projects so as to restore the hope of the poor and
unemployed, with the assistance of Haitian institutions,
which can also facilitate the planning of a long-term
strategy. I am convinced that, working jointly with the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and its Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti will make an
important contribution to those goals. As some of those
here today know, we have long been promoting, under
Article 65 of the Charter, closer cooperation between
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council, which will make it possible to make the
provision of assistance by donors and international
institutions more transparent. That will be good for
everybody, in particular the Government of Haiti,
which will be able to make its voice heard in that joint
multilateral forum.

As has been said, we must accelerate the
disbursement of the pledges made at the donors
conference and streamline the procedures. We welcome
the release of resources by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, which has opened the
way for a restoration of the normal flow of
international financing. We cannot allow bureaucratic
obstacles and management difficulties, however
genuine, to continue to delay the flow of resources. In
the case of Haiti, to delay help is to forgo it - perhaps
forever.

Under the leadership of President Lula, Brazil has
been doing whatever it can to help. On 20 December,
as Special Representative Valdes said, we signed three
cooperation agreements in Haiti, two of which focus on
agriculture, with their own resources and working
directly with the Government of Haiti. With the World
Bank and the Haitian Government, we also signed an
agreement to provide $1 million to feed more than
35,000 schoolchildren. According to the World Bank
official who was present, that was the first time that the
Bank had signed a cooperation agreement with a
developing country to help another developing country.
We cannot do a great deal in terms of money and
resources, but we would like this to be a source of
inspiration for those with more resources.

At the recent Ouro Preto Summit of the Common
Market of the South, I signed, with Enrique Iglesias,
President of the Inter-American Development Bank, a
memorandum of understanding for the development of
technical cooperation projects, which will allow for the
use of funds already available to the Bank. With the
other Rio Group countries, we have discussed a series
of other projects that can be carried out, bilaterally,
trilaterally or with the cooperation of other
organizations.

The indiscriminate use of natural resources in
Haiti has had very serious environmental
consequences. A national reforestation campaign, with
international cooperation, must be part of any strategy
for the sustainable development of Haiti.

The fate of Haiti is inseparable from that of its
neighbours. The regional isolation of Haiti is in no
one's interest. On our part, since the beginning of the
crisis and of our participation in MINUSTAH, we have
chosen dialogue with the Caribbean Community as a
priority, and we have sent several special missions to
its member countries in order to familiarize ourselves
with their positions. Last November, I had the
opportunity and the honour of meeting with four
ministers and other high-level representatives of the
Caribbean countries during my visit to Barbados under
the coordination of Minister Billie Miller, who is with
us today. Today, I will travel to Trinidad and Tobago to
continue that dialogue with local authorities.
I wish to say that the terrible crisis that Haiti
endured in 2004 brought us together and taught us
many lessons regarding our own past and present. That
is why in Brazil the question of Haiti is not just a
political issue; it is a matter that touches the very soul
of the Brazilians.

It is up to the Haitians to re-invent their future.
The international community cannot replace them in
that task, but it would be irresponsible on our part not
to offer all the assistance we can. The peoples of
America all owe a great historical debt to Haiti. The
world must help the Haitians to recover control over
their own security, their own future and their national
dignity. I am glad to see that in the presidential
statement that we will probably adopt, this long-term
participation, this long-term effort, is reaffirmed once
again.

