Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): First of all, let me
extend to you, Sir, my very warm congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. This is an excellent manner for
Colombia to be exiting the Council.

I should like also to express my very warm
gratitude to Ambassador Wang Yingfan and the whole
Chinese team for their excellent presidency last month.

We would like to thank Mr. James Morris for his
very comprehensive and very useful briefing. We were
particularly interested in the views that he expressed
with respect to the need for Governments to stress the
importance of agriculture in their policies. I think this
is extremely important and we look forward to having
some more useful briefings and strategic papers on how
Governments can undertake agricultural policies in
order to find some measure of food security.

Mauritius, as a member of the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC), is extremely
concerned about the alarming humanitarian situation in
our region. We know that Mr. Morris and his team
visited the region two months back. They must have
witnessed the devastating effects of extreme hunger
and the spread of HIV/AIDS. In some countries,
families and children are taking very extreme measures
to survive by living on wild fruit, which is often
poisonous. The very worst period of the crisis, which is
the rainy season, is yet to come. According to recent
press releases from the United Nations Regional Inter-
Agency Coordination Support Office in Southern
Africa, the humanitarian relief operation for Southern
Africa is falling short by 400,000 metric tons of food
and even the next season will not enable farmers to
produce enough food to support the population because
of the intensification of El Nifio.

I know our colleague from the United Kingdom
has talked about the combination of drought and the
current policies undertaken by some Governments that
might have exacerbated the situation. Clearly, however,
in the Southern African region we have had a situation
of extreme drought for quite a number of months,
which is the main cause of the problem that we are
having in that region.

There is a likelihood that crop production could
drop even lower, thus necessitating food relief efforts
to stretch beyond 2003. It is alarming to note that the
number of people from SADC countries who will
continue to suffer from food crises until next year is
now estimated to be close to 15 million. My delegation
would like to hear from Mr. Morris on the strategy that
the World Food Programme (WFP) is adopting for its
operations and resource needs to face this grave
situation.

We have a second concern that is also connected

to that region - the status of the genetically modified
food products that are currently being sent to some of
the countries of SADC. We all know that donations of
food to WFP include those containing genetically
modified products and that some countries are quite
legitimately concerned about the potential risk to the
biological diversity of their maize varieties. As we all
know, they have expressed reservations on receiving
such food products. In some SADC countries, the
milling of genetically modified products, especially
whole maize kernels, is being undertaken, but not all of
them have the capacity to do so.

We understand that the United Nations agencies
involved in the humanitarian operations are planning to
establish a policy for food aid involving genetically
modified products or food derived from biotechnology.
We would like to get more information about the safety
of such products and about how much research has
been carried out to ensure that these do not have long-
term effects on the health of the population and, more
important, that they do not have an effect on the
environment where these products are likely to be used.

Finally, we would like to urge donors to increase
their pledges, especially towards the work that is being
done by the World Food Programme. We also make a
special appeal to donors of food grains to consider
sending non-genetically-modified products to countries
in need.

