Mr. de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank Angola for having organized this debate. I
also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sandra Honore, for her briefing.
Brazil reiterates its respect and unwavering support
for the consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.
I also take note of the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Regis.

(spoke in English)

Brazil welcomes the holding of two electoral
rounds last year in Haiti, which enabled the Haitian
Parliament to resume functioning on 11 January. We
also acknowledge the efforts by Haitian institutions
to take corrective measures to address irregularities
and improve the electoral process. While regretting
the postponement of the presidential run-off, we
recognize the importance of the inter-Haitian political
agreement achieved on 5 February, which avoided a
governance vacuum. We expect the political dialogue
that has been promoted by the provisional President,
Jocelerme Privert, to allow for the normalization of
the country's democratic life with the completion of
presidential elections. Brazil calls on all stakeholders
to engage constructively during the process leading
to the next round of elections. Allow me to recognize,
in that regard, the key role of mediators from the
United Nations, Organization of American States,
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Caribbean Community, who are providing the
necessary space and support for inter-Haitian dialogue.

We acknowledge that there are reasons for concern
in the area of security, including in the context of
the pending round of elections. Despite the enhanced
performance of the Haitian National Police in preventing
crime and controlling civil unrest, there was an increase
in the number of homicides and a peak in violence
in February, as reported by the Secretary-General,
including murder, attacks against police stations and
private property, armed confrontation among rival
gangs and violent demonstrations in Port-au-Prince.
We deeply regret the death of two United Nations police
officers killed by gunshot in December 2015.

We concur with the view of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that the
deterrence provided by troops continues to be essential
to reduce violent demonstrations and crime in certain
areas. Therefore, we support the continued visible
and mobile posture of the uniformed personnel of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We also encourage the Haitian National
Police to benefit from the Mission's efforts to ensure a
successful handover of responsibilities for security in
critical areas. In that context, it is worth underlining
that the number of staff of the Haitian National Police
is still short of the target set for 2016.

In a context of negative economic trends in Haiti,
the country's resilience was again put to test. The
three years of drought have resulted in crop losses
and an increase in food prices. Recent floods led to
the establishment of additional camps for internally
displaced persons and an increase in the number
of cholera cases in the country. That very difficult
scenario still requires the sustained attention of the
international community.

Brazil notes with concern a sequence of reductions
in MINUSTAH's quick-impact and community
violence-reduction projects. We believe that those
important mandated tools are crucial to promote a
culture of peace and the rule of law and, ultimately, to
consolidate stability.

In addition to our support for elections in Haiti and
our comprehensive humanitarian cooperation with the
country, Brazil is committed to maintaining its current
special immigration policy for Haitians to ensure an
appropriate entry and dignified welcome to those
migrants in our country.

We concur with the view of the Secretary-General
that the deployment of the strategic assessment
mission should be carried out after the completion
of the interrupted electoral process, ideally after the
formation of the new Government. In that regard, we
underline that the assessment mission should take
into account the concrete situation on the ground and
avoid prejudgments on its outcome. Close and effective
coordination with the Government of Haiti will remain
a decisive requirement in that context.

(spoke in French)

Despite the concern caused by the political crisis
that led to the postponement of the second round of
presidential elections, Brazil will continue to support
the solutions that, we are sure, Haitians themselves will
determine. We hope that a constructive and positive
attitude on the part of Haitian political stakeholders
will lead to the finalization of the ongoing process and
contribute to the achievement of fair and transparent
elections. We urge the Haitian leadership to continue to
work to entrentch the social compact and to strengthen
democracy in the country - a definitive transition is up
to the Haitian people. A transition from the instability
of the past to a future rooted in the origininal Haitian
dream that inspired an entire region to fight for its
independence as a way of ensuring a dignified life of
freedom for all. We will continue to support our Haitian
brethren in pursuit of that goal.

