Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): When the Syrian Arab Republic introduced,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the draft
resolution now contained in document S/2002/ 1385, we
understood that it dealt with issues that enjoyed
unanimous support - issues of concern to the
international community and the various bodies of the
United Nations, including the Security Council. The
objective of the draft resolution was to put an end to
the killing by the occupying Power, Israel, of United
Nations personnel, which escalated sharply last month.
From another angle, it aimed at compelling Israel to
stop attacking United Nations buildings or warehouses,
including that belonging to the World Food
Programme, which has a warehouse in the occupied
Palestinian land. The purpose of that warehouse is to
feed the Palestinian people - a people who are in dire
need of food. Even that warehouse was attacked in
order to deprive the Palestinian people of food.

The international community is in agreement that
the killing of international personnel and the
destruction of United Nations facilities is a red line that
no party is allowed to cross. We do not believe that
Israel should be allowed to be an exception to that rule.
We do not believe that it is permissible in any way to
give Israel the right to kill United Nations personnel
without accountability or sanction. So far it has killed
more than 14 international staff members.

The Fourth Geneva Convention sets out the
obligations of occupying Powers. We all are parties to
that Convention, which must be respected and
implemented by all, without double standard.

If the Security Council - the United Nations
body with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security - is unable to put
an end to such Israeli practices because of the
protection given Israel by one permanent member, that
will open the door wide to further flouting of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

Syria, along with the other members of the
Security Council, undertook the necessary
consultations this past week. We took all proposed
amendments, which were put forward by the majority
of members of the Security Council, back to the Group
of Arab States, in order to ensure the adoption of the
draft.

However, most regrettably, we were unable to
include the amendments proposed by one delegation,
because they fell outside the framework of the draft
resolution and were inconsistent with the desired
objective, and because they attempted to equate the
butcher and the victim. This is very strange. Indeed, the
delegation concerned voted against the draft resolution
today, thus depriving the majority of members of the
Security Council - 12 members - of their desired
goal: to maintain the unanimity of the Council.
Regrettably that was denied them. The delegation that
voted against the draft resolution also prevented the
international community from sending its message to
Israel, the occupying Power.

We must place on record the fact that this draft
resolution and the condemnation therein of the
occupying Power, Israel, in its criminal acts, is
unrelated to ongoing international efforts to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace.

Although the Security Council was unable to
adopt the draft resolution because of the negative vote
of a permanent member, Syria will persevere in
supporting the Security Council in its tireless efforts to
maintain international peace and security, ensure
respect for international law, and prevent the killing of
United Nations personnel engaged in humanitarian
missions anywhere in the world. These principles lie at
the heart of our foreign policy.

