Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, I
wish to join previous speakers in welcoming the Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and to express my delegation's
appreciation for his statement. Let me also congratulate
Mr. Atul Khare on his appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and thank him for his in-depth assessment of the
situation in that country. I assure the Special
Representative of Ghana's full support in the discharge
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and wish him great
success in his very challenging role.

I take this opportunity further to extend our
goodwill and best wishes to our South African
colleagues as they assume the role of lead country on
Timor-Leste. We look forward to working closely with
them in the interest of the people of Timor-Leste.

Ghana has always followed with keen interest the
peace and reconstruction efforts in Timor-Leste. We
welcome all the positive developments that have
occurred in the country since the destabilizing events
of April and May 2006 and commend the entire
leadership for their foresight and courage. We believe
their experience offers vital lessons to developing
countries, such as ours, that are equally engaged in the
arduous task of nation-building.
In the course of 50 years of national
independence, Ghana has suffered many setbacks and
has learned that there is no surer path to national unity

and stability than through good governance, the rule of
law and a vibrant economy. We are therefore pleased to
see highlighted in today's discussion the determined
efforts being made by the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste to reconcile their nation and redirect
their energies towards the vital tasks of consolidating
democracy and the rule of law and building a sound
economy.

By drawing on their time-honoured traditions in
peacemaking to resolve their differences, the Timorese
people have demonstrated their resilience and
resourcefulness. We encourage them to employ the
same wisdom and resolve in meeting the many difficult
challenges that lie ahead. These include, among other
challenges, tackling delicate security issues,
reintegrating the internally displaced persons, holding
national elections - which will be the first since
independence in May 2002 - and, above all,
implementing the recommendations contained in the
report of the Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry, especially those aspects relating to political
accountability and justice for the events of April and
May 2006. As has been rightly observed in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2007/50), justice is an
essential precondition for sustainable national
reconciliation.

In that connection, we remain concerned about
the fate of the 594 dismissed soldiers who are still
living on a stipend paid by the Government. It is our
hope that the Commission of Notables that is
addressing the petitions of those affected will conclude
its work in due course, so that the issue can be settled
once and for all.

On the other hand, impunity must not be
condoned and we trust that those fugitives who escaped
from Becora Prison will be accorded due process and
dealt with, as appropriate, under the law. We believe
the overriding consideration must be equal treatment of
all citizens before the law. The various mechanisms
that have been set up to handle these delicate matters
must be given the necessary support in order to
complete their tasks in a responsive and impartial
manner. In particular, they must be encouraged to take
on board the reservations expressed by opposition
groups, such as Fretilin, about the report of the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry.
Even though, in the final analysis, the primary
responsibility for their country's future lies in the
hands of the people of Timor-Leste, they deserve all
the support that the international community can
extend to them. So far, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste has distinguished itself as a
reliable partner, and we commend its leadership and
staff on the breadth and depth of their endeavours. The
activities of UNMIT reflect the interconnected nature
of the problems of security, human rights, displaced
persons, gender mainstreaming and poverty alleviation
faced by Timor-Leste. They are all as vital as the need
to ensure that next year's elections meet international
standards, not least regarding the active involvement of
women in the political process.

I wish to commend the Prime Minister for his
eloquent, frank and passionate appeal for the continued
engagement of the international community in Timor-
Leste. We share his assessment that building a nation
almost from scratch is a tall order. The international
community should not leave Timor-Leste in the lurch.
We are therefore sympathetic to the request for an
extension of UNMIT's mandate for another year. We
also support the request for the deployment of an
additional formed police unit, which, we are informed,
Portugal is ready to provide if requested, to strengthen
security for the critical electoral process.

We are confident that the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste will work with UNMIT in
laying the foundation for realizing the modern,
independent and prosperous democratic State for which
many Timorese citizens laid down their lives.

