Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me first, on behalf of the
Arab Group, over which I have the honour to preside,
to extend to you our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are confident that your expertise and thorough
knowledge of international relations will greatly
contribute to the Council's role in maintaining
international peace and security. On this occasion, I
would not fail to extend our appreciation to His
Excellency the Permanent Representative of brotherly
Tunisia for his successful presidency of the Council
last month and for the positive results that have been
achieved.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the situation and serious developments on the
Palestinian scene, particularly in light of the new
Israeli Government's continuation of its policies of
systematic economic siege, the destruction of human,
social and economic infrastructure and its practices of
terrorism and ethnic cleansing against the Palestinian
people, in addition to its rejection of cooperation with
the Mitchell fact-finding mission on aggression against
the Palestinian people, one of the most horrendous acts
of aggression in the history of humankind, particularly
with regard to human rights.

Security Council resolution 1322 (2000) and the
resolutions of the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly, as well as resolutions adopted
by human rights and other related bodies, have all
requested the Israeli Government as the occupying
power to cease immediately all practices of deliberate
killing, in particular of women and children, and to
cease its bombardment of and aggression against
unarmed Palestinian people and the strict closure of
Palestinian cities and villages. However, since Sharon's
assumption of the present Government, he has exposed
his real intentions and designs, which are more
aggressive towards the Palestinians and Arabs and
which could be considered an extension of his historic
criminal policies. One example of this was the
massacre at Sabra and Chatila in 1982, when hundreds
of unarmed women and children fell victim.

Mr. Sharon's Deputy and Foreign Minister,
Shimon Peres, committed a similar criminal act,
witnessed by the entire world, against the inhabitants
of Qana in southern Lebanon. Even United Nations
forces in Lebanon were not spared by that act of
aggression.

Today the Palestinian people face the same
systematic pattern of terror and aggression. Since
December, Israeli military forces have been
implementing a serious design of deliberate killing,
siege and closure of Palestinian villages and cities.
They are preventing access to food supplies and
medicines, in addition to other necessary humanitarian
needs, and are severing communications with all
Palestinian areas by establishing checkpoints, military
and otherwise, around Palestinian villages and cities in
order to partition the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and
to transform them into 60 cantons very similar to
collective detention centres. This is a most horrendous
act and a violation of human rights. Furthermore, they
continue to implement unprecedented policies aimed at
destroying the human, social and economic
infrastructures of the Palestinian people, coupled with
the withholding of financial entitlements to the
Palestinian Authority that are measured in millions of
dollars.

The United Arab Emirates, on behalf of the Arab
Group, expresses its strong condemnation and grave
concern regarding this serious military escalation by
Israel - aggression that has resulted in the death of
400 innocent Palestinians, particularly women and
children, in addition to the injury and crippling of
thousands of other innocent Palestinian inhabitants -
and considers the Al-Aksa intifada a reflection of
Palestinian desperation and frustration and one of the
simplest means of self-defence against the Israeli war
machine and the heavily armed settlers who possess
internationally prohibited weapons that they use
against the Palestinian people, who can only defend
themselves, their sons and their rights, by throwing
stones at their killers in the Israeli army.

We are confident and fully convinced that the
situation would not have deteriorated to such a serious
stage had the Security Council responded by adopting
the draft resolution submitted by the Non-Aligned
caucus last December calling for the formation of an
international observer force to protect the Palestinian
people from all these violations and crimes committed
by Israel against it.

The Arab Group hopes that today's Council
meeting will result in the adoption of immediate and
urgent measures that would reflect the Council's
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Such measures should include, first,
bringing the highest degree of pressure to bear on the
Israeli Government to force it to immediately cease its
wanton aggression against the Palestinian people and to
lift its siege of their cities and villages and to allow
access to humanitarian assistance - financial, relief,
and otherwise - without any further delay; secondly,
securing the adoption by the Security Council of the
draft resolution that was submitted to it last December
calling for the formation of an international observer
force to provide protection to the Palestinian people;
and thirdly, proceeding to provide urgent financial,
economic and humanitarian assistance to alleviate the
suffering of the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, the Arab Group would like once
again to reiterate its full support of and solidarity with
the Palestinian people and its National Authority in
their continued search to realize their legitimate rights
to establish their own independent State, with Al-Quds
as its capital. The Arab Group would also like to
reaffirm its determination to continue the march
towards a just and comprehensive peace based on
resolutions of the international legitimacy, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace, as well as towards the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 194
(III) on the return of Palestinian refugees to their
homeland, Palestine.

The Arab Group would also like to request the
Israeli side to strictly adhere to its commitments as
well as to political and legal undertakings stipulated in
the agreements it has concluded with the Palestinian
side, in particular those related to the removal of
settlements and to putting an end to the occupation of
all Arab and Palestinian territories that have been
occupied since 1967, including Al-Quds al-Sharif and
the Syrian Golan, and to complete its withdrawal from
the occupied Lebanese territories, and to remove all
weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear
weapons, in order to promote confidence-building
measures leading to the realization of peace, stability
and security in the region.

