The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
summit in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, on
8 February 2005 and the resumption of direct
talks between Prime Minister of Israel Mr. Ariel
Sharon and President of the Palestinian Authority
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. The Council expresses its
appreciation to President Hosni Mubarak of the
Arab Republic of Egypt for the invitation to both
parties to the summit and to King Abdullah II Bin
Al Hussein of Jordan for his participation.

"The Security Council underlines the
understandings reached by the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, in particular
that all Palestinians will stop all acts of Violence
against all Israelis everywhere and that Israel will
cease all its military activities against all
Palestinians everywhere. The Security Council
calls for the full respect by the parties of their
commitments in this regard.

"The Security Council recognizes these
understandings, along with other recent positive
developments, as primary steps towards restoring
confidence between the two parties and as a
significant opportunity to enhance a new spirit of
cooperation and to promote an atmosphere
conducive to the establishment of peace and
coexistence in the region.

"The Security Council commends the role
being played by Egypt and Jordan in facilitating a
successful resumption of dialogue between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority within the framework of the road map.
"The Security Council welcomes the
initiative of the United Kingdom Government in
convening an international meeting in London on
1 March to support Palestinian efforts to prepare
the ground for a Viable Palestinian State. The
Security Council also welcomes the upcoming
Quartet meeting at the ministerial level which
will convene in the margins of the London
meeting.

"The Council looks forward to further
engagement by the Quartet with the two parties to
ensure continued progress in the peace process
and the full implementation of the road map and
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
and 1515 (2003), towards the creation of an
independent, viable, democratic and sovereign
State of Palestine living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
establishment of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.
