Mr. Nduwimana (Burundi) (spoke in French):
I too wish to greet, on behalf of the Government of
Burundi, all the members of the Security Council, and
in particular you, Mr. President. I congratulate you
on your country's accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month.

I would like to begin my statement by recalling
that, on 13 February, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2137 (2014), by which the mandate of the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) is to come to
an end by 31 December 2014 in order to effect a transfer
of responsibilities to a United Nations country team.
The resolution calls on the Government of Burundi,
BNUB, the Peacebuilding Commission and bilateral
and multilateral partners to create a transitional
steering group to draw up a plan for international
support to Burundi after BNUB's final departure and
the establishment of the country team, and requests
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
draw up a transition plan by 15 May 2014.

The Council also urged BNUB to carry out its
mandate, the core of which is laid out in resolution 2090
(2013), and which covers the following main points:
promoting and facilitating dialogue between national
actors and supporting the mechanisms for broad-based
participation in political life, including those aimed at
ensuring a conducive, free and open environment for
the run-up to the 2015 elections; strengthening the
independence of judicial and parliamentary institutions;
supporting efforts to fight impunity, particularly
through the establishment of independent and impartial
transitional justice mechanisms; promoting and
protecting human rights; and supporting the efforts of
the Government and the international community to
focus on the socioeconomic development ofwomen and
youth and the socioeconomic reintegration of conflict-
affected populations.

In addition, resolution 2137 (2014) calls for BNUB
and its international partners to support the Government
of Burundi in making the reforms necessary for
improving the political, economic and administrative
climate, for professionalizing the defence and security
forces, and for creating an environment conducive
to implementing constitutional reforms with the
involvement of the political parties and all the relevant
stakeholders, while also establishing transitionaljustice
mechanisms such as a credible and agreed-on national
truth and reconciliation commission.

As has already been stated many times, including
in the General Assembly at the start of the work
of transitioning from the United Nations Office in
Burundi to the country team in March, the Government
of Burundi is aware that the programme I have just
mentioned constitutes the be-all and end-all of these
activities and concerns, and has continued to improve
on the results that have already been achieved in the
aforementioned areas. These are also laid out in most
of the principal strategic programme tools in Vision
Burundi 2025 and the second Strategic Framework for
Growth and the Fight against Poverty, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned.

With regard to the 2015 elections, which require
the creation of a conducive environment before, during
and after, the Government has already met part of its
obligations, as evidenced by the holding ofa workshop
that produced the electoral road map adopted in
March 2013, organized by the United Nations Office
in Burundi and the United Nations system, in close
coordination with the Government of Burundi. We
should also note that the road map is being fully
implemented, primarily through the holding of a
meeting in Kayanza and through broad consultations
open to all, in the spirit of the 2000 Arusha accords,
organized on 19 and 20 December in Kigobe' by the
Burundian Parliament, which were commended by all
the actors involved for being constructive and broadly
representative, and which culminated in the adoption of
an agreed-on electoral code which was recently enacted
by Parliament.

Concerning the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission in accordance withresolution
1606 (2005) and the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi of 28 August 2000, and as a
result of the technical work and national consultations
held in 2009, it should be noted that remarkable progress
was achieved with Parliament's enactment in April of
a law on the subject. The members of these structures
will be nominated very shortly and their nomination
will take into account the requirements of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

I cannot conclude this statement without mentioning
the third phase of the priority peacebuilding plan for
Burundi, to which the Peacebuilding Support Office
has just approved the allocation of $11.65 million.
I should add that the budget is part of the support
package provided to Burundi by the Peacebuilding
Fund, amounting to $50 million over the past few years
and covering the first two phases of peacebuilding in
my country. The areas covered in the plan are focused
on Government programmes, including those directed
towards social cohesion and political dialogue, young
people's participation in political and social life,
reconciliation initiatives, the democratic exercise
of human rights and the peaceful settlement of land
disputes. I take this opportunity to request that all
the funds pledged to the implementation of all these
programmes be speedily released so that the people
concerned can benefit from them as soon as possible.

Regarding the joint plan of transition from the United
Nations to Burundi, I wish to confirm that it reflects a
permanent arrangement between the Government and
the United Nations Office in Burundi. The content of
the document and the establishment of the transition
steering group have been carried out in accordance
with paragraph 3 of resolution 2137 (2014), whose main
goal is to provide high-level strategic direction aimed at
implementing the resolution, including by facilitating
the transition process and supporting the effective
fulfilment of the mandate of the United Nations Office
in Burundi through 31 December.

The Government would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Special Representatives of
the United Nations in Burundi, and its other bilateral
and multilateral partners involved in significant
activities in the transition process in the five priority
areas of the joint transition plan, for their willing
collaboration, and to thank them in advance for their
efforts in implementing it. It should be recalled that the
programmes covered include democracy, governance
and institution-building; human rights and transitional
justice; the rule of law, security and stability; and
economic and social development.

The Government of Burundi would again like
to thank the United Nations and its bilateral and
multilateral partners for their commitment to supporting
the Government's programme for the comprehensive
development of the Burundian people. For its part, the
Government will spare no effort in fulfilling the role
assigned to it. In taking this road, hand in hand we will
leave behind and conquer the poverty that has dogged
and bemired the people of Burundi.

