Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on an
issue that has preoccupied the Organization for over
six decades and will endure until the Palestinian people
recover their full rights, including the right to establish
their own State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Allow me also to welcome Azerbaijan, Guatemala,
Morocco, Pakistan and Togo to membership in the
Security Council.

Some weeks ago, we celebrated the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. On that
occasion, as on previous ones, it was clear that the
question of Palestine lies at the core of the crisis in the
Middle East and that the Israeli settlement policy is the
major obstacle to peace. If the peace process is now at
a stalemate, one of the most serious and principal
causes of the paralysis is Israel's insistence on
pursuing its policy of colonial annexation, to the
frustration of the Palestinian side as expressed in the
activities of the Committee on the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. Israel's refusal to implement
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, the road map, and other resolutions of
international legitimacy is a flagrant violation of the
rules of international law, which will inevitably lead to
further confrontation, tension and strife throughout the
region.

The Supreme Council of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, at its thirty-second session in December last
year, took up developments surrounding the question of
Palestine. It stressed that a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace can be achieved only through the
creation of an independent Palestinian State within the
borders of June 4 1967, with East Jerusalem as its

capital; that East Jerusalem is a red line; and that its
support for Palestine's application to United Nations
membership is legitimate, just and a further
encouragement to the peace process.

The Security Council has another historic
opportunity today to resolve the question of Palestine
through the two-State solution by accepting the
membership of the State of Palestine within the June 4
1967 borders. It is clear that the UNESCO decision to
accept Palestine as a full-fledged member was an
important milestone on the road to creating an
independent Palestinian State on Palestinian land.

I would like to reiterate the position clearly
expressed by His Majesty King of Bahrain in his
statement before the General Assembly on
22 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.15). His Majesty
called on the international community to take this
opportunity to give help our brothers, the Palestinian
people, to realize their legitimate aspirations by
recognizing their State on their own land inside the
June 4 1967 borders. He called on the international
community to put an end to the conflict by ensuring
full Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab land to
the June 4 1967 lines, including from the occupied
Syrian Golan and lands occupied in southern Lebanon,
in accordance with relevant international resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is a firm position of
Bahrain on the situation in the Middle East.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain again
appeals to the Security Council to intensify its efforts
towards a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East, based on relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council; to put an
end to the Israeli occupation that has endured since
1967; and to establish a sovereign, viable, contiguous
Palestinian State living side by side in peace with the
State of Israel.

