Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

The peace process in the Middle East is at a critical
stage. The settlements are expanding, in violation of
international law, the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip is deteriorating, and provocative statements
by extremists on all sides are proliferating. The rocket
attacks on Israel continue; tensions have been growing
on the Temple Mount and, more recently, around
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem; and
violence persists on the part of settlers, who go largely
unpunished.

Nine months of talks have not enabled an
agreement - or even a framework for negotiations on
a final status agreement - to be reached. But the talks
should nonetheless not stop. Everyone knows that only
dialogue will enable a lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict to be found. We therefore reiterate
our full support for the United States Administration's
efforts and urge both parties to remain engaged in this
process, aimed at creating a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian State,

living in peace and security side by side with Israel and
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.

With its European Union partners, Luxembourg has
consistently called for inter-Palestinian reconciliation
under the leadership of President Abbas. It is that
reconciliation alone that can improve the viability of
a future peace agreement and ensure the unity of a
Palestinian State that incorporates the West Bank and
Gaza Strip. We hope that reconciliation will enable
national elections to be held as soon as possible and
ensure Palestinian institutions' democratic legitimacy.

We welcome President Abbas's commitment to
respecting the principle of non-violence, supporting
a two-State solution and honouring all agreements
and obligations previously contracted, including the
recognition of Israel's legitimate right to exist. In that
context, we welcome the clear terms in which President
Abbas condemned the Holocaust the day before
yesterday, calling it the most heinous crime against
humanity of the modern era. The fact that President
Abbas remains fully in charge of the negotiation
process, with a mandate to negotiate in the name and on
behalf of all Palestinians, is, in our view, an assurance
that the peace negotiations can and should continue.
The considerable efforts made in the last few months
should not be in vain. Negotiations must resume in
order to put an end to the occupation implement a two-
State solution.

I now turn to the situation in Syria. We are firmly
convinced that the only solution to the Syrian conflict
is a political one. But how can we reach it when the
Syrian authorities put off the issue of a political
transition indefinitely? How can we reach it when
President Al-Assad fiercely persists in his scorched-
earth policy, with his eye on the next presidential
election - elections that Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi has
rightly termed incompatible with the Geneva process?
A leader committed to seeking a political solution
does not put the opposition's representatives on a list
of terrorists, confiscate their property or threaten and
imprison their family members in order to torture them.
A leader committed to seeking a political solution
does not persist in an all-out military, killer assault,
bombing civilians and starving its own people, its
women and children. A leader committed to seeking a
political solution does not seek re-election in a travesty
of an election when half the population are displaced
or refugees.

In order to uphold international humanitarian law
in Syria, resolution 2139 (2014), which we adopted two
months ago, made a series of very clear demands. It
asked for an immediate end to indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, such as aerial bombing and the use
of barrel bombs; for immediate humanitarian access
to areas that are difficult to reach, including across
conflict lines and borders, and by the most direct
routes; and for the removal of bureaucratic obstacles to
delivering aid. Based on the Secretary-General's first
two monthly reports on the implementation of resolution
2139 (2014), only one thing is clear - that the parties
to the conflict, particularly the Syrian authorities, have
not responded to the Security Council's demands. The
proof of that is the continuing and intensified barrel-
bomb attacks on civilians; the roughly 242,000 people
who are still under siege; the 3.5 million who still live
in areas that are difficult to access and who receive
only dribs and drabs of aid; the 5.5 million children
who are in danger of becoming a lost generation;
and the Syrian officials who are still systematically
removing medical supplies from convoys intended
for areas controlled by the opposition. That denial of
medical assistance to civilian populations is described
as arbitrary and unjustified in the Secretary-General's
most recent report, which we will discuss tomorrow in
consultations with Ms. Valerie Amos.

In resolution 2139 (2014), the Council expressed its
intention to take additional measures if the resolution
was not complied with. We will have to draw the
necessary conclusions, based on our responsibility,
our credibility and the authority of the Security
Council's binding decisions. We must also insist on
the complete elimination of Syria's chemical weapons
programme. Luxembourg is seriously concerned about
the new allegations of the use of chemical substances,
particularly in the town of Kafr Zita, near Hama, on
11 April, when explosive barrels filled with chlorine
were dropped on civilians, including many children.
These new allegations of the use of chemical agents,
if confirmed, would constitute a serious violation
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. It is therefore essential that the investigative
mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons announced today shed some light
on the allegations as soon as possible.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our firm
belief that the perpetrators of the heinous crimes
committed in Syria since March 2011 should be held
accountable for their actions. The time has finally
come to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. Justice must be rendered and those
unconscionable crimes must end.

