Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing today. I welcome
Ambassador Citaku and First Deputy Prime Minister
Dacic' back to the Security Council and I thank them
both for their statements.

It has been less than three months since the last
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (see S/PV.7660). In that time, a great deal has happened in
the world. The United Nations chose a new Secretary-
General, and the United States chose a new president.
But in truth very little has happened in Kosovo that
warrants the Council to spend yet another afternoon
discussing UNMIK. In the last 11 weeks, we have spent
more time debating Kosovo in this Chamber than we
have spent discussing North Korea and its missile tests.

As New Zealand and France have already said,
this is clearly unnecessary. As the United Kingdom's
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson saw during his visit to
Pristina and Belgrade last week, the people of Kosovo
and Serbia no longer live in the world we hear about in
this Chamber. Instead, they live in a world where their
prospects for the future matter more than the divisions
of the past. It is the future that the leaders of Serbia and
Kosovo both want, as they made clear to my Foreign
Secretary, and it is a future that the Security Council
has a responsibility to help realize.

It was in that positive, forward-looking spirit that
London played host to the United Kingdom-United
States Kosovo Investment Forum this month. Over 150
companies heard about the great potential of Kosovo,
the potential of rich natural resources, the potential of
unexplored reserves of lead, silver and chrome, and,
of course, the great potential of the dynamic, talented
young men and women of Kosovo. It is a potential
clearly seen in the Trepca mines, which could bring
economic prosperity to all of Kosovo. It is vital that
the Government continue to consult transparently on
the future of this important economic asset, and it is
this spirit of consultation and of dialogue that is so
necessary to the realization of Kosovo's potential.

This is most clearly seen in the dialogue facilitated
by the European Union (EU). I would like to welcome
the commitment to the dialogue shown by both sides.
But as the Special Representative has made clear,
implementation of those commitments has slowed,
which will only hold both countries back on their paths
to membership in the EU. Normalization of relations
is in the interests of the people of Kosovo, Serbia and
the region. So let us call on all sides to redouble their
efforts to deliver on their commitments.

But dialogue should not just be limited to meetings
in Brussels. Dialogue is also needed between Kosovo's
politicians in the Assembly. Disruption and violence
have no place in political discourse, and I call on the
opposition and the Government to work through their
disagreements in a spirit of dialogue, not confrontation.

But away from the destruction in the Assembly, the
latest UNMIK report (S/2016/901) also makes clear that
dialogue is ongoing elsewhere. I want to pay tribute to
President Thaci and welcome his efforts to reach out to
Kosovar Serbs on issues such as missing persons. I urge
all parties to engage in that spirit so that together they
can deal with issues of the past.

Dealing with the past, however, also requires
accountability. As the Secretary-General's report sets
out, a number of senior political figures involved in
corruption or war crimes have been brought to justice
in the past few months, which is a vital reaffirmation
that the rule of law applies consistently to all people
in Kosovo no matter their position, and that there will
be no impunity. This pursuit of accountability must
continue, including through the Special Court. Coming
to terms with the past is a vital part ofbuilding a future
for all in Kosovo.

I would like to close with a final reflection on
dialogue. If there is perhaps too little dialogue in
Kosovo at the moment, there is certainly too much
dialogue about Kosovo here in New York. So I call
again for a reduction in the number of these meetings
and a reduction in the number of these reports. This
would more accurately reflect the realities on the
ground in Kosovo. In that spirit, we echo calls for
increased efficiencies to be found in UNMIK and for
a further scaling down of the Mission in line with its
mandate. We also support calls for the Secretariat to
present proposals for restructuring the Mission in the
next report.

