I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Amany Qaddour, Regional Director of Syria Relief and Development, for their briefings. I also wish a warm welcome to the representatives of Syria and of Turkey. The increased hostilities and violent incidents observed over the past two weeks, particularly in north-western Syria, are a source of concern for us. The air strikes, shelling and use of explosives have resulted in several civilian casualties, including women and children. This new type of threat adds another layer to the psychological trauma of the population living in these areas. My delegation strongly condemns the recent attacks using improvised explosive devices. We call on all warring parties in the Syrian conflict and on external actors to take tangible steps towards the full cessation of hostilities, in keeping with the Secretary-General's call regarding the necessity to observe a global humanitarian ceasefire. However, the Niger would like to reiterate that the fight against terrorism is equally important as the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Whether in the Sahel or in Syria, we should not allow terrorist groups to take advantage of the current situation to resume and step up their deadly activities in the light of the huge sacrifices made by the international coalition to defeat them in Syria and Iraq. As the days pass, the humanitarian situation in Syria becomes more and more worrisome. The combination of the effects of a protracted conflict, the COVID-19 pandemic and the current economic downturn has rendered the situation even harder for the population, which had already been living in difficult conditions. The Niger commends humanitarian agencies for their daily efforts to deliver much-needed assistance to the most vulnerable population throughout Syria and for their ability to adapt to the shifting conditions on the grounds. From the briefings we just heard, the work of the humanitarian agencies in Syria is crucial more than ever as the COVID-19 pandemic is now spreading across the country. As of 27 July, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported some 650 cases in Syria, including 23 in the Idlib and Aleppo governorates. We salute the excellent work of humanitarian agencies to help put in place the minimum critical capacity for the testing and treatment of cases in health centres in those restive areas. Even though difficult to implement in such an environment, precautionary measures, such as social distancing and hygiene, will be critical to containing the spread of the virus. To conclude, the current economic downturn and the devaluation of the Syrian pound have resulted in a steep rise in the price of food, medicine and other goods. According to OCHA, the price of one month's worth of food for a family increased by 120 per cent between March and June 2020. This price volatility has exacerbated the already weak purchasing power of numerous Syrian families. We reiterate our call for a humanitarian lifting of all unilateral economic measures that might hinder the Government's ability to effectively fight the pandemic and complicates the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The devastating consequences of the collapse of the Syrian economy is affecting Syrians indiscriminately and could further burden the relief efforts, as more and more families will be turning to aid to meet their basic needs. As the humanitarian crisis deepens, there is an urgent need to take the necessary steps to guarantee access to food, essential medical supplies and medical assistance around the country, in keeping with resolution 2533 (2020).
