Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Our deepest thanks go to our
colleagues and friends Dian Djani of Indonesia, Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State, Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, undertakings and entities, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction; and Gustavo Meza-
Cuadra, Ambassador of Peru, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, for their
briefings. I also acknowledge the exemplary work done
by both in leading their respective Committees with the
commitment, neutrality and efficiency that the issues
under consideration require.

The report attests to the fact that these terrorist
groups, as well as weapons of mass destruction,
remain two of the main threats to international peace
and security. On the one hand, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates continue
to represent the main international terrorist threat,
with access to abundant resources, while, on the other,
Al-Qaida remains resilient and active in many regions,
with the aggravating factor of its intention to further
expand internationally.

As we have stressed in the past, the current
transformation of ISIL into a covert global network;
the activities of its affiliates at the regional level, as
we have seen in Iraq; and the problem presented by
the return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters,
including movements between terrorist groups as a
result of their persistent nature and the development
of policies and actions to combat them, requires that
cooperation among States be deepened in order to
strengthen global action.

We applaud the joint efforts of the Committees, and
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253
(2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, in
preventing and combating terrorism, and we encourage
them to continue working to develop regulations and
actions for that purpose, just as we urge States to
comply with Security Council resolutions and other
international norms. We also need parallel actions
such as strengthening the implementation of the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
and providing support at the national level for the work
of the financial intelligence units.

An example of the important collaboration
between these Committees was the Council's adoption
in March of resolution 2462 (2019), on combating
terrorism financing, which reaffirms Member States'
obligation to prevent and suppress the financing of
terrorist acts by strictly enforcing their laws and
ensuring appropriate criminalization of those acts,
including by establishing serious criminal offences
in their national laws and regulations. The resolution
also instructs the 1267 and 1373 Committees to hold
a joint meeting every 12 months on new threats and
trends in terrorist financing. We therefore encourage
Member States to commit to providing updated
information to the Committee and the Monitoring
Team on the listed threats, persons and entities and the
status of the implementation of sanctions measures,
which is essential for the sanctions regime to function
effectively. We also emphasize the important role played
by investigations of the underlying causes that produce
these terrorist groups, enable them to survive over
time, and help them change and adapt their activities
and financing methods.

Another example I want to point to is the joint
special meeting in March of the 1267 and 1373 counter-
terrorism Committees on the links between terrorism
and international organized crime, which was a
concrete effort to understand the changing nature of
these groups, including the very worrying causes that
create or fuel radicalization and Violent extremism
among young people, women and children. In that
regard, we also want to acknowledge the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
the areas of research, intelligence and implementation.

We want to highlight the hard work that the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts are doing to
ensure the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
through activities, technical assistance and cooperation,
and we commend the progress and commitments made
by the great majority of States with respect to its
implementation. The full and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) as the cornerstone of the
regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, as well as for preventing non-State actors,
especially terrorist groups, from accessing such
weapons and their delivery systems, is something we
consider extremely important. The Dominican Republic
and Panama recently conducted a peer review exercise
with a view to sharing experiences and good practices
for implementing the resolution, analysing aspects such
as national and international legislation, strategic trade,
safe transportation and risk management in chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive
emergencies. We urge other States to do the same. Our
peer review took place in the Dominican Republic from
26 to 29 March, and in Panama from 9 to 12 April, with
the participation ofofficials from associated institutions.
We are very grateful to the Group of Experts of the
1540 Committee, the experts from the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States, and the Government of Canada, for
their support and assistance in planning and executing
the exercise. The authorities of both nations agreed to
prepare a final report on the peer review, which will be
presented to the 1540 Committee soon.

