Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
There are no viable alternatives to multilateralism.
Defending and promoting it, as President of the
Government of Spain Mr. Senchez Perez-Castejon
declared before the General Assembly (see A/73/ PV.11), is a clear purpose of our country and our
partners in the European Union, with whose statement
we align ourselves.

A renewed collective commitment to multilateralism
and international law is needed now more than ever.
In my statement, I will address three key aspects:
first, the responsibility of States; secondly, the value
of international norms; and thirdly, the unity of the
pillars that underpin multilateralism and the vitality of
the Organization.

First, every State has an unavoidable responsibility
in facing the common challenges that determine
our agenda. Climate change, growing economic
inequality, remaining gender inequality, migratory
flows, geopolitical friction, terrorism and other forms
of violence are, among others, widely shared concerns.
No State can or should evade its obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations or to the international
community. There are no partial or unilateral solutions.
The only suitable tools for facing global challenges are
global agreements.

Secondly, respect for treaties and the values of
international norms are the basic foundations of legal
security and stable international relations. In that
regard, Spain once again reaffirms its commitment to
protection systems for the legal order, in particular for
international judicial bodies. The fight against impunity
remains paramount. The International Criminal Court is
a key institution of the international community, and its
founding treaty, the Rome Statute, is now celebrating its
twentieth anniversary. With full legitimacy, the Court
investigates, establishes responsibilities and punishes
the most atrocious crimes. We call once again for its
universality and strongly believe that, in carrying out
its duties, its full independence must be respected.

I would like to conclude by thanking the People's
Republic of China for convening this debate and
recalling a third point that we believe to be essential.
Security, prosperity and the values that underpin
human rights cannot be strengthened separately. As
the President of the Spanish Government pointed out in
the General Assembly Hall on 27 September, without
peace and security there can be no social development
or respect for human dignity.

Flagrant and mass Violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law constitute in
and of themselves a threat to international peace and
security and must therefore be taken into consideration
by the organs to which the Charter attributes that
responsibility, in particular the Security Council.
Indeed, strengthening multilateralism in the twenty-
first century requires reform of the Security Council,
with openness to consensus and a broad political
vision. Spain, together with numerous other groups of
countries, continues to advocate a more democratic,
representative and transparent Council.

Everything I have said can be condensed into
one single idea - today the international situation
requires, more than it did 73 years ago, a strong United
Nations. Its role is essential as a forum for dialogue, a
broad framework for cooperation and a decisive actor
in the global order. In that regard, we express our
full support for the reform undertaken by Secretary-
General Guterres.

