Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank Foreign Minister
Holguin Cuellar for joining us to mark this very
special occasion. It is a pleasure to have her here as
a representative of her Government, as a former
Ambassador to the United Nations and as someone who
has been so personally engaged in this peace process.

In an interview published over the weekend in the
newspaper El Tiempo, President Obama said,

"It is harder to end wars than to start them. It
requires commitment, it involves taking risks.
President Santos and his team have demonstrated
unyielding determination to achieve peace."

I know that Foreign Minister Holguin Cuellar and
Colombia's formidable Ambassador her, Ms. Maria
Emma Mejia Velez, share that determination. I know
President Obama looks forward to welcoming President
Santos Calderon, the Foreign Minister and their whole
team to Washington, D.C., next week.

Last month, a small ceremony was held in the
central Colombian town of Villavicencio. Presented
in small brown coffins, the remains of 29 people who
had been killed in the conflict were returned to their
relatives. One victim had been abducted and forced to
join the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) when he was 11 years old. His father, a 60-year-
old farmer, had spent a decade looking for his son. He
told a reporter, "it is hard to finally find him under
these conditions". That ceremony reflects the toll that
this conflict has taken on the Colombian people over
the last 50 years.

The National Centre for Historical Memory has
documented the killing of 220,000 citizens, while the
Government has registered nearly 6 million displaced
persons. Colombians have lost loved ones to bombs and
bullets, kidnappings and disappearances. They have
seen their streets and villages turned into war zones,
and they have spent too many years worrying that today
might be the day that war strikes home.

It is the prospect of finally ending that violence
that brings us here today. After nearly four years of
negotiations, the Colombian peace process has yielded
agreements on a set of extraordinarily complex issues,
including an accord on victims of the conflict, which
made the ceremony in Villavicencio possible.

Colombia is now on the precipice of a historic
achievement. Forging a lasting peace agreement will
not resolve all of Colombia's challenges, nor will it
instantly help heal the deep wounds inflicted over the
last five decades. It cannot undo what happened in
Villavicencio and so many communities like it. But if
the fighting truly ends, then a new and long-overdue
chapter can finally begin.

With today's resolution 2261 (2016), the Security
Council shows that the United Nations stands with the
Colombian people as they forge that new future. The
resolution represents the answer of the United Nations to
the joint call made by the Government of Colombia and
the FARC for United Nations engagement in helping to
end the conflict. The requested United Nations observer
mission will serve as the international component of a
tripartite mechanism that will monitor and verify the
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and be responsible
for monitoring the laying down ofweapons. The mission
will be strengthened by the participation of observers
from other countries in the region and will complement
the important work of United Nations agencies already
in Colombia, such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

With its vote today, the United States underscores
its continued partnership with Colombia. Just as we
have supported the Government since it developed the
Plan Colombia strategy, nearly 16 years ago, so have
we backed its efforts to negotiate a just and lasting
peace agreement - one that should be consistent with
Colombia's domestic and international legal obligations
and make accountability and the rule of law the bedrock
of sustainable peace. As Colombia works towards that
goal, the United States will remain at its side, ready to
assist in the hard work ahead, in the lead-up to the final
peace agreement and then in the challenging process of
implementation that will follow, where what is put in
writing must be translated into practice.

Victims and vulnerable individuals will need
access to justice, protection and dispute-resolution
services. Communities that suffered in the conflict
will need basic security and additional public services.
Former combatants will need to be reintegrated into
society. Land mines will have to be removed so that
communities can return to their lands and more rural
economic development can occur. The United States
will support critical Government initiatives such as
those aimed at expanding the rule of law and economic
opportunity in former conflict zones, bolstering civilian
law enforcement, supporting the victims of conflict and
expanding protections for human rights.

In conclusion, back in September, President Santos
Calderon travelled to Havana, where he reached an
agreement with the FARC to complete a peace deal by
March. He said at the time,

"We are adversaries, on different sides, but today
we advance in the same direction, the direction of
peace".

Today, Colombia has taken another step in that direction
of peace. The road ahead will surely have its bumps,
and much will rest on implementation. But because
of the Colombian Government's commitment - its
"unyielding determination", as President Obama put
it - to fight for peace, the destination is in sight. With
today's vote, the United Nations recognizes Colombia's
achievement and offers its collective support as the
country completes its journey.

