Mr. Nimac (Croatia): Allow me first to commend
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor Meron, and the
Chief Prosecutor, Mrs. Carla Del Ponte, for their
dedication and distinguished service, and to thank them
for their detailed reports on the activities of the
Tribunal over the past period.

As one of the leading advocates of the foundation
of the ICTY, Croatia has a strong interest in the success
of the Tribunal's mandate and in the flawless
performance of its functions. We are convinced of the
Tribunal's important role in facilitating stability and
reconciliation in South-East Europe, and therefore
Croatia urges the international community to do its
utmost to ensure that the ICTY continues to serve in
support of the Euro-Atlantic prospects of the countries
in the region.

Croatia recognizes and reaffirms the need for full
cooperation with the Tribunal, in terms of both
ensuring the success of the Tribunal's mandate and our
international obligations, and it is engaging in such
cooperation. Indeed, Croatia is cooperating fully with
the Tribunal, in accordance with its Constitutional Law
on Cooperation with the ICTY, confirming our
commitment fully to facilitate the accomplishment of
the ICTY's mission. Furthermore - and more
importantly - full cooperation with the ICTY is a
priority for the Croatian Government because of the
positive effects of the Tribunal's work on security and
reconciliation in South-East Europe and our strong
commitment to the rule of law.
In order to resolve the last remaining issue in
terms of cooperation with the ICTY, the Croatian
Government has designed and begun implementing its
action plan, which was presented to the European
Union Task Force at the end of April. Croatia is
convinced that the implementation of the Action Plan
will be conducive to an assessment of full cooperation.
We are pleased that the Chief Prosecutor has confirmed
our commitment to continuing with the vigorous
implementation of the action plan.

As regards other aspects of the report, Croatia
takes note of the efforts made by the ICTY to meet the
goals set out in Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004). In order to facilitate the exit
strategy in line with the dynamics envisaged by the
Office of the Prosecutor, Croatia has put in place the
necessary capabilities to take over those cases that, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1504 (2003), cannot be tried in The Hague.
An important measure to that effect is the designation
of four special courts for war crimes proceedings. In
order to ensure sufficient transparency, Croatia has
agreed that war crimes trials before its national courts
will be monitored by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

As a further measure of support, Croatia's State
Attorney has established a fruitful working relationship
and cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor. To
foster cross-border cooperation in war crimes trials,
Croatia has signed an agreement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia and Montenegro on
cooperation in war crimes proceedings and in
combating organized crime. We are pleased to note that
efforts to harmonize legislation relevant to war crimes
in the countries of the region are also under way.

Croatia reiterates the importance of the ICTY in
the context of post-conflict reconciliation and
stabilization in South-East Europe. We reaffirm our
determination to support the work of ICTY and to
cooperate fully so that its mandate can be successfully
completed. In that regard, the Croatian Government
would like to reassure the Council of its determination
to continue building a constructive partnership, based
on trust, with the ICTY prosecution and with the
Tribunal as a whole.

