Mr. Ipo (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's briefing on developments
in Mali in the light of the strategic priorities defined
by resolution 2480 (2019). We commend Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), on his briefing and express our
full support for his tireless efforts in implementing
the MINUSMA mandate. My delegation also thanks
Ambassador Singer Weisinger, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017),
concerning Mali, for his detailed briefing. We welcome
the Permanent Representative of Mali to the United
Nations to today's meeting and will pay close attention
to his statement.

In the light of the findings and recommendations
of the Secretary-General's report on the situation in
Mali and the work of MINUSMA (S/2019/782), my
delegation would like to make a few observations on
the political, security and humanitarian issues.

At the political level, my country welcomes the
actions of the Malian authorities, in particular the
launching, on 16 September, of the political dialogue,
which should enable all the country's leading forces to
make their voices heard on constitutional issues and
political and institutional reforms. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire calls on all stakeholders to prioritize the best
interests of the nation in the political dialogue.

National consultations must also give a prominent
place to women, the primary victims of the unspeakable
violence perpetrated by terrorist groups, so that their
aspirations can be taken into account in the quest
for lasting solutions to Mali's many challenges.
Furthermore, my country believes that the success of
the dialogue depends, above all, upon the willingness
of Malian political actors to take ownership of the
recovery process following the crisis. We also welcome
the support of MINUSMA, which is an added value
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, borne out of the Algiers
process. Cote d'Ivoire therefore hopes that the new
momentum created by the political dialogue will enable
a continuation of the slow but encouraging progress in
the areas of defence and security and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and in
establishing the northern economic development zone.

The security situation in northern and central Mali
remains a source of serious concern, as illustrated
by the recurrent attacks by terrorist groups against
civilians and the use of community violence. Cote
d'Ivoire reiterates its firm condemnation of the heinous
and indiscriminate attacks on the Malian defence and
security forces, MINUSMA, the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and international
forces. They include attacks on the Boulkessy and
Mandoro military camps, on 1 and 2 October, which
killed 25 Malian soldiers, as well as those carried out
four days later in Aguelhok and Bandiagara, which left
one dead and injured five among MINUSMA forces.
Such attacks, similar to violence against civilians,
compel the Security Council to continue strengthening
the logistical and operational capacities of the Malian
armed forces, in particularwhen collecting and analysing
information. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
MINUSMA's support in building the capacity of the
Malian armed forces, in line with the Government's
integrated security plan for the central regions and the
restoration of State authority and basic social services
in the centre of the country, which should help reduce
violence and intercommunity tensions.

The continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, due mainly to attacks by extremist armed
groups and terrorists, as well as community violence,
is also worrisome. The number of internally displaced
persons continues to increase and, regrettably, reflects
the urgency of the humanitarian situation in affected
areas. According to the most recent report of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, dated
12 September, the number increased from 84,300 to
168,500 between January and July. Approximately
3.9 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance today, as compared to 3.2 million in January,
thereby increasing the budget for the intervention
plan to $324 million. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls
for strong support from the international community
commensurate with the immense humanitarian
challenges in order to fund the intervention plan.

Today's meeting takes place in a worrisome
regional security context, marked not only by the
exacerbation of intercommunity conflicts but also the
growing terrorist threat and an increase in the number
of attacks throughout the West African subregion.
There is an increasing number of worrisome signs that
require the Council to go further and be pragmatic
in its support for the fight against terrorism in West
Africa and the Sahel. That calls for a paradigm
shift in the fight against terrorism, which must be
considered at the subregional level, while building
on the achievements of the G-5 Sahel. That is the
essence of the commitment made by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at its
Extraordinary Summit of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government on Terrorism in the ECOWAS
Region, held on 14 September in Ouagadougou, where
they pledged to pool their resources in the fight against
terrorism through a priority action plan with a fund of
$1 billion.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its ongoing
support for the Malian authorities during this difficult
phase of their country's history and encourages the
international community, first and foremost the
Security Council, to strengthen its support in order to
help restore peace and stability in Mali.

