The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
offering my warmest greetings for the new year, 2010.
I hope and trust that it will bring greater peace and
serenity, to both the public and private affairs of
peoples and nations around the world.
10-20219

I welcome the new members of the Council:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Lebanon, Nigeria and
Gabon. I wish them a fruitful and distinguished tenure
on the Council. I also wish to commend the
contributions made by Burkina F aso, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Viet Nam as
non-permanent members of the Council during the past
two years. Of course, I would like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of China on his assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month.

I welcome this opportunity to brief the Council
on the situation in Afghanistan. Following my remarks,
Special Representative Kai Eide will provide an
update.

Last year was another extremely challenging
period for Afghanistan and for international efforts to
assist the Government and its people. Difficult
elections, deteriorating security and doubts about the
current strategies of both the Government and the
international community all combined to produce
further violence and uncertainty for a country facing
immense challenges.

There can be no doubt that Afghanistan will
remain one of our main priorities in 2010. Let me focus
on two aspects in particular: first, strengthening the
role of the Afghan Government, and secondly,
coordinating international civilian efforts under the
United Nations umbrella.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme, alongside other international
organizations and bilateral representatives, played an
instrumental role in helping the Afghan authorities to
conduct last year's presidential and provincial council
elections. The electoral process was problematic, to say
the least. That should have been no surprise, given the
security conditions and institutional limitations.

Still, the elections did produce results that were
ultimately accepted. Preparations for this year's
parliamentary elections are expected to start soon.
Should the Government ask for United Nations
assistance and if the Security Council agrees, the
United Nations is ready to support the process through
technical assistance and institution-building. More
generally, we hope that the tremendous political energy
released during last year's elections will now be
directed towards forging a meaningful, realistic and
10-20219
renewed compact between the Afghan Government and
its people.

President Karzai's inaugural speech was
encouraging. The priorities that he set out reflect the
real issues facing Afghan society: security, good
governance, corruption, national unity and the need to
expand cooperation with the country's neighbours so as
to address drug trafficking and other cross-border
threats to stability. President Karzai also made an
explicit commitment to ensuring measurable
achievements, allowing for the start of a gradual
transfer of responsibilities from international actors to
Afghan institutions, particularly in the field of security.
That is especially important given that conditions
across the country have deteriorated further.

While the Violence was caused by a politically
driven insurgency, it has also been exploited by
criminal groups, drug traffickers and others. There
have been increased civilian casualties and greater
risks for UNAMA and other Afghan partners. Efforts
by the Taliban and insurgents to prevent people from
participating in the electoral process have also
destroyed social structures and traditional security
mechanisms.

This insecurity remains the single biggest
impediment to progress. Last year, about three times as
many civilian deaths were attributed to anti-
Government elements as to pro-Government forces.
Most resulted from suicide attacks and improvised
explosive devices used by anti-Government elements
or air strikes by pro-Government forces. The
vulnerability of civilians is a serious issue, with great
implications for the standing of the Government and its
partners in steering the country towards stability and
peace. I urge all parties to do their utmost to uphold
international human rights and humanitarian law.

Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. All key
players, Afghan and international, have drawn
important lessons from controversial experiences and
missed opportunities. I appeal to both the Afghan
Government and the international community to make
the best possible use of the next few months.

The international community has reaffirmed its
resolve to complete the task of erasing the terrorist
threat. The sharpened strategies demonstrate a clear
understanding that continued pursuit of the same
policies will not lead to success, but if these strategies
are to be implemented in an efficient and timely
3
manner, the new Afghan Government must fulfil its
far-reaching pledges. At the same time, the relationship
between Afghanistan and its international partners
must be re-evaluated. Well-prepared international
conferences, both inside and outside Afghanistan, can
help to ensure the sustainability of the international
community's efforts.

The forthcoming International Conference to be
held in London on 28 January offers an important
opportunity for fresh impetus, both to the international
effort and to that of the newly established Government
in Kabul, to provide greater stability and support to the
security and development needs of Afghanistan. While
external assistance can help, it is for the Afghans to
take ownership of these efforts through strong
commitment and good governance.

I appreciate the initiative taken by the leaders of
the United Kingdom, France and Germany in
convening this meeting. I also commend the important
contribution made by the group of friends of
Afghanistan. In this regard, I welcome the new
approach by United States President Obama that seeks
an optimal balance between military and civilian
efforts, and that would strengthen cooperation with the
United Nations. It is clear that there is a need for
broader and more effective civilian efforts, which will
require much better international coordination.

UNAMA is mandated to lead this coordination,
and Special Representative Kai Eide has suggested
exploring the viability of a dedicated civilian
coordination structure, in consultation with the Afghan
Government and international stakeholders. Ultimately,
however, the main obstacle is not the lack of structures
or even a shortage of resources, although both of these
play a part. Rather, the main problem is a question of
political will. Better coordination based on the strong
political willingness of donor countries and strong
local effort is key to resolving the current situation. We
need strategies that meet the requirements of building
sustainable institutions to deliver services to the
Afghan people and to develop the Afghan economy.

At a time of increasingly challenging security
conditions and a more demanding political
environment, our task is that much more difficult. But
if it is more arduous for us, imagine how it feels to the
average Afghan. Despite the uncertainties, the United
Nations remains firmly committed to supporting the
men and women of Afghanistan in finding the path of
stability and peace. We are also committed to ensuring
the safety and security of our local and international
staff in this increasingly dangerous Mission. Their
courage, dedication and, often, outright heroism are an
inspiration to us all.

At this moment, I wish to recall those who have
paid for this service with their lives. We can expect
more terror attacks, and I again ask for the Council's
full support in doing everything possible to ensure the
well-being ofthe Mission's personnel.

Let me close with a word on Special
Representative Kai Eide. His intrepid spirit, strong
determination and selfless dedication have sustained
the Mission during these past critical months. His
contribution will be remembered with gratitude both by
this Organization and the people of Afghanistan.

