Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. I wish you great
success in your stewardship of the Council and assure
you of my delegation's full support and cooperation.
I wish also to thank colleagues for their kind words
concerning India's presidency last month.

I thank Special Adviser Jamal Benomar for his
comprehensive briefing on recent developments in
Yemen, including the Secretary-General's recent visit
to Sana'a to mark the anniversary of the signing of the
agreement brokered by the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC).

Nearly a year ago, when the Security Council
adopted resolution 2014 (2011), Yemen was facing
a serious situation on the political, security and
humanitarian fronts. On the one hand, the Yemeni
people's aspirations for democratic transformation
and a stable and secure future were thwarted due
to divisions among the political class. On the other
hand, extremist and terrorist groups, some linked to
Al-Qaida, were expanding their presence in various
parts of the country, particularly in the south. Clashes
among various factions of the military had led to the
deaths of several hundred Yemenis.

By virtue of the unanimous support of the
international community, anchored in the Security
Council, the efforts of the GCC succeeded, resulting in
the signing of an agreement between the main Yemeni
parties. It is a great tribute to the Yemeni people and their
leadership that the country is making steady progress
in the implementation of the Transition Agreement. We
commend President Mansour, whose leadership of the
transition process has made an immense contribution
in turning a situation of despair into one of hope for
a stable, secure, democratic and prosperous Yemen.
We would also like to congratulate the Yemeni people
for their determination to resolve current challenges
through an inclusive, Yemeni-led political process.

India stands by the people and the Government
of Yemen in their journey towards a stable, secure,
prosperous and democratic future. Despite the
significant progress made during the past year, Yemen
continues to face multiple political, security, economic
and humanitarian challenges.

The political situation remains delicate. The
political parties and regional stakeholders have yet to
overcome differences over important issues, including
transitional justice and reconciliation. The fragility
of the situation has compounded the humanitarian
situation affecting nearly 10 million Yemenis.

Al-Qaida and affiliated militant groups continue
to carry out attacks against Government institutions
and officials. Tribal militias also continue hostilities in
the southern and northern parts of Yemen. We strongly
condemn all terrorist acts and violence in Yemen and
urge all groups to lay down their arms and join the
political process to address their grievances.

We also fully support Yemen's political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We call upon the international community to continue
its assistance to the Government of Yemen in its fight
against terrorist groups and in its efforts to stabilize the
security situation.

We have noted that the Yemeni Government has
taken several important initiatives to restructure the
armed forces, appoint a new electoral commission
and resume economic activities. The preparatory
committee for the National Dialogue Conference is
engaged in a serious and inclusive dialogue among
all stakeholders and is in the final stages of its work.
Political parties are actively engaged in dialogue to
resolve differences over the law on transitional justice
and national reconciliation. We hope that the National
Dialogue Conference will ensure the involvement of
all stakeholders, including youth and women's groups,
the Al-Houthi insurrection, the rebellion in the South,
and civil society. We also hope that those initiatives
will pave the way for holding the referendum on the
Constitution in 2013 and elections in the beginning of
2014, as envisaged in the Transition Agreement.

India has had a long and historical relationship
with Yemen. We have partnered with Yemen in
humanitarian, human resource development and various
capacity-building areas. In addition to its engagement
as part of the Friends of Yemen group, India would
be happy to look at specific proposals for cooperation
with the Government of Yemen, particularly in the
fields of training, capacity-building, entrepreneurship,
development, small and medium enterprises, education
and information technology within the bilateral
cooperation arrangements. India has also provided a
consignment of rice amounting to $2 million and will
very soon be sending another consignment of wheat
worth the same amount. In addition, India will also
be supplying medicine worth $2 million to Yemen.
India stands ready to offer concessional lines of credit
for projects and programmes considered urgent and
necessary by Yemen under the umbrella of credit lines
for the least developed countries. The Indian Ocean
Rim Association for Regional Cooperation provides
another framework for cooperation with Yemen.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the continuing
support of the international community is crucial to
Yemen as it consolidates the gains that have been made
during the past year. We would like to wish the friendly
people of Yemen continued progress, peace and
prosperity and reassure them of India's support as the
country traverses through a crucial phase in its history.

