Ms. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): First of all, I would
like to thank everybody for their statements and to say
to Mr. Rucker that the Coordinating Centre for Kosovo
and Metohija is ready to cooperate with the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

I would like to refer to the statement on behalf of
the European Union (EU) that was made by Her
Excellency Ms. Kirsti Lintonen. Serbia enthusiastically
welcomes the EU's objectives regarding Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as its contributions to a possible
future international civilian presence. We are, of
course, committed to cooperation with a new EU
mission when the time comes, including during the
preparatory phase.

Let me say that there are many things upon which
we can cooperate, first of all the issue of return.
Although the European Union statement said that there
has been progress on returns, I would like to disagree
at this time and say that there is a lot of work still to be
done on that issue.

One other thing that has been mentioned here is
the issue of progress in the rule of law. From the
Serbian point of view, there is a perception that there is
a culture of impunity in Kosovo. That is based on
realistic data. For example, from 1999 until today, 931
Serbs and other non-Albanians have been killed. For
those misdeeds, no one has been indicted or taken to
court. However, we believe that things are changing for
the better and that we will cooperate on many things,
such as regional security and returns.

I would like to say a few words on the reasons for
the non-participation of the Serbian community in local
government and in the Provisional Institutions. In
2002, local elections were held, and five municipalities
have representatives at the local level. In 2004, there
were elections for the Kosovo parliament. Serbs
boycotted those elections; only 811 people went to the
polling station and voted. Thus, we have now Serbian
representatives backed by only 0.3 per cent of the
electoral body. This electoral body consists of 140,000
Serbs and other non-Albanians in the region of Kosovo
and Metohija and 230,000 people who are outside the
administrative border and are internally displaced in
Serbia. What we would like to have as Serbs - not as
Belgrade, but as Serbs - are legal and legitimate
representatives. I think that the Council will agree with
me that the endorsement of 0.3 per cent of the electoral
body is not legitimate and legal Serbian representation.
We think - Serbs think - that this is not the end of
the story.

The key to many issues concerning Serbs in the
region is decentralization. If decentralization were in
place - I do not say implemented, but agreed upon -
then we could have elections. Elections could be
organized very quickly after that. A bottom-up process
would then occur: first, representatives in the local
communities, then in the future, decentralized
municipalities, and then representatives in the Kosovo
parliament.

