Mr. Yamazaki: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to apprise the Council on the progress
made in strengthening financial and administrative
oversight of the current Development Fund for Iraq
(DFI), on the legal issues and options to be considered
to implement successor arrangements, and on the
assessment of the Government of Iraq's progress in
preparing for the successor arrangements of the DFI, as
presented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/563) pursuant to paragraph 3 of Security
Council resolution 1905 (2005).

With regard to the activities of the DFI and the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB),
on 14 and 15 October the IAMB held its third meeting
of 2010 in Amman, Jordan, to continue its oversight
role over the use of resources of the DFI. This was its
twenty-ninth meeting since its inception in December
2003. The external audit firm KPMG briefed the IAMB
on the final 2009 audit reports.

Separately, the newly appointed external audit
firm for 2010, PricewaterhouseCoopers, briefed the
IAMB on the results of its work for the period from 1
January to 30 June 2010. At the request of the IAMB,
the scope of work for the 2010 interim audit had been
expanded to include a review of the installation of oil
metering. I note from the report of the Government of
Iraq that approximately 51 per cent of the total oil
meters targeted under the Ministry of Oil's plan had
been installed as of 30 September 2010.

In addition, PricewaterhouseCoopers identified
further steps required to fully implement the Ministry
of Oil's schedule through the end of 201 1. In particular,
PricewaterhouseCoopers recommended the
appointment of a technically qualified independent
party to verify the completeness, effectiveness and
efficiency of the implementation plan when fully
implemented, based on the best practices of the
petroleum industry. I note with concern that the
10-63109
implementation of the plan is already behind schedule,
and I encourage the Government of Iraq to make every
effort to implement the metering plan on schedule and
address the further steps recommended by
PricewaterhouseCoopers.

The Office of the Special Inspector General for
Iraq Reconstruction of the United States was invited to
the meeting in Amman, and representatives of that
Office briefed the IAMB on their recent report of
relevance to the DFI. The July 2010 audit report of the
Special Inspector General on the accounting by United
States Department of Defense for DFI funds concluded
that there were weaknesses in the Department of
Defense's financial and management controls over the
funds it received for reconstruction activities in Iraq. I
note that the Special Inspector General's findings
echoed those raised by the IAMB between 2004 and
2006. IAMB agreed on the urgent need for the
expeditious implementation of the Special Inspector
General's recommendations.

At the meeting in Amman, the representative of
the Government of Iraq briefed the IAMB on the
progress made in achieving the action plan to ensure
the timely and effective transition to a
post-Development Fund mechanism by 31 December.
In this respect, I note that, in its third quarterly report,
the Government of Iraq proposes that immunity for
Development Fund for Iraq should be extended for a
further year. In his report of 1 April 2010 (S/2010/l66),
the Secretary-General elaborated on the legal issues
relating to the privileges and immunities of the
Development Fund for Iraq. In light of this, it is for the
Council to assess the proposal of the Government of
Iraq and its implications.

With regard to the Iraq escrow account, once all
outstanding activities under the oil-for-food
programme are concluded, and taking into account
issues mentioned in the first report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1905
(2009) dated 1 April 2010, other uncommitted
remaining funds will need to be transferred from the
Iraq escrow account to the DFI.

I would like to recall that, on 12 July, in its
second briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.6356), the Government of Iraq, represented by
the head of the Committee of Financial Experts,
expressed its readiness to pay 26 outstanding letters of
credit under the oil-for-food programme. Separately, on
10-63109

8 September, the Secretariat received confirmation that
the Government of Iraq was willing to pay six
additional outstanding letters of credit under the
oil-for-food programme, resulting in a total of
32 letters of credit to be paid.

At the time of this briefing, the Secretariat has
received the requisite confirmations of arrivals relating
to most of the 32 letters of credit that the Government
of Iraq has decided to pay. Absent the receipt by the
Secretariat of the requisite confirmation of arrival
documents for the remaining letters of credit outside
the 32 I have mentioned, the Security Council has the
option to cancel those remaining letters of credit with
outstanding claims of delivery subject to the provision
by the Government of Iraq of a comprehensive
indemnity with regard to all activities of the
Organization, its representatives and agents in
connection with the oil-for-food programme since its
inception.

This completes my briefing on the Secretary-
General's report pursuant to paragraph 3 of Security
Council resolution 1905 (2009). I will be happy to
respond to any questions from members of the Council
relating to the report.

