Mr. Sinclair: Before I respond to the questions
raised by the representative of Spain and the
representative of Bulgaria, I think it is my duty, first of
all, to express my sincere gratitude to all speakers for
the very kind and generous words addressed to the
mission, to myself and to my staff for the work that we
have done. We could not have accomplished what we
accomplished there without the very positive and
encouraging support that we have consistently received
from the Security Council. And I should like to place
on record our profound appreciation for the attitude
that the Security Council has consistently maintained.

I should also like to express to the representatives
of Papua New Guinea, Australia, Fiji, New Zealand
and Japan my sincere gratitude and appreciation for
their very kind and generous words addressed to myself
and to the staff of the mission. Once again, I wish to
place on record the importance that we attach to the
generous assistance that we have received from the
Peace Monitoring Group as a collectivity as well as
from its individual Governments, as well as from those
of Japan and Papua New Guinea.

The Government of Spain asked about the
consultations currently taking place between the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
with regard to securing the smoothest possible
transition for Bougainville. There are four points I
should like to make in that connection.

At this time, Bougainville enjoys the international
presence of UNPOB, the UNDP and the Bougainville
Transition Team (BTT). At the end of December,
UNPOB will have withdrawn and it is expected that the
BTT will withdraw. That will mean a very significant
change for the people of Bougainville. Bougainville
will have been functioning with a significant
international presence for the past six years, and
suddenly, on 1 January 2004, that presence will be
withdrawn. The UNDP will remain, and, with the
withdrawal of UNPOB and the BTT, it will have a
tremendous responsibility - an even greater
responsibility than it has now.

What I have been trying to do is to get the UNDP
accustomed to that fact: it will be alone in its task of
fulfilling whatever expectations Bougainvilleans may
have of the international presence on the island. UNDP

has been there for a number of years, and, in the phase
that will begin on 1 January 2004, it will be there to
assume all the responsibilities that devolve upon it.
UNDP has the advantage of continuity, and I have been
trying to encourage it to begin to prepare for assuming
those additional responsibilities resulting from the
withdrawal of UNPOB and the BTT.

We have not forgotten that Bougainville is now
emerging from a war, a very serious crisis that
destroyed not only physical infrastructure but also
social and intellectual infrastructure. One of the first
challenges that the Bougainvilleans will be facing in
their new autonomous Government will be that of
capacity-building. I believe that UNDP, being present
after we have withdrawn, will have a very important
role to play in terms of assisting Bougainvilleans in
developing their capacities.

There was an administration in Bougainville that
was effectively destroyed, in the sense that many of the
people who were working there left the island during
the crisis and others were killed - the whole system of
administration was destroyed. A very small group of
people now working under the Administrator is
responsible for causing Bougainville to function, and
that is quite a huge challenge for the very small
resource base that the island now has. I believe that,
after the end of this year, UNDP will be in a unique
position where it can help, through its technical and
other expertise, in developing and strengthening
Bougainville's technical capacity. There is a need to
rebuild capacity in Bougainville.

Moreover, one of the first priorities of
Bougainvilleans right now concerns the question of law
and justice: the putting in place of a police force. The
police force and the justice system that existed in
Bougainville have been destroyed. And it is not simply
a question of restoring the service that used to exist,
because Bougainville's police force had become so
much a part of the crisis - so much a part of the
Bougainvillean experience - that Bougainvilleans
would like something different now. They do not feel
that the Bougainvillean force that existed before has
any credibility on the island now, and they have their
own conception of what the new police force should
be. It must be different from what it was before; it must
be a force that is not as easily identifiable with the
national Government as the one that existed before the
crisis. They also have their own conception that it must
be a law-and-justice system - a police force system -
that also makes use of Bougainvillean traditions and
the Bougainvillean cultural experience.

It is one thing for them to conceptualize that, but
it is something else to put it into practice. That will
require many financial and technical resources, and I
believe that UNDP is well placed to provide the
resources that Bougainvilleans will need. It is true that,
where the question of putting a law-and-order system
in place is concerned, the Bougainvilleans are
receiving a great deal of assistance from Australia and
New Zealand. But it is clear to us that, after the end of
the year, when UNPOB and the BTT withdraw, there
will be room for a great coordinating effort on the part
of UNDP in terms of channelling and bringing together
offers of development assistance by countries of the
region, including Australia and New Zealand.

There is no shortage of offers to assist
Bougainville. Indeed, we have just heard a statement
by the representative of Japan indicating the readiness
of his Government to make assistance available to it.

I think that we have to avoid a situation in which
we have a number of offers going in parallel in
Bougainville. I believe that it is important that there be
good coordination among all of these aid offers, and
that the agency that is best placed to play this
coordinating role is the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). What we have been trying to do
is to get the UNDP to think in terms of preparing itself
to play such a coordinating role, so as to ensure that, as
one era ends, a new era begins, and that the transition
is as smooth as possible, without any gaps or holes that
would prejudice the progress of the autonomous
Government from the start.

During the past two years, we have also received
offers of assistance from the United Kingdom and New
Zealand intended specifically for community
development in Bougainville. Unfortunately, that
money is still lying unused, I say unfortunately because
there is a great need for community development
projects. I am trying to encourage the UNDP to put
some criteria in place, so that such projects can begin
to function immediately.

