Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Cameroon would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, at the request of the
League of Arab States.
The prevailing situation in that part of the world
is a subject of very serious concern, as it is fraught
with peril for peace and security and with dangers for
mankind and human life. The gruesome statistics that
we have just heard are particularly indicative of
assassinations, butchery and destruction. Since
September 2000, 977 Palestinians and 279 Israelis have
been killed. How long will it continue? The peace
process is quite obviously imperilled, as everything
seems to be converging to stoke hate and violence. All
of this gives a particularly historic and tragic tone and
importance to our debate today.

We would like to welcome the presence of Israel
and Palestine among us, whose peoples are at this very
moment looking to the Security Council with both
disquiet and, above all, hope. The peoples of the
United Nations who live in the Middle East are
expecting the Council to urge the leaders of these two
countries to put an end to intolerance and violence and
to get the peace process back on track. These peoples
are waiting for the Council to hasten reconciliation
between people and understanding between nations.
They are waiting for a time when the clash of arms will
be replaced by the song of peace.

S/PV.4478

 

Peace in the Middle East assumes the creation of
a Palestinian State. Peace in the Middle East assumes
recognition of Israel and its right to live within secure
and recognized borders. Peace in the Middle East
therefore involves the strict implementation by all the
parties of Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
which resolution 338 (1973) refers to, as well as the
implementation of the fundamental principle of land
for peace. Those are the necessary prerequisites for a
just and lasting peace, namely, a peace in whose
establishment all parties have been involved; a peace
that stems from dialogue and negotiation free from any
violence. Such a peace cannot be imposed by force of
arms. Peace imposed by force of arms is always
doomed to failure. That has always been the conviction
of Cameroon, and the position defended by my
country.

It is therefore up to the Security Council to
encourage both the Palestinians and the Israelis to
resume the path of negotiation and dialogue in order to
promote a just peace based on various new and old
initiatives, including the recent initiative put forth by
Saudi Arabia.

It is up to us - as we have always said and now
reiterate - to create, on their behalf and within their
hearts, a genuine culture of peace around those two
brotherly people who are condemned to live together,
as is often forgotten. It is up to us to help those two
brotherly peoples - who have waged war against each
other for more than 50 years now - to make peace.

