I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. As others have done, I would like to start by reflecting on the tragic passing away of Saeb Erekat. I echo the words of my Prime Minister and my Foreign Secretary in offering our condolences to Mr. Erekat's family, President Abbas and the Palestinian people. Mr. Erekat dedicated his life to dialogue, Palestinian rights and advancing the cause of peace. He will be sorely missed. It is with Mr. Erekat's legacy in mind that we must renew our commitment to acting through dialogue, building trust and cooperation and avoiding the unilateral and inflammatory steps that undermine the cause of peace. As we have made clear repeatedly in the Security Council, the United Kingdom opposes annexation and welcomes its suspension. Any other unilateral action that jeopardizes the physical viability of a future Palestinian State is also unacceptable. The United Kingdom condemns the Government of Israel's publication of tenders for construction in the East Jerusalem settlement of Givat Hamatos, an extremely sensitive area of the West Bank. Settlements are illegal under international law and remain an obstacle to peace and a threat to the two-State solution. The United Kingdom also expresses its serious concern following the demolition of Humsa Al-Baqai'a by the Israeli Authorities on 3 November. That act caused the displacement of vulnerable Palestinians, including 41 children, as well as unnecessary suffering. The year 2020 has seen the highest levels of demolitions of Palestinian homes and structures since 2016. The United Kingdom calls on the Government of Israel to cease this policy and provide Palestinians with a clear, transparent route to construction in Area C of the West Bank. In all but the most exceptional of circumstances, demolitions are a violation of international humanitarian law. The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by the situation in Gaza, particularly at this time of a global pandemic. We continue to urge the parties to prioritize progress towards reaching a durable solution for Gaza and to take the necessary practical steps to ensure Gaza's reconstruction and economic recovery. We encourage actors to put forward long-term, sustainable proposals to resolve the threat posed to Israel's security by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other militants in Gaza. We call upon Hamas and other terrorist groups to permanently end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel. We note the Commissioner-General's urgent call for additional funding for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) this month, without which schools will close from the beginning of December. We call in particular on States that have cut their funding significantly in recent years to support UNRWA now. I note that this year the United Kingdom has given over $65 million, which is commensurate with previous years. We are sympathetic to those who argue that UNRWA must do more to reach a secure and sustainable financial footing, but that cannot be achieved by | December, and money is needed by then to avoid unnecessarily adding to the suffering of refugees. This week we saw the historic first ministerial visit of the Kingdom of Bahrain to Israel. Normalization agreements show that the Arab world and Israel can pursue a positive path, away from hostility and towards a more peaceful, prosperous region. With dialogue in mind, my Government therefore welcomes reports that the Palestinian Authority and the Government of Israel will return to cooperation and abide by signed agreements. Full cooperation across financial, security and health matters puts the needs and security of Israelis and Palestinians first. That is an example of the dialogue and compromise that we have called for, which will be required to make meaningful progress towards a two-State solution. Both parties should now seize that positive momentum and show commitment to their bilateral agreements through their actions on the ground. Seventy-three years ago this month, the United Nations decided on the partition of Palestine. Piece by painful piece over many years, progress was made towards an agreed partition - a two-State solution. As the region takes strides towards dialogue, it is time, too, for the parties to the Israel-Palestine conflict to stop dismantling peace and start building it again.
