Ms. Lflj (Denmark): Allow me to formally
congratulate Argentina on becoming a member of the
Security Council and on assuming the presidency of
the Council. We are honoured to have you, Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina, chairing the
meeting today, which is a clear sign of the importance
your country attaches to finding a peaceful and durable
solution to the situation in Haiti. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Valdes for his comprehensive briefing.
Denmark fully supports his work as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). My Government urges all parties
involved - at the national, regional and international
levels - to support the work of the United Nations in
Haiti.

Denmark also fully associates itself with the
statement that the Ambassador of Luxembourg will
deliver shortly on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Mr. President, a secure environment is a
precondition for a viable political process and for long-
term development in Haiti. Recurring incidents of
violence remind us of the urgent need to stabilize the
still-volatile security situation. In that context, we urge
all Haitians to refrain from using any kind of violence
to achieve their political goals.

Denmark welcomes the recent deployment of
additional military and civilian police units to
MINUSTAH. We would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the many troop
contributors. We are encouraged by the reported
improvement of the security situation at the end of
2004, and would like to see further action by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police to
stabilize the situation in all parts of the country. In that
connection, my Government would like to underscore
the importance of demonstrating respect for all human
rights.

The ongoing high level of violence underlines the
urgent need for the effective removal of all illegal
weapons from the streets of Haiti. With the assistance
of MINUSTAH, the Transitional Government should
initiate a comprehensive and community-based
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process. In that respect, Denmark urges the
Government to establish without delay a national
commission on DDR.

A national reconciliation process is very much
needed. Although the United Nations and regional
partners can play an important supportive role in such a
process, the initiative must come from within Haitian
society itself, and it must be based on the broadest
possible national political dialogue.

The Transitional Government should take the lead
in the national reconciliation process. We therefore call
on the Transitional Government to continue to explore
avenues for the creation of an all-inclusive political
process that encourages all segments of Haitian society
to participate. That process should be initiated before
the upcoming elections later this year.

Only 10 months from now, local, parliamentary
and presidential elections will take place in Haiti. We

welcome the agreement signed recently between
MINUSTAH, the Transitional Government, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Provisional
Electoral Council on the organization of the elections.
Denmark urges all parties involved to continue to make
all the necessary preparations to ensure truly free and
fair elections that will ultimately lead to the handing
over of power to an elected Government.

Poverty, extreme inequality and public corruption
have fuelled authoritarian rule and violence for
decades. The Haitian people longs for sustained and
equitable economic and social development. There is a
clear need for both long-term development
programmes and quick-impact projects. Substantial
funds were pledged at the international donors'
conference on Haiti last summer, where the EU
emerged as the largest donor. Regrettably, only little of
the aid pledged at the conference has been disbursed so
far. My Government urges financial institutions,
international organizations and donor countries to
accelerate the disbursement of pledged funds. In that
regard, we welcome the recent release of resources by
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

Part of the problem stems from administrative
bottlenecks in Haiti itself. The lack of administrative
capacity and resources within the Transitional
Government and State institutions is hindering the
proper preparation and implementation of development
projects. Donors should therefore pay special attention
to the urgent need for capacity building within the
Transitional Government, as a prerequisite for effective
development cooperation.

For the Haitian people, last year was supposed to
be a year of celebration marking the bicentenary of its
victory over slavery and colonization. Unfortunately,
that did not happen. Instead Haitians found themselves
in the midst of the kind of violent political unrest that
has dominated Haiti for too long. It is vital that, this
time, the international community delivers on its
promises and helps the Haitian people to establish the
foundation for a secure environment and economic and
social development based on democratic principles, the
rule of law, good governance and respect for all human
rights. The Haitian people needs, deserves and expects
that to happen.

