Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I appreciate the presence of Ms. Bensouda
here today, as well as the introduction of her report.

We must recall that, for the second time in its
history, on 26 February 2011, the Security Council
decided to refer a situation - specifically the situation
in Libya since 15 February 2011 - to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) (see S/PV.6491).
Referrals by the Council to the ICC constitute an
acknowledgement of the importance attached by the
Council to justice, accountability and the fight against
impunity. We all know that international peace and
security are based on respect for the rule of law. By
referring this case - and let us not forget that we did so
unanimously - the Council rose to the challenge of the
circumstances in the fight against impunity and stood
in favour of justice. Nevertheless, a single referral is
not enough. Libya needs the Council's support through
consistent and appropriate follow-up.

I have three issues to address; first, the situation
in Libya; secondly, the state of cooperation between
Libya and the Court; and, thirdly, I will make some
remarks and pose a question regarding a proposal made
by Ms. Bensouda.

With regard to the situation in Libya, we cannot
help but express our deep concern at the information we
have on the situation. The ninth report of the Prosecutor,
the report of the Secretary-General dated 26 February
(S/2015/144) and the Human Rights Council's resolution
of 27 March (A/HRC/RES/28/30) all sadly attest to the
deteriorating situation in Libya, where serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
continue to take place. Spain unequivocally condemns
attacks perpetrated by all parties to the conflict
against the population and civilian targets, including
arbitrary detentions, torture, extrajudicial executions,
assassinations, abductions, the denial of due process,
and the persecution of immigrants, women activists,
journalists, human rights defenders, attorneys, judges
and prosecutors. We condemn just as forcefully the
barbaric acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, or Daesh, and the groups that have sworn
allegiance to them, acts that, as the Prosecutor has
informed us, may constitute crimes under the Court's
jurisdiction. We should also make clear how worried
we are about the extremely high numbers of displaced
persons, such as the residents of Tawergha.

Spain believes strongly that there can be no military
solution to the crisis in Libya, and only a political
settlement between the parties can ensure the stability
the country needs. We reiterate our call to the parties
to refrain from violence and to participate in a spirit
of reconciliation in dialogue under the auspices of the
United Nations, with a view to forming a Government of
national unity. Once again, we support those efforts and
those of Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to agree on a Government of
national unity capable of ensuring respect for the rule
of law, justice, freedom and the rights of all citizens.
Whatever happens, all the parties should understand
that they will be held accountable for their actions.

Concerning the relations between Libya and the
International Criminal Court, we were pleased to hear
about the constructive dialogue being held between the
Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities, including as it
relates to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding. We welcome the update on the cases
being brought against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. With regard to Al-Qadhafi,
we note the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I, which
found Libya non-compliant with the Court's request
to surrender Al-Qadhafi and return seized documents
to his defence counsel. In our view, Libya must fulfil
its obligations to the ICC and the Council, whose
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 2174 (2014) must be abided
by. Full cooperation with the Court is essential. The
Government of Libya must understand that there can
be no end to the violence if there is no end to impunity.
We support the Court's efforts to begin consultations
immediately concerning the Government of Libya's
failure to cooperate.
With regard to the second case, that of Abdullah
Al-Senussi, Spain understands that a decision on
the inadmissibility of the case amounts to a vote of
confidence in the Libyan justice system. We view that
positively and hope it translates into the holding of a
fair trial with all the guarantees of due process, and we
await with interest any information from the Prosecutor
in that regard. Libya has frequently reiterated its
commitment to bringing justice to the victims, and for
that the Government should have the support of the
international community. In that regard, we believe
we should consider establishing a contact group on
justice capable of giving practical help to the Libyan
authorities and the judicial system. In other words, we
support Prosecutor Bensouda's proposal to create such
a contact group, and I would like to know what her
views are on more specific details of its composition
and nature, and above all the kind of assistance it would
provide to the Libyan authorities.

In conclusion, I reiterate our gratitude for
Prosecutor Bensouda's work and for the tireless efforts
of the International Criminal Court to deal with these
enormously difficult cases, prioritize justice and put an
end to impunity.

