Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The comprehensive
presentation made earlier in our meeting by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno, as well as the answers he
provided to questions raised by previous speakers,
leave my delegation with little to add. I therefore wish
to use this opportunity to pay tribute to the men and
women of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Legwaila,
for their signal accomplishments to date.

The decision to establish the Temporary Security
Zone, which marks the formal separation of the forces
of Eritrea and Ethiopia, recognizes the steps taken by
both Governments towards the fulfilment of their
obligations under the Algiers Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities. It also allows for the immediate
restoration of civil administration and for the return of
internally displaced persons in the areas of the
Temporary Security Zone.

My delegation has noted other progress made
since our last briefing, including the signing of the
status-of-forces agreement, as well as those areas on
which action is still outstanding, including on the
restrictions on the movement of UNMEE as long as the
issue of direct flights remains unresolved, and on the
activation of the Boundary Commission. We have all
recognized that these are crucial to the fulfilment of
UNMEE's mandate, and we join those who have called
for early resolution of these issues.

We have heard from Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno that some 300,000 internally displaced
persons can be expected to return to the Temporary
Security Zone prior to the rainy season, that is, within
the next six to eight weeks. I repeat this in order to
emphasize that this is a massive humanitarian
undertaking, the success of which requires close
collaboration between the humanitarian agencies,
UNMEE and both Governments, the urgent completion
of the surveys of the Temporary Security Zone to
determine the extent of mine contamination and
unexploded ordnance, the marking off of non-go areas
and, most importantly, the sensitizing of the returning
population, particularly children.
The need for the Boundary Commission to begin
its work has been emphasized by previous speakers. I
would only wish to draw attention to the fact that both
Governments agreed in advance to accept the verdict of
the Commission. It is therefore imperative that the
problems related to the establishment of the
Commission be addressed without delay.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
establishment of the Temporary Security Zone will
create the desired climate of calm and confidence, and
conditions conducive to the comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the conflict, which we all hope to
achieve.

