At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. We noted with concern the latest developments on the ground, especially the humanitarian situation in Gaza and the illegal settlement enlargement. Given these circumstances, allow me to emphasize the following points. First, we commend the effective coordination between Israel and Palestine in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This very positive gesture proves that parties to a conflict can always cooperate if they share the goal of saving people's lives. However, we remain deeply concerned over the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. A possible outbreak of COVID-19 could bring overwhelming devastation to the already poor health-care conditions and pose a deadly threat to 2 million people there. We call for a full lifting of the Israeli blockade in Gaza to facilitate the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We once again express our appreciation to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its tireless efforts in the occupied Palestinian territory. Last week Viet Nam pledged a new budget donation to UNRWA, and we wish to see increased support on the part of the international community for the Agency. Secondly, we share other Council members' concerns about continued settlement activities and the annexation plan for the occupied Palestinian territory. Just two weeks ago, Israel's Defence Minister approved the construction of some 7,000 new housing units in the settlement of Efrat, in the West Bank. Unilateral actions like those are illegal under international law and constitute the biggest obstacle to the peace process. We call on Israel to immediately stop such attempts and to fulfil its obligations under resolution 2334 (2016) and other relevant resolutions. Thirdly, we are deeply concerned that hostilities are almost an everyday occurrence in the occupied Palestinian territory. Last week there were reports of violent incidents in the West Bank, resulting in the deaths of a 15-year-old Palestinian and an Israeli soldier, and injuring dozens of Palestinian civilians. We urge the parties concerned to refrain from acts of provocation or violence. The peace process can be revived only on the basis of efforts by the parties to de-escalate tensions. Fourthly, Viet Nam fully supports the mediation efforts of the Secretary- General and his Special Coordinator. We welcome all other initiatives and efforts seeking a just, comprehensive and lasting solution that ensures the legitimate interests of both Palestinians and Israelis. We urge the Middle East Quartet to play its role in encouraging the long-awaited resumption of peace talks between Israel and Palestine on the basis of internationally agreed parameters, including the relevant United Nations resolutions. Finally, we firmly believe that the only viable solution to the conflict is a two- State solution that establishes an independent and sovereign Palestinian State along the pre-1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
