Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/50)
and both Patricia O'Brien and Yuri Fedotov for their
comprehensive briefing this morning. We are grateful
for the work of the United Nations and its agencies on
counter-piracy programmes, particularly the efforts
being undertaken by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) with States in the
region and in Somalia itself.

The United Kingdom remains strongly committed
to the fight against piracy. We believe that it is vital to
break the piracy business model. We need a
comprehensive approach that tackles piracy directly
and its root causes on land. Piracy will be one of the
main focuses of discussion at the London Conference
on Somalia, which my Prime Minister will host
tomorrow.

Despite the significant reduction in the number of
successful attacks in the past year, the threat of piracy
remains serious. We strongly support efforts to bolster
prosecution and prison capacity in regional States and
in Somalia. Several States already play a vital role in
bringing suspected pirates to justice, supported by the
international community.

The report highlights serious capacity constraints
in Somalia. Prosecution by regional States has
therefore been instrumental in efforts to counter piracy.
We believe that that continues to be the most effective
way to prosecute pirates over the short term. We
support, in principle, the report's implementation
proposals to increase capacity through specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia, but continuing our work
to build the capacity of regional States also remains
essential.

The report reaffirms the preference of regional
States that we should build capacity in a way that does
not prevent facilities and expertise being used to
prosecute in other areas of the law. We agree that that
would help create a more sustainable solution to the
piracy problem.

A long-term solution that would enable Somali
pirates to be prosecuted and imprisoned in Somalia is
necessary. The report notes the preference of the
Somali authorities for new courts to be established
within Somalia rather than extraterritorially. That
approach is in line with the existing work of UNODC
and UNDP to build capacity in Puntland and
Somaliland. We fully support that approach.

The report rightly highlights the problem of
limited prison capacity. In that regard, we welcome
recent efforts to ensure that convicted pirates serve out
their sentences in Somalia, in particular the
commitments made by Puntland and Somaliland for
post-trial transfer. We hope that agreement on the legal
and practical framework for transferring pirates to
United Nations-constructed prisons in Somalia is
reached quickly. We are grateful for the commitment of
the Seychelles to transfer convicted pirates to
Somaliland.

We strongly support the work of the UNODC
counter-piracy programme, including on the
investigation and trial process, and its work to provide
additional prison capacity. We call on all partners in
the international community to work together to create
a sustainable model for regional prosecution. We will
continue to provide bilateral assistance on prosecution
and prison capacity, as requested by regional States.

The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia is undertaking important work to explore the
legal and evidential thresholds for prosecution, with
the aim of increasing the number of successful
prosecutions of suspected pirates. It is important that
we coordinate that work as we move forward.

The threat of piracy, the effects of the famine in
Somalia and terrorism are all symptoms of one central
problem - the breakdown of the Somali State.
Tackling piracy and its causes cannot be separated
from that. We need to tackle the factors on land that
feed piracy at sea, including deterrence, security, the
rule of law and development. It is crucial that the
international community mobilize in an integrated way.
The United Kingdom provided over $15 million in
bilateral support for that agenda last year. Today, we
have announced a further $30 million for the stability
of the Somali regions. We urge others to respond
quickly and generously.

