Some States members of the Security Council continue to seek to use this platform as a tool for their foreign policy and for the defamation and usurping of my country's Government under the pretext of pretentious care and lethal affection. These have been manifested in the large number of formal and informal, small and expansive, rhetorical and consultative meetings on the situation in my country on the political and humanitarian, as well as some chemical aspects. A few days ago, at the initiative of France, the Permanent Representatives of the five permanent members of the Security Council met with the Under- Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs to discuss minor aspects related to the humanitarian situation in my country. Today, as on previous occasions, the Council is holding two meetings on Syria. Naturally, we would have had no objection to that had we seen a reasonable degree of professionalism, objectivity and humanitarian concern in the reports and briefings of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and in the positions of the three permanent Western States on the Council and their allies. Recently, at the United Nations and beyond, we have witnessed a positive movement, on the one hand, and a feverish rush and competition, on the other, to formulate a coordinated collective response to the threat posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The efforts exerted by the international community to address this pandemic have encountered the same dilemma as the work of the United Nations in the field of humanitarian response in my country and other States, namely, politicization and the pursuit of political viewpoints and objectives by some at the expense of the principles of international law and humanitarianism. Whereas the Secretary-General and senior staff of the Organization - including the Special Envoy to my country, the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, the World Health Organization and more than 40 United Nations entities and international organizations - have launched calls for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures against the approximately 2 billion people of the countries affected by these illegitimate and illegal measures so as to enable them to respond to and treat the COVID-19 pandemic, the United States and its European Union allies have sought to scrub any proposals or initiatives and the nine relevant draft resolutions of any language demanding that existing imbalances be corrected and unilateral coercive measures eliminated. Such selfish and exclusionary conduct undermines any humanitarian concerns their respective Governments have claimed. My country, Syria, in cooperation with friendly countries affected by unilateral coercive measures, has sent numerous letters and appeals to the Secretary-General, the Presidents of the Security Council, the President of the General Assembly and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to demand the lifting of these inhumane measures, which constitute economic terrorism and a stain on those who impose them. Moreover, our demands have been accompanied by petitions signed by millions around the world to reject these measures. To date, we have not seen any sincere response from the Governments that have imposed these measures, and the United States Administration has only issued what it called a fact sheet, which contains only allegations having nothing to do with the truth and aimed only at covering up flagrant violations of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights instruments. What humanitarian situation are we talking about today? Would putting an end to the suffering caused by the coercive measures imposed on 2 billion people not be a humanitarian matter? Is lifting the coercive measures imposed against 24 million Syrians less important than the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, which was made a vital issue by some members of this Council and the hostile Gaziantep OCHA Office? Why have neither France, Germany nor Belgium taken the initiative to call for a Security Council meeting to discuss the impact of coercive measures on Syrians? Why have they not requested that the Secretary-General issue an objective and professional report to the Security Council within 30 days on the impacts of the coercive measures on Syrian State institutions and the daily life of Syrians? It seems that the humanitarian pen held by Germany and Belgium writes only what some of their NATO allies force them to, and that the OCHA pen, which has written 66 reports and hundreds of briefings so far, does not dare to write what angers its operators. My delegation reiterates the demand to immediately and unconditionally put an end to the unilateral coercive measures that are used by some Member States as a weapon in their sinful war against my country. These measures, among many others, are depriving Syrians of their basic livelihood requirements and preventing medical and health-care institutions from obtaining testing, diagnosis, prevention and treatment kits for this pandemic, as well as ventilators, intensive-care beds, ambulances, laboratory and quarantine-centre equipment and personal protection equipment for health-care workers. In addition, they are unable to obtain medicines for tumours or carry out procedures using medical devices suchas MRIs, CT scanners, radiography, ultrasound or endoscopy machines, monitors or oxygen concentrators. The depriving of the Syrian people and State institutions of such essential equipment, the continuation of the financial, economic and commercial embargo imposed on the Syrian State and the freezing of its foreign assets negate any humanitarian allegations claimed by some States members of the Council. In that context, I reiterate our gratitude to Russia and China for standing with Syria in these difficult times. A few days ago, my country sent the Council an official letter (S/2020/333) regarding its position on the sixty-sixth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020) (S/2020/327). My delegation stresses the ineffectiveness of those reports, which do not dare to clearly and truly address the practices of countries sponsoring terrorism. The reports do not mention the Turkish occupation's violations of international law or its numerous crimes against civilians. They say nothing about how the international coalition destroyed Raqqa city, killed thousands of its people, burying them under the rubble, and committed numerous war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Secretariat's reports do not mention how the Turkish regime blackmails Europe using the suffering of refugees, nor do they say anything about the fact that the Turkish Red Crescent and the terrorist groups it supports strive to prevent the Syrian Red Crescent from working in north-western Syria, while American occupation forces and their proxy terrorist militias prevent it from working in north-eastern Syria and deprive Syrians in the Government-controlled environs of Raqqa of electricity. Again, the Secretariat does not report on how the American occupation forces and its affiliated terrorist group Maghawir Al-Thawra resist ending the suffering of displaced people in Rukban and dismantling that infamous camp. The reports do not mention how the European countries concerned refuse to repatriate their foreign-terrorist nationals. Finally, the reports say nothing about how the Turkish occupation forces destroyed the village of Al-Sharkrak after displacing its people, nor do they mention how the Turkish regime and the American occupation loot the wealth, resources, oil and antiquities of the Syrian people. All 66 OCHA reports are biased and lack credibility. They are flagrantly selective and overpoliticize the humanitarian situation. Therefore, they are worthless and a waste of the time, effort and resources of the United Nations. Finally, we in Syria are not only facing COVID-19; we are also facing a more dangerous virus: terrorism. Some countries have insisted on ignoring it for too long and have manipulated the facts, falsely calling terrorists "moderate armed opposition groups" or "non-State armed elements". This virus has many names, including Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, Huras Addin, Sultan Murad, Kataeb Al-Zunki and Maghawir Al-Thawra, and many more. That is the virus that we have been facing for nine years.
