Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having chosen the protection of
civilians in armed conflict for our consideration in this
open debate.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its support for the importance of protecting civilians in
armed conflicts. We wish to recall that such protection
should always be based on international humanitarian
law, particularly the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. Venezuela believes that the
subject of the protection of civilians refers to those
measures that are taken in order to protect civilians
in time of war, and recognizes its ties to international
humanitarian law, refugee law and international human
rights law.

The Security Council has been addressing the
topic of the protection of civilians since 1999, with
an emphasis on women, children and humanitarian
workers. Those issues are inspired by noble goals.
Diplomacy and dialogue are the most appropriate
means for protecting civilians and the best guarantee
for ensuring international peace and security. The
protection of civilians in armed conflict must therefore
be achieved peacefully. The use of military force is
neither the best, nor the only, option for the protection
of civilians. That alternative should be resorted to only
in extreme cases, while always respecting the principle
of proportionality.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
commendable goal. There cannot be indifference to the
violation of humanist principles and practices in times
ofwar. All civilians on all continents require protection.
International law on the protection of civilians, for
example, as enshrined in the Fourth Geneva Convention
and other international instruments, represents a
milestone on the age-old path in pursuit of the dignity
of the individual. Sovereign Governments bear the
primary responsibility to protect their citizens. It is an
exclusive responsibility, which cannot be replaced or
manipulated by interventionist political agendas.

The inequality, poverty, hunger, unemployment
and inequities that arise as a result of the unjust global
capitalist system and through foreign domination and
occupation are the primary reasons for, or root causes of,
armed conflict in countries around the world. In order
to prevent armed conflict, developing social justice
policies that make it possible to eliminate poverty and
inequality among countries must be a priority. Such
policies must be part of international cooperation and
diplomacy based on solidarity.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict cannot be addressed selectively or on a
discretionary basis. We emphasize that the Security
Council has acted in that manner on several occasions
by choosing the civilians who merit or do not merit
protection. In addressing the matter, it is not uncommon
for imperialist Powers with neocolonial aims to resort
to double standards. That is a strategy to reconquer and
recolonize similar to that of past centuries that sought
to topple the sovereign status of developing countries.
What hope do the peoples of the world have that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict be applied
universally and impartially?

Some Member States of the Security Council
promote resolutions seemingly to protect civilians,
but what they seek is a hegemonic foothold over
countries of the South. That practice undermines the
noble principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. In that
way, such practices degrade the humanism and noble
goals of civilian protection.

Under the guise of protecting civilians, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1973 (2011), which provided
NATO with a pretext to destroy much of Libya's civilian
infrastructure, causing the deaths of thousands of
civilians, including women and children, and leading to
regime change and the brutal assassination of the head
of State. The International Criminal Court seems to be
concerned only with alleged or actual crimes against
civilians when they are committed by African leaders
or individuals.

The concept of civilian protection is therefore
controversial. In its name, regime change and
overthrowing sovereign Governments of countries of the
South are promoted so as to set up puppet Governments
that favour the interests of transnational corporations
and imperialist Powers.

Why is civilian protection not invoked when
American drones kill dozens ofcivilians in Afghanistan,
Yemen and Pakistan? What about the war in Iraq,
where hundreds of thousands of civilians have died.
What about the sanctions imposed on Iraq before the
invasion, which caused the deaths of at least 1 million
people according to the press and international analysis?
Where were the ardent advocates of civilian protection
when those atrocities were being perpetrated?

As some Security Council members have said, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376) ignores
the Middle East and African countries and alludes to the
alleged lack of cooperation of the Syrian Government
with regard to the protection of civilians, while it
forgets the suffering of civilians subjected to the Israeli
occupation. Nor does it address the situation in Libya.
If we wish to protect civilians in Syria, we must contain
those who seek to promote violence and terrorism from
abroad, fuel sectarian and religious tension and arm
terrorist groups.

Venezuela supports the initiative of the Russian
Federation to convene an international conference on
Syria, with the participation of key actors with influence
in the Middle East, in order to help promote a political
dialogue between the parties by way of achieving a
peaceful and lasting solution to that conflict. Any such
initiative, proposed by whomsoever, that gives rise to a
peaceful outcome and the reconciliation of the Syrians
must be supported.

The protection of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
civilians suffering under the Israeli occupation must
be a fundamental component of an international effort
for the full and fair implementation of the mandate to
protect civilians in armed conflict. While sanctions
regimes are imposed on Governments and peoples
of countries of the South, there is silence over the
unpunished and massive human rights violations
committed by the State of Israel. Why are Palestinian
civilians not protected from those who systematically
violate their human rights?

The concept of the responsibility to protect
re-establishes the former imperial political theories in
new forms. Today, it is a lethal weapon of neoliberalism
and brutal capitalism that seeks to violate the
sovereignty of States. Former Western Powers claimed
a civilized superiority in order to invade or to conquer
subjugated peoples. They disguised their intentions
with the fallacy that they were acting out of altruism.
From that shameful history was borne the international
protectorate system, established by the League of
Nations. Acts of neocolonial aggression that violate
international law and international humanitarian
and human rights law have been perpetrated under
the responsibility to protect. While the concept of
the responsibility to protect rejects the protection of
civilians in times not only of war, but also of peace,
those harmful precedents to which I have referred in
our statement must be borne in mind when considering
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela advocates with
determination for the protection without discrimination
of each and every civilian afflicted by armed conflict in
any part of the world and condemns the unscrupulous
use that imperialist Powers have made of that noble
humanitarian goal.

