Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, allow me to thank the
leadership of both Tribunals for their briefings to the
Security Council and for the reports on implementing
the completion strategy, pursuant to Council resolution
1534 (2004).

We commend, in general, the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
We also welcome the initiative of the Government of
Rwanda to abolish the death penalty. We suggest that,
in the future, this will remove the concerns that have
prevented the transfer of cases of low- and middle-
level accused to the national courts in Rwanda. This
gives greater importance to the ICTR's work in
capacity-building with the judicial system in that
country. We continue to believe that the transfer of
cases to national justice systems is the main component
for the timely completion strategy of the ICTR.

In the work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the greatest concern
at this stage is the case of the accused Vojislav Seselj.
We are thankful to the President of the ICTY for
submitting information to the Council on the measures
being taken by the leadership of the Tribunal in order
to de-dramatize the situation. However, we consider
that the responsibility for the current situation and for
Mr. Seselj's state of health lies firmly and squarely on
the ICTY. The accused has been in prison in
Scheveningen since the beginning of 2003. We note
that the President of the Court has said that the
Tribunal is trying to limit the period of the pre-trail
detention, but I repeat that Mr. Seselj has been in
prison in Scheveningen since the beginning of 2003.
Such a drawn-out process, in our view, is further proof
of the unwieldy nature of the work of the Tribunal.

Given the serious harm to Mr. Seselj's health
caused by the lengthy hunger strike, this story can still
not be considered as closed. The recurrence of such
situations would completely discredit this Court, whose
reputation has already been hurt by the deaths of
Mr. Babic and Mr. Milosevic this year.

Another aspect that negatively affects the image
of the Tribunal is the open criticism coming from the
Prosecutor's Office on the amendments to the rules of
procedure and evidence for the ICTY. We suggest that
these amendments are in line with the implementation
of the deadlines for the completion strategy, as set out
by the Security Council.

We do not believe that the statement by the
Prosecutor was appropriate concerning the alleged
presence of Mr. Djordjevic on the territory of the
Russian Federation and that the responsibility lies with
Serbia to arrest him in our country. First of all, on
many occasions we have stated that the information
provided by the Tribunal on Mr. Djordjevic's
whereabouts have not been confirmed. The Russian
authorities are making every effort to find him.
Secondly, there can be no question of extending the
jurisdiction of Serbian authorities to the Russian
Federation, a separate and sovereign State. We would
like to repeat our proposal that was made in the
discussion of the ICTY annual report in the General
Assembly, namely that it would be useful and
informative to obtain comparative lists showing the
number of those convicted by nationality and also the
duration of the sentences they received, depending on
their nationality, for similar crimes in terms of type and
gravity.

We expect that the Tribunal will strictly
implement the completion strategy, according to the
timetable established by the Security Council. We note
here that we cannot see how we can make plans - and
this was said by the President of the ICTY - for cases
that have been scheduled for completion by 2009 -
how can we make such plans in violation of the
completion strategy that the Security Council has
adopted? That strategy sets out a deadline for
completing the work, and the ICTY should base its
work on that fact in planning its future work.

In our view, the fact that Mr. Mladic and
Mr. Karadzic and other accused have not been brought
to the ICTY cannot justify the indefinite continuation
of the work of this Court.

