Mr. Jalang'o (Kenya): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. Our
salutations also go to your predecessor, Ambassador
Levitte of France.

Allow me to take this opportunity to address the
Council on the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia, which was presented this morning
by his Representative. This comprehensive report is
most welcome to my delegation. We also express our
appreciation for the detailed briefing presented this
morning by the Prime Minister of the Transitional
National Government (TNG) on the developments in
Somalia and on ways and means of assisting Somalia.

My delegation wholeheartedly welcomes the
TNG back to the fold of the international community to
play its role on behalf of the people of Somalia, so long
denied of that very important and Vital opportunity.

As the Ambassador of Ethiopia mentioned a few
minutes ago, Kenya as a neighbour of Somalia, also
knows only too well the problems Somalia has gone
through since 1991. We have shared Somalia's pain and
tears as both a neighbour and a friend. We therefore
continue to support all the ongoing peace processes,
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development's (IGAD) task of implementing the
mechanisms agreed upon at the Khartoum summit held
in November 2000.

My delegation also joins the appeal that was
made a few minutes ago by the Ambassador of
Ethiopia for immediate humanitarian assistance for the
thousands of refugees in neighbouring countries,
including Kenya.

Many efforts have been expended through IGAD,
the Organization of African Unity, the European Union,
the United Nations and others to bring about a lasting
solution to the Somalia problem, caused by the lack of
central administration during the last 10 years. At long
last, we see hope exemplified in the Transitional
National Government of Somalia; and it is in this vein
that we welcome among us, after very many years, the
Prime Minister and head of the Transitional National
Government of Somalia and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

The Secretary-General notes in his report that

"the security situation did not make it possible to
deploy a peace-building office in the country."
(5/2001/963, para. 72)

However, my delegation welcomes the feasibility of
setting up a Committee of Friends of Somalia, as noted
in paragraph 66 of the report. As a member State of
IGAD, Kenya will be ready to participate in the work
of that Committee with other members of the IGAD
Partners Forum.

Finally, my delegation calls upon the United
Nations to redouble its efforts to assist the people and the
Government of Somalia to return to normalcy as soon as
possible through the establishment of workable national
institutions, security and legal organs; and above all to
facilitate economic recovery and development.

