The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the three co-leads of the Council's mission to West
Africa, namely, Angola, France and Senegal.

1 shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Angola.

The Security Council mission to West Africa
concluded in Dakar on 8 March 2016. The mission
held meetings with the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS). It was briefed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed lbn
Chambas, who was accompanied by his deputy,
Ms. Hiroute Gebre Selassie. The mission also met with
the diplomatic corps accredited to Senegal, and ended
its visit with a meeting with President Macky Sall, in
his capacity as Chairman of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS).

Mr. Chambas gave an overview of the situation in
the region and on issues related to the work of UNOWAS
in preventing and resolving conflicts. He spoke of the
activities under the new UNOWAS configuration and
mandate. He also told the mission of his recent visit to
the Niger, where his Office was closely monitoring the
situation with regard to the second round of presidential
elections, on 20 March, as Mr. Hama Amadou, the
candidate of the opposition, remained in prison on
charges of child-trafficking. Lastly, Mr. Chambas
briefed us on his visit to Benin, where he welcomed
the peaceful conduct of presidential elections, with a
second round to be held soon.

The members of the Council stressed the importance
of accelerating the implementation of the new UNOWAS
configuration and of the setting up of a cell office in
Mauritania to work with the group of five countries of
the Sahel. The Council also expressed support for the
conflict-prevention role UNOWAS was playing in the
region and described the Office as a model for United
Nations preventive diplomacy.

The Special Representative stressed the increasing
threat of terrorism in West Africa, especially by Boko
Haram. He requested the international community's
support for the countries of the region in countering
terrorism. Mr. Chambas also mentioned the joint
visit to the Lake Chad region with his counterpart,
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, aimed as
strengthening cooperation with the countries of the
region in coordinating the Multilateral Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram. He also noted the start of joint
border controls.

At our meeting with President Sall, he made an
assessment ofissues affecting the region, including the
threat of terrorism. He shared his views on the situation
in Mali and on the need to ensure the territorial
integrity of the country, suggesting that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali be empowered to perform its mandate
in the light of the current violence affecting Mali.
The President emphasized the transnational nature of
the terrorist threat, which calls for the joint efforts of
the international community in support of countering
terrorist groups in the region, and noted the need for
West African countries to develop capacities to deal
with such threats.

Mission members requested President Sall's view
on resolving the crises in Guinea-Bissau and Burundi.
The President advised the conduct of a constitutional
review as a means to resolve the situation in the future,
while urging the authorities to work work together
until the end of the term of President Jose Mario Vaz
of Guinea-Bissau, who is still in office. The President
further emphasized the role of ECOWAS in Guinea-
Bissau, the financial difficulties facing the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau, and its important role in the
maintenance of peace and security in the country.

The President informed the mission of his stay
in Burundi on 25 and 26 February as a member of
the African Union (AU) high-level delegation that
was comprised of the Presidents of Ethiopia, Gabon,
Mauritania and South Africa, and requested the
President of Burundi to conduct an inclusive dialogue
with the Burundian stakeholders, including those who
left the country, and to free all political prisoners.
President Sall noted the important role played by the
Ugandan President as facilitator of the inter-Burundian
dialogue and in finding ways to reduce tensions with
Rwanda. He stressed the importance of the African
Union leadership in the negotiations in Burundi,
and the AU decision to send 100 military and 100
human rights observers to Burundi due to President
Nkurunziza's rejection of the AU proposal to send an
African peacekeeping mission to Burundi. President
Sall requested the Security Council to support that
African Union observer mission to Burundi.

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to thank
the Government of Senegal for the warm welcome and
hospitality afforded to the Security Council mission to
Senegal. Our appreciation goes to Mr. lbn Chambas
and UNOWAS for providing the logistical and protocol
arrangements necessary to the success of the mission
to Senegal. We also thank the Secretariat, the security
teams and all those who were directly or indirectly
involved in the organization of the Security Council
mission to West African countries, as well as France
and Senegal for co-leading that important mission.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of France to
make a statement on the Council's visit to Mali.

