Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): We
meet at a dark hour. The Government of Canada had
hoped that a compromise would be possible and that
the Iraqi regime could have been disarmed without
recourse to war. But war is here. As a result, our main
concern must be the plight of the victims of war.

No one, civilian or soldier, combatant or non-
combatant, is immune to the ravages of war. We
express our condolences to those who have
experienced loss during this conflict.

In this Council, our common humanity compels
us to put people first, to focus our energies on
protecting them and helping them to meet and
overcome the challenges they face in the days ahead.
Our first duty is to meet the urgent human needs of the
Iraqi people, who have been victimized by the brutality
of their own Government for too long.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council has on several occasions
committed itself to protecting civilians in armed
conflict, including in particular women and children at
risk. Every effort must be made to avoid civilian
casualties. The Council has also emphasized the
obligation of parties to a conflict to ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
and humanitarian personnel. The Council has
underscored the need for safe and unimpeded access to
civilian populations at risk. Furthermore, the Council
has urged all parties to conflicts, including
neighbouring countries, to comply strictly with their
obligations under international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law.

We appeal to all concerned to fulfil those
undertakings. We particularly appeal to neighbouring
countries to do everything in their power to facilitate
immediate, full, safe and unhindered access by
humanitarian aid agencies to those in need.

We commend the courage and the commitment of
humanitarian aid personnel, including those of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
United Nations, who are braving the very significant
dangers of war to continue their operations in support
of the people of Iraq.

We also call upon neighbouring countries to
respect international law and to shelter those refugees
who have no alternative but to flee across international
borders.

We have only begun to see the potential
humanitarian implications of the current crisis,
including movements of internally displaced persons.
And we know that the longer and more destructive the
war is, the greater the needs will be. We therefore urge
the Council to adapt the oil for food programme
without delay. The programme can contribute
significantly to meeting the Iraqi people's pressing
needs.

Despite the efforts of many inside and outside the
Security Council, including Canada, the United Nations
was not able to unite to disarm Saddam Hussain.
However, we now have another opportunity to find the
unity of purpose that eluded us before.

The people of Iraq will soon face the challenge of
rebuilding their country in the wake both of inevitably
destructive war and of the deprivation and suffering
they have endured for years. We believe that the
Council must provide the mandate for that
reconstruction effort. Furthermore, we believe that the
United Nations system as a whole should be centrally
engaged and should offer both leadership and its
proven expertise in ensuring that the effort to help the
Iraqi people rebuild their country is one in which all
members of the international community can
participate.

I would now like to say a word about the laws of
war. We appeal to all parties to respect their obligations
under the Geneva Conventions with regard to the
conduct of conflict. Prisoners of war must not be used
for propaganda purposes. Civilians must not be used as
human shields. Schools and hospitals must remain off
limits to war.

When I spoke before the Council on 19 February
on behalf of the Canadian Government, I urged the
Council to keep the welfare of the Iraqi people at the
heart of its deliberations. I make that appeal again
today. There is no more noble and humane purpose that
the Council can now serve than to help the people of
Iraq. Canada commits to joining with others in meeting
the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people and in
working with them to rebuild their country.

In that regard, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the Government of Canada has decided to commit
approximately $70 million for humanitarian assistance
to the people of Iraq.

