Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Madam President, for holding this meeting on
peacebuilding. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador
Lucas for their presentations. It is crucial for the
Security Council, which is responsible for issues of
international peacekeeping and security, to regularly
address the matter of peacebuilding. United Nations
action is not limited to merely supporting or restoring
peace. Building peace once it has been established is
essential to make sure that a country just emerging
from conflict does not relapse into crisis.

We must remember that peacebuilding consists
above all of managing the progressive restoration of all
the capabilities of a given sovereign State with the goal
of giving their people full mastery of their destiny.

Several elements are key to the successful
management that transition. First of all, national
ownership, which is the basis of lasting peace,
demands sizable reforms. Those reforms, which
involve such essential aspects such as governance,
justice and security, or which can also require the
renewal of a development process, cannot be brought
to fruition without national ownership. The key to
success in peacebuilding is the implementation of a
substantial dialogue with the State in question. To
facilitate that dialogue, we have established in some
post-conflict countries, integrated peacebuilding
offices, such as the United Nations Integrated Office in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.

The second key element for a successful
transition is good coordination among the stakeholders.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is complex, because it
implies the simultaneous management of very different
tasks. There is often a fine line between those tasks and
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping operations
should support that process as much as possible.
However, even during the early stages, peacekeeping
operations cannot necessarily take on all the aspects of
peacebuilding. The earliest possible return of the usual
actors, in the realm of development for example, is
preferable. Careful consultation and coordination
among all stakeholders is therefore necessary for the
most effective international partners to be involved in
peacebuilding programmes, and for each stakeholder to
play the most appropriate role. In addition to the
civilian structure that any peacekeeping operation
implies, this could involve the United Nations agencies
with solid technical experience, such United Nations
Development Program, or bilateral partners.

It is precisely that level of engagement that the
Peacebuilding Commission, with the impetus provided
by the Luxembourg Mission and the help of the
Secretariat and the Office in Dakar, is attempting to
advance in Guinea, where there is neither a
peacekeeping operation nor an integrated
peacebuilding office. We are pleased to see that the
support actions have been identified and assigned,
particularly with respect to security sector reform, in
order to help the Guineans to build peace and
consolidate their young democracy.

The third key element is advance planning.
Because the conditions needed for peacebuilding must
to be present from the first stages of crisis
management, it is important to undertake a process of
reflection on the priorities that need to be implemented
in the immediate post-conflict period. In that regard, I
wish to single out the study conducted by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Mission Support Division on the contribution of
peacekeeping operations to the question of
consolidating peace, which was explored during the
last meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission.

What tools do we have for implementing those
transition principles?

First of all, we must work on the quality of the
mandates, which should allow us to lay the
groundwork for the peacebuilding phase. That is what
we did in Cote d'Ivoire, with resolution 2000 (2011),
which gives the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire a clear mandate to support the authorities in
stepping up their security sector. We did the same thing
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, with
resolution 1996 (2011), which sets forth support for the
South Sudanese authorities with respect to the reform
of their justice and security sectors, and the
strengthening of the rule of law.

Secondly, based on those mandates, the
Secretariat should implement a planning process that
includes, on the one hand, a mechanism for measuring
the progress of a mission, and on the other, provisions
that allow its end-point to be taken into account from
the beginning. Finally, it is critical to have resources on
the ground in order to implement the transition. For
that reason in particular, the civilian capacity-building
is a key aspect in peacebuilding in post-conflict
situations. In order to more effectively help countries
affected by conflict, the efforts of the international
community should be guided by a spirit of partnership
that strengthens the links between United Nations
civilian capacity, Member States, regional
organizations and civil society.

In that context, I welcome the Secretary-
General's report from last August (see S/201l/552),
which is the first United Nations response to the
Independent Report by Mr. Jean-Marie Gue'henno on
civilian capacities.

To conclude, I should like to underscore that the
growing mobilization of different stakeholders with
respect to peacebuilding, whether the United Nations
or other international actors, has provided us with
many tools, which we must use in the best way
possible by developing synergies. We will thus ensure
both consistent international action and clear United
Nations work in the area of peacebuilding.

