Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Sir, for convening
this very important meeting today.

The Security Council has been directly engaged in
matters relating to weapons of mass destruction for 65
years. This long priority work by the Council has rested
on two mutually reinforcing pillars. One derives from
the Council's responsibility for establishing a system
for the regulation of armaments, as enshrined in Article
26 of the Charter of the United Nations. This objective
is closely linked with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, and aims to promote international peace
and security with the least diversion for armaments
of the world's human and economic resources. The
other derives, of course, from the Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Pursuant to this responsibility, the
Council has sought various aims, including respect for
the prohibition of the use of biological and chemical
weapons, ensuring compliance with international
norms and treaties, preventing non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction, and addressing
specific cases of proliferation.

The Council's engagement on weapons of mass
destruction has always been grounded on a common
understanding that measures for disarmament and
non-proliferation are two sides of the same coin and
are mutually reinforcing. The need to pursue both
objectives while responding urgently to contemporary
proliferation challenges was evident when the Council
adopted the resolutions in support of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Similarly, when
the Council met for the first time at the level of Heads
of State and Government in 1992 (see S/PV.3046),
disarmament and arms control were a major focus,
and importantly determined that the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction constituted a threat to
international Peace and Security.

The disarmament and non-proliferation efforts
of the Council over the past 25 years have achieved
important and historic outcomes, even as the
international community continues to grapple with
isolated cases of proliferation and the unresolved
question of disarmament. The Council has made use
of a great variety of tools towards these ends. In this
regard, I will briefly highlight a number of country-
specific and general approaches.

In responding to the invasion of Kuwait in 1991,
the Council required Iraq to eliminate its weapons of
mass destruction programme and mandated on-site
inspections towards that end. It has since been
confirmed, of course, that those obligations were
carried out and the Council has effectively normalized
Iraq's international non-proliferation obligations.

With respect to the Iranian nuclear issue, direct
engagement and a shared commitment to dialogue and
cooperation resulted in the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, which the Council endorsed in resolution
2231 (2015). Two years later, international inspectors
continue to verify the implementation of Iran's nuclear-
related commitments. A sustained commitment on the
part of all participants remains essential to the long-
term viability and success of that historic agreement.

In Libya, timely action by the Council enabled the
international inspectors to help the Government secure
and remove vulnerable stockpiles of chemical agents.

In the Syrian Arab Republic, successful engagement
by the Russian Federation and the United States resulted
in that country eliminating its declared chemical
weapons programme under United Nations supervision
and with unprecedented international cooperation.

Regrettably, we continue to find evidence of the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons, which we determined
has been carried out by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. In order to uphold our shared norms of
humanity, all those who have used those weapons must
be held to account. The unity and action of the Council
remain essential.

Finally, the provocative and dangerous nuclear and
ballistic missile activities by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea continue to defy the decisions of the
Council and the will of the international community.
These acts have also undermined international norms
against nuclear proliferation and nuclear testing. The
Secretary-General has repeatedly and unequivocally
condemned those acts, and called on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to cease further testing,
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and allow space for the resumption of sincere
dialogue on denuclearization. The steady escalation
of provocative acts must be immediately reversed.
The continued unity of the Council remains essential
to facilitate the resumption of diplomacy, leading to a
peaceful settlement.

Turning to general approaches on non-proliferation,
resolution 1540 (2004) continues to stand as a pioneering
achievement in cooperative action to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
related material by strengthening national capacities.
In maintaining the effectiveness of this instrument,
it remains imperative to keep pace with global trends
and emerging technologies that continuously lower
the threshold for the acquisition and use of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear material.

In concluding this survey, it is apparent that the most
effective approaches to non-proliferation must involve
a mixture of active, robust and wise diplomacy, strong
international cooperation and a solid commitment
to fully implementing the decisions of the Council.
Addressing the threats and risks posed by weapons of
mass destruction will also require new and creative
efforts to complete unfinished business, including the
achievement of a world without nuclear weapons.

I end my remarks with the words of the Secretary-
General at the opening of the General Assembly general
debate two days ago:

"There is an urgent need to prevent proliferation,
to promote disarmament and to preserve the gains
made in these directions. Those goals are linked:
progress on one will generate progress on the
other." (A/72/PV3, p. 2)

