Ms. Darlow (New Zealand): Like others, I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for his briefing this morning and for his
efforts over the past four years as the Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission (UNMIK) in
Kosovo. I wish him well in his next role, and we look
forward to working with his successor. I also welcome
Deputy Prime Minister Daeie and Mr. Thaci to the
meeting.

The last time the Council considered this agenda
item (see S/PV.7448), we, like others, urged the Kosovo
Assembly to take the remaining steps required in order
to establish a specialist court to try cases arising from
the European Union Special Investigative Task Force.
We are therefore pleased to note that the Assembly
recently voted to approve a constitutional amendment
for the establishment ofthe specialist court. We warmly
welcome that move, which we recognize was not easy.
It demonstrates an important commitment, not only to
justice and accountability but also, ultimately, to long-
term reconciliation.

The decision of the Kosovo Assembly was
an important step towards addressing the serious
allegations that have been made, but it was of course
just a first step. There remains much to do before the
specialist court and associated prosecutor's office
are established and functioning. Reaching that point
will not be a simple process. We therefore urge all
involved to build on the momentum of the decision of
the Kosovo Assembly and to drive the process forward
expeditiously.

In terms of the political situation, we welcome the
continued high-level engagement between Belgrade and
Pristina in the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
We encourage both sides to approach the dialogue
constructively. The more progress that is made in
normalizing relations, the more flexibility will need to
be shown by all leaders in order to address core issues.
Particular attention is needed to resolve outstanding
issues in northern Kosovo. Practical cooperation, such
as that demonstrated by the mayors of South and North
Mitrovica, helpfully contributes to the process. Beyond
that, we encourage both sides to make progress on
other issues identified in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/579), including the protection of cultural and
religious sites, the issue of internally displaced persons
and the question of missing persons.

Finally, with respect to the frequency with which
the Council considers this agenda item, New Zealand
echoes the words of others this morning and reiterates
the comments we made during the Council's most recent
discussion on Kosovo, regarding the organization ofthe
Council's work. We are not convinced that the Council's
current practice with respect to UNMIK is calibrated
optimally. While it is important for the Council to hear
from those affected by its decisions, we believe that
there should be flexibility in how the Council monitors
the situation in Kosovo so that it can more appropriately
reflect the situation on the ground.

