Mr. Krahenbiihl: First of all, allow me to thank
you, Madam President, for the invitation to address
the Security Council. It is a particular honour to do so
from Gaza.

I wish to emphasize and express heartfelt
appreciation to the States Members of the United
Nations - both countries hosting Palestine refugees
and donors - for their extraordinary trust in and
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
since its operations began, in 1950. Together, we
have significantly advanced several key Sustainable
Development Goals for Palestine refugees, notably in
education, health and beyond, pending ajust and lasting
solution to their plight.

Never was the support of Member States more
remarkable than in 2018, when our Agency was
confronted with its most severe funding crisis
ever - a truly existential crisis. Forty-two different
countries and institutions from all corners of the world,
including Indonesia, Madam President, increased
their contributions to UNRWA last year. On our side,
we took a number of difficult internal measures and
reduced expenditures by $92 million. Through those
combined efforts, last year we successfully overcame
an unprecedented deficit of $446 million. We are
particularly indebted to the leadership of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and the wider United Nations
family, who resolutely stood with UNRWA every step
of the way during those most challenging times.

The European Union became the Agency's
single-largest contributor in 2018. I also wish to pay
special tribute to Germany, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Kingdom, Sweden, the United
Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Japan, Norway and
many others, including permanent and non-permanent
members of the Security Council, for their very
generous contributions last year. Those actions were
vital to keeping open the 715 schools that UNRWA runs
for more than half a million female and male students
in the West Bank, as well as in East Jerusalem, Gaza,
Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.

More than 2 million students have graduated from
UNRWA schools since 1950, where gender parity has
long been achieved and we have included a human
rights, conflict resolution and tolerance programme
that is unique in the region. The generous support of
donors also preserved primary health-care services for
3 million patients through our network of 140 health
centres and, despite severe pressures, also preserved
our emergency services for 1.5 million refugees,
mainly in Gaza, the West Bank and Syria. At a time
when Palestine refugees face a near complete absence
of a political horizon, I am strongly convinced that
preserving UNRWA's services is a crucial contribution
in terms of human dignity and regional stability.

Speaking from Gaza, I must draw the urgent and
renewed attention of the Council to the increasingly
desperate situation faced by the inhabitants of the
Gaza Strip, of whom at least 1.3 million are Palestine
refugees. My current visit has once again exposed me
to the extreme hardship created by successive armed
confrontations, blockade and violence. UNRWA is
working alongside our United Nations and civil society
partners to address that humanitarian crisis.

I think here of issues such as the lack of freedom of
movement or employment opportunities, as well as the
deep trauma created by the many casualties and persons
injured from repeated wars and from what became
known as the Great March of Return. Thousands of
young people have been wounded, and hundreds killed,
since March 2018, including 14 boys and girls, ages 11
to 16, who were students in UNRWA schools. As I have
done in the past, I reiterate here my call for respect for
international humanitarian law and my condemnation
of the targeting of civilians. That includes rocket firing
from Gaza that has led to civilian loss of life and
injuries in Israel.

Every family in Gaza has been impacted, and
people speak of a level of despair that surpasses
anything previously known to them, in particular
in terms of what our health teams call an epidemic
deterioration of mental-health conditions. After hearing
many concrete examples during my visit today, it seems
particularly important that UNRWA and other relevant
actors ne enabled to strengthen critically needed
mental-health capacities.

Poverty levels among Palestine refugees continue
to rise, and they rely on UNRWA in particular to meet
essential food needs. For their sake and the stability of
Gaza, we must ensure that our food distributions for
1 million people here in the Gaza Strip do not face any
interruption. As we speak, UNRWA has only enough
money to run its operations until mid-June; then we will
hit negative figures and a funding gap. It is absolutely
crucial to avoid a breakdown of our food pipeline, and
I call on all our partners to actively mobilize in support
of our efforts to secure the needed funding.

It is similarly essential that UNRWA be able to open
the next school year on time in August and September.
We are currently rehabilitating a large number of
schools, but we need the funding to ensure that the
education itself can be provided. Nothing sustains hope
and opportunities more effectively than the education
provided in our classrooms. I am deeply impressed by
the courage shown by our students in overcoming the
adversity they face and pursuing their studies. We need
to match that courage with our ability to mobilize the
necessary financial support. In Gaza alone, 280,000
girls and boys study in our schools. In the light of all the
discussions on leaving no one behind, on safeguarding
refugee education and preserving regional stability, we
need to work together to keep UNRWA schools open
and safe.

UNRWA faces important needs in the West
Bank as well, including in East Jerusalem. Palestine
refugees in the West Bank are confronted with multiple
consequences of the ongoing occupation, such as home
demolitions and evictions, with numbers significantly
on the rise since early 2019, as well as movement
restrictions and settler violence. There are also frequent
military incursions in which live ammunition is fired,
resulting at times in fatalities, but often in injuries
and property damage in densely populated areas like
Palestine refugee camps, where entire communities can
be impacted by the live fire and the use of tear gas. I
must in particular draw the attention of the Council to
the growing pressure UNRWA itself has faced in East
Jerusalem, with threats to interfere with our operations.
The current developments in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, will further unsettle not only Palestine
refugees, but also their hope and aspirations with
regard to a two-State solution and their rights under
international law.

In addition to strong political backing, in 2019 we
require $1.2 billion for all of our operations throughout
the Near East. That is the exact amount we mobilized
last year. In other words, if every donor should manage
to maintain its level of funding in 2019, we should be
able to cover our budget. I therefore humbly call on all
of our partners to repeat their generous support and
preserve the successful dynamic created in 2018. The
upcoming pledging conference, to be held in New York
on 25 June, will be an important opportunity to that
effect. For its part, UNRWA will continue to manage
its operations with strong financial discipline and a
determination to achieve further efficiencies.

Wars, armed conflicts and violence persist in the
absence of effective political action to resolve them. It
is political inaction - not the action of humanitarian
organizations i that perpetuates conflicts. Nothing
today would be more important than a renewed,
genuine and inclusive effort to resolve the conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians. I say that not because
UNRWA was mandated to deal with the politics
of the region - we were not - but rather because
every single day, we deal with the increasingly severe
humanitarian and human consequences of this enduring
conflict. We do not believe that the future of Palestine
refugees should be framed by another 10, 20, 30 or 40
years of UNRWA. They need and deserve a just and
lasting political solution. Until then, however, we are
determined to live up to the mandate that the General
Assembly bestowed upon us.

When meeting with young students here in Gaza,
I was again reminded that our efforts - with the
Council's support - are worth it every single day. In
another remarkable example of talent and dedication,
15-year-old UNRWA student Jameela Abu Jom'a was
declared the winner of the 2019 Inspirational Messages
of Peace Contest by the United States National Park
Service and International World Peace Rose Gardens.
The competition celebrates messages of peace written
by young people throughout the world. Yesterday I
congratulated Jameela and told her that we are very
proud that her message of peace will be on display in
the gardens of the Martin Luther King, Jr. National
Historical Park in Atlanta, Georgia, for one year. That
is what members of the Council and of the General
Assembly have allowed us to achieve and preserve. For
that, members deserve the highest recognition. From
here in Gaza, I call on them to protect this vital effort
and sustain their collective mobilization, in support of
dignity, stability and robust multilateralism.

