Ms. Yade (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the presence of the Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Stubb, and to
thank him for his briefing. The priorities that he has
defined are in keeping with the challenges we face, and
we share them in full.

The European Union (EU) is tied to the OSCE,
the only organization that brings together all the States
from Vancouver to Vladivostok and is equipped with a
broad mandate. It has contributed to the strengthening
of international stability and security by establishing a
platform of common values. That is why France and its
EU partners believe it is imperative to preserve the
conditions that ensure the effectiveness of OSCE
actions - not only because the EU currently represents
almost half of the OSCE's membership and provides
three quarters of its budget, but above all because the
EU and the OSCE are deeply complementary. They
share the same values and the same principles, but they
do not yet work together closely enough. One of the
objectives of the French presidency of the EU is
precisely to further strengthen this complementary
relationship. The presence at this table of several
ministers representing European States that are
members of the OSCE demonstrates that that priority is
widely shared within the EU.

The EU and the OSCE are cooperating closely to
resolve the crisis in Georgia. The joint visit of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France and his Finnish
counterpart on 10 August demonstrated this
cooperation. On the ground, the OSCE Mission to
Georgia and the European Union Monitoring Mission
(EUMM) will of course be working closely together.
The OSCE also continues to play a very positive role
in Kosovo, which deserves support. The OSCE Mission
in Kosovo fulfils an important role in guaranteeing a
democratic and multi-ethnic future for Kosovo, in
particular in the preservation of minority rights. The
stability of the Balkans must be a shared goal for the
EU and OSCE.
08-5232]
Finally, Central Asia is the region where the
activities of the OSCE have been most developed in
recent years. The EU, by adopting a strategy for
Central Asia, is also in the process of becoming a full
actor in the region. During our presidency of the EU
and in close coordination with the OSCE, we shall
focus our efforts on security issues in Central Asia.
Those issues were addressed in Paris on 18 September
at the first EU-Central Asia Forum addressing security
issues and will be considered at the conference of the
EU, the OSCE and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on integrated border management and the
fight against narcotics in Central Asia.

It is in its comprehensive vision of security and
cooperation that the OSCE finds the fullest expression
of its value. It was founded on the belief that security
goes hand in hand with the promotion of human rights
and democracy. In that regard, I welcome the essential
role played by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights in providing election
monitoring in the OSCE region, and I encourage all
States Members to welcome those missions during
major elections.

This institution is essential for our organization.
The strength of the OSCE lies in its autonomy, which
must be preserved. France will pay attention to
promoting its irreplaceable expertise and to its
exemplary role in election monitoring.

The French presidency of the EU coincides with
the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. This symbolic anniversary is an
opportunity to energetically recall the universality of
those values and principles. I welcome the fact that the
sixtieth anniversary will also be celebrated by the
OSCE, under the presidency of Finland.

Finally, the OSCE must continue to work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. In that regard, the presence of the
Finnish chairmanship at the Security Council is a good
example of the vital cooperation between the European
Union and the OSCE.

