Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I align myself
with the statements to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union and the Nordic countries.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely debate on a subject that engages
not only us at the United Nations but also communities
and people worldwide. As our world becomes
increasingly interconnected and interdependent, we
must constantly reflect on the fundamental purpose of
our cooperation here at the United Nations. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General and our other briefers this
morning.

A rules-based international order and multilateral
cooperation, with the United Nations at its core,
are perhaps more important than ever. Those are
cornerstones of Swedish foreign policy, as well as the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European
Union. Multilateralism also represents an end in itself, as
it embodies humankind's commitments to coexistence
and cooperation. Ultimately, multilateralism is how we
unite for peace and alleviate human suffering. However,
multilateralism and the United Nations are also
increasingly under pressure. Short-sighted and narrow
interests stand ready to exploit the Organization's
shortcomings. Failure to deliver on our commitments
for peace, security and development risks turning them
into empty words, paving the way for cynicism and
polarization. The risks, challenges and threats of our
time require joint action. Climate change, weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism and violent extremism all
have consequences that go beyond the scope of any
single State. Multilateral cooperation is required. We
already have the norms and structures - we are now
living at a time for action and implementation.

Fortunately, the evidence is clear - we can do it if
we put our minds to it. The recent substantial multilateral
achievements - the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Paris Agreement and the sustaining
peace agenda - are all powerful illustrations of what
can be achieved through multilateral cooperation, as
are the rules-based multilateral world trade system
upheld by the World Trade Organization. Not least, we
have encouraging examples from all over the world,
where collaboration and cooperation on all issues,
from peacekeeping to climate action, have resulted in
a better life and hope for the future for so many. Such
achievements must never be degraded to mere ink on
paper. We owe it to the people to deliver results. Let me
highlight three key aspects that we believe need to be
the focus to strengthen multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations.

First, we must embrace prevention. For the Council
to be able to fulfil its task we need to act on the full
range of threats to international peace and security. We
need to be better at identifying risks and root causes
of conflicts, and we must ensure that our response
is comprehensive. Early warnings must also lead to
early action. A better understanding of climate-related
security risks is an obvious example.

The global norms against the use of weapons
of mass destruction are indispensable pillars of the
global disarmament and non-proliferation regime that
protect us against the dangers of nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons and their horrific consequences for
humanity. The repeated use of chemical weapons and
worrying tendencies regarding nuclear capabilities and
doctrines paint an ominous picture. Safeguarding the
non-use norms must be an overarching priority and
remains a crucial component of prevention. To that
end, every effort must be made to ensure a successful
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 2020.
The Council should also stand behind the Securing
Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament
initiative, launched earlier this year by the Secretary-
General, and increased high-level United Nations
engagement.

Secondly, we need to keep the Charter of the
United Nations and international law at the core of
our cooperation. The Charter of the United Nations
was drafted against the backdrop of a collapse of the
international order and a surge in nationalism, which
led to war and human suffering. Although the threats
look different today, the faith in humankind's ability
to unite for peace and overcome differences remains
at the heart of multilateralism. We, the Members of
the United Nations, have already committed to the
principles of the Charter. It is contingent upon each
Member State to abide by and defend the rules-based
international order that it prescribes. In order to
effectively prevent and resolve threats to international
peace and security, cooperation continues to be the only
way forward. We must shoulder our joint responsibility
to uphold international law, including human rights.
It is no less vital today than 70 years ago. That is not
merely a question of political will but a legal obligation
to be fulfilled in good faith. Above all, it is a duty to
humanity.

The international legal system founded on human
rights, democracy and the principles of the rule of
law must be constantly defended. That has become
particularly clear in the light of the repressive and
reactionary trend that we see in several parts of the
world today, where in particular the protection and
promotion of human rights are increasingly being
called into question.

In the context of prevention, the provisions on
pacific settlement of disputes, as laid out in Chapter
VI of the Charter, also contain powerful instruments
to resolve disputes based on the rule of law and before
they escalate into serious conflicts. The International
Court of Justice is fundamental to upholding and
clarifying the rules of international law, including its
role in maintaining and promoting the rule of law. As
a deterrent to international crimes and a force against
impunity, the International Criminal Court plays a key
role in preventing conflict.

Finally, we need a United Nations in tune with our
times that is relevant and legitimate to all. There is
no more effective way to build and maintain trust and
confidence in multilateralism and the United Nations
system than delivering concrete results in the areas of
peace, security and development where it matters the
most for the millions of women, men, boys and girls
who live in the shadow of war and poverty. The United
Nations system is a global public good, and it is in our
shared strategic interest to keep investing in it. The
long-term gains from doing so are far greater than any
short-term costs.

It is therefore imperative that we continue to
support the implementation of the Secretary-General's
reforms of the United Nations system at a time when
they are needed more than ever. Those reforms offer
an unprecedented opportunity to make the United
Nations more flexible and effective and better equipped
to respond to current and emerging challenges. That
is the recipe for enhancing trust and confidence in
multilateralism. Not least, the ongoing reform process
is a key opportunity to ensure that a gender perspective
is integrated into all aspects of the work of the United
Nations system.

As members of the Security Council, we need to
do better in meeting our responsibilities under the
United Nations Charter to maintain international peace
and security. We need to work harder to overcome our
differences and come together in united responses to
effectively address the many difficult issues on our
agenda. Our working methods should be more results-
oriented and focus on taking meaningful decisions that
make a difference to people's lives on the ground. That
is not only our responsibility under the Charter but also
to all members of the General Assembly. However,
first and foremost, we owe it to the people affected
by conflict, oppression, poverty and climate change
throughout the world.

To achieve that, all members of the Council must do

their utmost to ensure that it can fulfil its responsibility
as stipulated by the United Nations Charter. We call
for a renewed discussion on limiting the use of the
veto, since its use is ultimately crippling the United
Nations. We also need a Council that better reflects the
realities of today's world through enhanced African
representation, as well as Asian and Latin American
representation.

We also need a shift in narrative. We should not
only defend multilateralism but go on the offensive. Let
us enhance it so that it is utilized to its full potential.
We would like to encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his ambitious reform agenda and his focus
on bringing us together and truly work multilaterally
towards sustaining peace, the implementation of the
2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. Members can
count on Sweden's continued firm commitment to
multilateralism and to the United Nations.

