Let me begin by expressing our appreciation to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their important updates and their efforts in finding a solution towards a political settlement and way to ease the humanitarian crisis. Much appreciation should be expressed to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs team and others, and we hope that they are all well and staying safe and healthy. In response to the updates, Indonesia highlights the following three points. First, Yemenis must seize the momentum for a political settlement. To quote the Special Envoy, an opportunity has emerged, and it is time to ensure that this opportunity is translated into concrete action. My delegation is very encouraged by the announcement of the coalition's unilateral ceasefire in Yemen in response to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. That is an important element for the peace process. We hope that the announcement will lead to a permanent ceasefire and strongly urge the Houthis to seize the moment and make a similar commitment. We regret, as Mr. Griffiths has mentioned, that violations of the Al-Hudaydah ceasefire agreement continue. This has to stop. In addition, we express support for the joint appeal by the Secretary-General's Envoys to the Middle East, in which they observed that far too many people in the area have endured conflict and deprivation for too long. This is critical for all Yemenis, and there is no better side to be on than on the side of history. As the world battles coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we call on the parties to unite with us in our fight against this common enemy and not to wage war against each other. Mr. Griffiths alluded to the fact that Yemen cannot survive fighting two battles at the same time. We would like to underline, once again, that all parties must work together with the Special Envoy to seize the momentum for a second dialogue and to pursue a comprehensive, inclusive and Yemeni-led and -owned political settlement. Secondly, my delegation reiterates its concern about the humanitarian situation, which is now considerably compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. We call on all parties to refrain from impeding humanitarian assistance and to cooperate with humanitarian workers to ensure that a bad situation is not made worse. We also plead for all the authorities in Yemen to work together to address the spread of the virus. We would like to underline what Under-Secretary-General Lowcock mentioned, namely, that the spread of the virus in Yemen could be much worse than in any other part of the world, noting that there are vast movements of refugees. COVID-19 could affect the five priorities that Under-Secretary-General Mark stated, and we are very much concerned that this will affect the humanitarian efforts currently being undertaken. We noted with concern that, out of 41 programmes, 31 will be closing down owing to a lack of funding. This will cause more suffering for Yemenis. In that regard, we would like to appeal to the international community to help alleviate the humanitarian problem in Yemen. We would also like to express our appreciation to the United Kingdom and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for their generous humanitarian contributions. We also would like once again to reiterate our concern over the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The response will be limited should there be a spill from it, as the situation gives us limited room for manoeuvre. In that connection, we again call on the Houthis to give access to United Nations inspectors. 15/28 16/28 Thirdly, I wish to re-emphasize the importance of the implementation of all previous undertakings, notably the Stockholm, Al-Hudaydah and Riyadh agreements. Evidently, implementing the Al-Hudaydah agreement remains critical, and we urge the Houthis not to hinder access to the United Nations Mission to support the Al-Hudaydah agreement patrols. We reiterate the urgent need to implement the prisoner swaps provided for in the Stockholm Agreement, a point that also now carries a new urgency in the light of the pandemic as detention centres are high-risk spots for transmission. We support the Special Envoy's efforts to continue to broker peace, as well as his proposal in that regard. We concur with his important point that diplomatic consensus is essential if we want to find a peaceful solution. We also note that the Special Envoy has been in contact with many layers of society, including women and civil society, and I hope that their appeals will be heard by the leaderships in Yemen. Finally, Indonesia stands ready to continue to support the peace efforts in Yemen. As the world awaits the month of Ramadan in the context of the coronavirus pandemic, there is perhaps no better time or opportunity for Yemenis to walk the road to peace together. Ramadan is supposed to be a time for peace and tranquility; therefore, this is an appeal to all parties.
