Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I will start right away.
First of all, I thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.

During last month's meeting on this subject we
welcomed Mr. Holkeri's assumption of the post of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo. He has taken over his responsibilities at what
no doubt is a difficult and crucial time, given the recent
murders in Gorazdevac and increasing ethnic tensions
in Kosovo.

In the interest of time, I shall just confine my
comments to the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
role that it should play in Kosovo.

UNMIK is a unique mission in many respects.
While it is a peacekeeping mission, administration,
capacity-building and development are among the vital
components of its mandate. Given those
responsibilities and its finite resources and capacities,
UNMIK therefore needs to develop a clearly focused,
but realistic, policy agenda. In developing any policy
initiative, UNMIK must consult local government
officials and gain their confidence. No such initiatives
are likely to succeed fully without the ownership of
Kosovar officials.

In that regard, some of the issues UNMIK must
urgently address include security and the rule of law.
There is also a need to reinvigorate the Transfer
Council and to utilize it to incorporate officials from
the Provisional Institutions in areas of UNMIK's
reserved authority. UNMIK should also allow Kosovo
Government officials to manage some of the budgetary
and financial responsibilities, in line with chapter 5 of
the Constitutional Framework. In addition to giving
greater autonomy to the Provisional Institutions,
UNMIK must also work proactively to promote the
socio-economic development and reconstruction of
Kosovo. In the long run, all political achievements in
Kosovo can easily be undermined by inadequate
economic recovery.

The comments I have just made are aimed at
enabling UNMIK to improve its performance. At the
same time, we will continue to urge UNMIK to make
whatever progress that can be made in terms of
building confidence between different communities,
the return of refugees and the protection of minorities.
We also encourage UNMIK to continue to work for
greater dialogue, at least initially on administrative
matters between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that,
in due course, those and other measures will create the
necessary environment to begin progress on the
difficult, yet important, issue of status.

