Mr. Braun (Germany): In the interests of time, I
will try to be brief. Our thanks go to today's briefers.
We believe that the Secretary-General's summary of the
Tripartite Review Commission discussions (S/2015/713, annex) has come at the right moment. It helps to define
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) during the transformation
decade, and the constructive role of the Afghan
Government in drafting it is very commendable.

It is important to safeguard the achievements of
the past decade while continuing on a path towards a
more sustainable future for the Afghan people. The
Government in Kabul has made remarkable progress in
that area. At the same time, we deeply deplore the ever-
growing number of civilian lives lost due to cowardly
terrorist acts and incessant fighting, as well as the
many casualties among the Afghan security forces in
their fight against anti-Government factions.

We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
continue its efforts to implement the reform agenda
presented at the London Conference in December of last
year. The reform agenda should now be implemented
more rapidly. Germany stands ready to support
Afghanistan in that endeavour, and we second the call
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/684) for all
Afghan political leaders to confront those challenges in
a spirit of national unity.

Development and security go hand in hand. Long-
lasting peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only
through an inclusive political process. In that regard,
we welcome the recent peace talks and encourage
participants and supporters to continue that dialogue
as soon as possible. While we welcome Afghanistan's
active participation in the work of the Human Rights
Council, it is clear that the implementation of human
rights, particularly women's rights, in all aspects of
Government activity remains a challenge as well as an
obligation for the Afghan Government. That includes
supporting refugees as well as finding solutions that
can enable them to return to their countries of origin.

A stable Afghanistan requires regional stability,
and vice versa. We commend the Government of
Afghanistan for actively strengthening ties with its
regional neighbours, in, for example, the framework
of the Heart of Asia Process, which Germany will
continue to support. Germany would like to commend
UNAMA for its work in Afghanistan. It played an
especially crucial role during the last elections. For
a democratic society to develop, it is essential that
the Afghan people be able to cast their ballots in a
secure, free and fair election process. In that context,
we welcome the appointment of the Special Electoral
Reforms Commission. Germany will remain committed
to supporting Afghanistan in this crucial decade. We
will very soon be introducing a new draft resolution in
the General Assembly in support of Afghanistan and
seeking approval for it from all Member States.

