I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings and for the eighteenth progress report (see S/2020/763) of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. As the Mechanism is soon to mark the tenth anniversary of its creation, it is worth recalling the significant contribution it has made to accountability for core international crimes. The Mechanism was not created as simply an annex of the ad hoc International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. It is a successor court vested with different residual functions and ad hoc functions, namely, the tracing of remaining ICTR fugitives, hearing remaining appeals, holding retrials and conducting contempt cases. The work of the Mechanism remains all the more pertinent amid the resurgence of pernicious ideologies that deny genocide and glorify convicted war criminals. As has often been argued, behaviours change in the shadow of the court. It is therefore critical that the Mechanism continue to cast that shadow by bringing suspects to trial so as to deter would-be perpetrators and counter revisionist narratives. To that end, the Mechanism must continue to rely on the full and swift cooperation of States and enjoy the support of the Security Council so that the six remaining suspects currently at large, including major fugitive Protais Mpiranya, are not shielded from justice. Tunisia appreciates continued efforts by the principals of the Mechanism, despite the impact of the coronavirus disease, to bring more effectiveness and efficiency to the administration and operation of the Mechanism, guided by the Security Council's vision of it as a small, temporary and efficient institution, the functions and size of which will diminish over time. We recall the recent significant developments following the transfer of suspect Felicien Kabuga to, and his initial appearance before, the Mechanism in The Hague, as well as the judicial closing of the Augustin Bizimana case. We salute Serge Brammertz's prosecutorial efforts, which enabled that breakthrough in the judicial caseload of the Mechanism. We take note that a final decision as to the location of Felicien Kabuga's trial remains to be made. We are confident that the Mechanism will be able to identify appropriate ways that best serve the effectiveness and fairness of its trials, while taking into consideration questions and concerns that may arise with regard to the health and overall detention conditions of the suspects. We commend the flexible measures and working arrangements undertaken by the Mechanism to ensure both physical and virtual business continuity across duty stations, allowing it to adapt to the pandemic as it evolves while closely monitoring the safety of staff and non-staff personnel. We express satisfaction at the resumption of the in-court hearings that were previously affected by the pandemic and take note of the reasonably adjusted projections for the completion of the remaining trials and appeals. We stress the importance of adhering to the newly anticipated timelines as closely as possible so as to maintain the requisite focus on the expeditiousness of the Mechanism's core mandated activities. Finally, identifying a permanent solution to the issue of persons who were acquitted or released by the ICTR and who currently reside in a safe house in Arusha remains an unresolved and weighty issue. We recall the stipulations of resolution 2529 (2020) on the importance of finding expeditious and durable solutions, including as part of a reconciliation process, which would help further downsize the work of the Mechanism and provide a sustainable outlook for the persons concerned.
