Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We are
extremely proud to present today something that we
consider as the first draft resolution on youth, peace
and security. Investing in young people guarantees
peace and security, as well as development and
progress in our societies. Draft resolution S/2015/935
clearly and directly calls for the participation of young
people in decision-making, in particular in the areas
of peacebuilding, political participation and conflict
resolution. It also calls on Member States to ensure such
participation in a positive manner. Through the draft
resolution, we aim to make young people a positive
element in the building societies by strengthening their
role, including in ensuring social inclusion, progress
and economic development.

The presentation of this draft resolution is the
culmination of efforts launched by Jordan's Crown
Prince following the open debate (see S/PV.7432) on
countering violent extremism that he presided over.
It also follows the holding of the Global Forum on
Youth, Peace and Security, which was held in Jordan
last August and produced the Amman declaration on
the role of young people in that regard. The adoption of
the draft resolution will mark the beginning of a new
phase in the efforts of the United Nations system on the
role of young people, within a five-element framework
that includes participation, protection, preventing
conflict, strengthening partherships, and reintegration
into society.

Seeing young people's lives squandered in today's
armed conflicts serves to strengthen our conviction as to
the role of youth in preventing the outbreak of conflict.
It also leads us to call on Member States to create a
conducive environment and provide the necessary
mechanisms to make it possible for young people to help
build and strengthen peace and respect and tolerance,
in particular respect for different religions, with a view
to integrating youth in our institutions and bolstering
efforts to achieve lasting development in which young
people are a factor in creating rather than destroying.
In that regard, coordination among the United Nations
system, Member States and the private sector, as well
as political, technical and financial support, have an
important role to play. That must take place while
taking into account the needs of young people and their
participation in peace efforts during and following
conflicts.

The draft resolution also calls on Member
States and all parties to armed conflicts to take the
necessary measures to protect civilians, especially
young people, in line with their obligations under
international law, including the Geneva Conventions
and other international instruments. It also calls for
States to investigate war crimes and crimes against
humanity against young people, as well as to enhance
accountability and end immunity for those who commit
such crimes.

We hope that, by adopting this draft resolution,
we will be drawing the world's attention to this issue
and heightening international support so that young
people can be accorded the importance they deserve in
the process of creating a better future for them, at this
time when an increase in negative events throughout
the world is leading young people to take a wrong turn
and fall victim to fallacious ideas that incite them to
violence, as we have seen in the recent terrorist attacks
in numerous parts of the world, including the Middle
East, Africa and France. Terrorist groups recruit young
people to hurt them. They are the first victims. We
believe that protecting young people from the fallout of
conflict and ensuring that they do not turn to violence
and extremism must be done via collective efforts at
the local, regional and international levels. That also
includes efforts to ensure that they do not become
marginalized, as well as strengthening their sense of
worth and of their role, so as to entrench the principles
of acceptance and respect for the other. And it includes
reinforcing Government educational programmes so
that they meet the needs of young people.

In conclusion, we thank all the Member States that
participated in the negotiations on the draft resolution.

