Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on cote
d'Ivoire's assumption of the Council presidency this
month and thank you for organizing this meeting with
a view to adopting resolution 2448 (2018), renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).

I express my heartfelt gratitude to all members
of the Security Council for their support in adopting
the resolution and the acute sense of responsibility
that accompanied their long consultations. I say this
because while we dither at the United Nations in
general, and in the Security Council in particular, the
reality on the ground is extremely serious and requires
our concerted attention.

As we noted on 23 October (see S/PV.8378) when
the Secretary-General presented his report (S/2018/922)
on the situation in the Central African Republic, the
situation remains fragile due to clashes among armed
groups, in particular ex-Seleka and anti-balaka factions.
Civilians, humanitarian workers and international
forces are caught up as targets in the spiral of this
violence. Despite calls for armed groups to lay down
their weapons and engage in the peace process, they
are responding with demonstrations of force, as we
witnessed in Ndele in recent weeks.

I stress the relevance of paragraph 66 of the report,
which stresses the need to exert credible, adequate
and sustained military pressure to prevent any further
strengthening or expansion of the armed groups.
Unfortunately, we are now witnessing that sad reality.
Indeed, the latest unfortunate events in Batangafo,
Bambari, and especially in Alindao on 15 November
and in Ippy on 4 December, where displaced person
sites were the targets of senseless, deadly attacks,
sufficiently demonstrate some of the limitations
of MINUSCA.
The persistence of conflicts has forced more than
1 million Central Africans to leave their homes due to
arson, the demolition of their homes or as a preventive
measure. As of 30 September, the Commission on
Population Movement reported 643,396 internally
displaced persons, while the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported
573,242 refugees in neighbouring countries. More
than half of the displaced are children. In 2018, an
increasing number of unaccompanied and separated
children - approximately 704 - were identified after
a forced displacement. The hardest hit categories of
populations are displaced persons, host families and
people living in conflict areas.

The Central African Republic continues to be
caught up in a cycle of violence that has spread to
various parts of the country, including areas that were
previously considered relatively stable. Abuses and
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law continue to be perpetrated in a context
of impunity, exacerbating tensions in several parts of the
country. That has led to increasing humanitarian needs
and raised fears that the country may be plunging further
into humanitarian crisis. Civilians, particularly women
and children, continue to suffer the consequences of the
conflict, are increasingly exposed to safety risks and
have ever more pressing humanitarian needs. Today,
one in five people is a displaced person or refugee as a
result of abuses by armed groups.

The crisis is first and foremost one of protection
and requires all parties to commit to the protection of
civilians. Women and children continue to bear the
brunt of the violence. A growing number of women
have been victims of Violence.

In view of the security challenges facing the
country, it is crucial to seriously consider the
deployment of the Forces armees centrafricaines
(FACA), which could reduce the bellicose fervour of
the armed groups where they are located. The decrease
in security breaches in Bangui, Bangassou, Paoua and
several prefectures in the west are due to the sizeable
joint deployment of FACA and MINUSCA troops. The
Central African Government calls on the Security
Council to authorize MINUSCA to provide logistical
support for the redeployment of the FACA to garrisons
throughout the country.

It should be noted that to date, in addition to
the training of personnel by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic (EUTM. RCA), some neighbouring
countries - including Rwanda, Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Republic ofthe Congo - also provide training. We also
note that, at the bilateral level, the Russian Federation
has supported our forces in by providing weaponry
and combat training to elements previously trained by
EUTM. RCA. Those troops are subsequently redeployed
to the field jointly with MINUSCA. The presence of
the Forces armees centrafricaines, equipped with their
working tools throughout the country, is a guarantee of
security for the civilian population, a defender of the
decentralized services of the State and an important
factor that can contribute to the country's economic and
social development.

In addition to the renewing Mission's primary
mandate, which focuses on certain priority tasks,
including support for the political and reconciliation
process and the protection of civilians, resolution 2448
(2018) confers on the Mission other equally important
tasks, such as involvement in the upcoming electoral
process, its integrated support for the African Initiative
and the inclusion of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General as a full member of the panel
of facilitators.

We warmly welcome those initiatives, and in
that context it is important to ensure that MINUSCA
is provided with the resources necessary to properly
fulfil its new mandate, which is a responsibility that
falls on all members of the Security Council and the
United Nations. For its part, the Government of the
Central African Republic reiterates its strong and
determined support for the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation, under the leadership of the African
Union. The Government fully appreciates the proposal
to appoint a joint United Nations-African Union
Special Envoy.

I conclude by underlining our gratitude for the
mobilization of the Council and the entire international
community on behalf of MINUSCA and lasting peace
in the Central African Republic. We must strengthen
the progress made in several areas in order to advance
towards finding a solution to the crisis. We reiterate our
sincere thanks for the Council's unwavering support
for President Touadera in his quest to turn the Central
African Republic into a country where life is good.
We continue to acknowledge the troop-contributing
countries whose nationals have lost their lives in the

service of the United Nations for the protection of the
Central African population. We will always carry them
in our hearts.

The meeting rose at 3.55pm.
