The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express our sadness at the loss of life and
damage resulting from the earthquake that took place
yesterday in Mexico. The members ofthe Council would
like to extend their condolences to the Government
and the people of Mexico, which has suffered two
significant earthquakes in just two weeks. The Council
members would also like to offer their condolences to
all the victims of the tropical storms that have buffeted
the Atlantic coast and the Caribbean this season, and I
wish a speedy recovery for all who have been affected
by that natural disaster.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Reform of United Nations peacekeeping:
implementation and follow-up

Letter dated 22 August 2017 from the

Permanent Representative of Ethiopia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/766)

The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, Ministers and other
representatives here in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

I am also delighted to welcome our briefers: His
Excellency the Secretary-General; His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission; and His Excellency
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Chairperson of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations.

Members have before them a list of speakers who
have requested to participate in today's meeting, in
accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council's rules
ofprocedure and the previous practice of the Council in
that regard. I propose that they be invited to participate
in this meeting.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/766, which contains the text of
a letter dated 22 August 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres.


