Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Rwanda for
organizing this important and timely debate and for the
concept note (S/2014/478, annex) provided to guide our
discussions. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his relentless pursuit of global peace. We
also thank the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations and the Deputy Secretary
General of the European Union External Action Service
for their profound, thoughtful and inspiring briefings.
In recognition of the complementary role that
regional organizations can play in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, former Secretary-General
Boutros Ghali drew attention, in his 1992 report entitled
"An Agenda for Peace" (S/24lll), to the promise of
Chapter VIII of the Charter through regional action,
which could foster security and contribute to a deeper
sense of participation, consensus and democratization
in internal affairs. He recommended that the Security
Council grant authority to a regional organization
during a crisis situation.

United Nations peacekeeping efforts have since
involved regional and subregional organizations in
peacekeeping operations across the globe. That is
evident in the joint efforts conducted by the United
Nations with the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, NATO, the Organization of American States,
the AU and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). For example, ECOWAS, through
its peacekeeping arm, the ECOWAS Cease-fire
Monitoring Group, responded effectively to situations
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau and helped
to stabilize them prior to the deployment of United
Nations missions.

The increasing demand for peacekeeping missions,
and the multidimensional nature of contemporary
peacekeeping operations, calls for a more robust
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that the time is ripe for
reflecting on ways of improving the peacekeeping
capabilities of regional organizations in order to
effectively complement United Nations peacekeeping
efforts. A cursory overview of United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1948 indicates a total
of 69 operations undertaken to date, of which 54 are
past and 15 current. Of the 54 past operations, 22,
representing slightly more than 40 per cent, were in
Africa. Ten of the current 15 operations are in Africa.
Of those 10, 5 have remained either permanent or
recurrent, underscoring the critical importance of the
Security Council's sustained engagement, together with
the African Union, in order to improve their partnership
for effective peacekeeping in the region.

This situation has led African regional and
subregional groups to take steps to enhance
peacekeeping efforts on the continent. The AU is
moving energetically towards establishing an African
Standby Force; similarly, ECOWAS is developing a
subregional standby force. Other African subregional
organizations, traditionally focused on development
and economic goals, are beginning to pay more
attention to peace and security issues. The concept
note provided for today's debate identifies the context
of the challenge to the peacekeeping efforts of the AU
and the constraints affecting the AU-United Nations
peacekeeping partnership, which include logistical,
operational and financial issues. The strengths indicate
that significant efforts must still be made to enhance
the peacekeeping capabilities of the AU for a more
effective peacekeeping partnership with the United
Nations.

Two reports containing recommendations
for improving the partnership between the two
organizations are worth noting - the Prodi report of
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to African peacekeeping operations (see S/2008/813) and the report of the Chairperson of the AU
Commission on the need for greater coherence in the
AU-United Nations partnership. They comprehensively
address the measures needed to achieve an effective
peacekeeping partnership between the United Nations
and the AU.

A major challenge limiting the peacekeeping
capabilities of the regional organizations is financial
resources. In resolution 1809 (2008), the Security
Council recognizes that and calls for enhanced
predictability, sustainability and flexibility in financing
for regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. In its
efforts to meet its financial challenges in the context of
peacekeeping missions, the AU has sought authorization
for the use of United Nations assessed contributions for
AU peace operations. That is in consonance with the
Prodi report, which also recommends establishing a
multi-donor trust fund for the purposes of supporting
African Union peacekeeping capacity. We believe that
effecting these recommendations will provide the AU
with predictable funding for its peacekeeping efforts.
The recommendations of the high-level panel chaired
by Nigeria's former President Obasanjo on alternative
sources of financing for the AU are also relevant in that
regard. They should therefore be implemented in order
to give the AU greater access to financial resources for
funding its peacekeeping operations. It is worth noting
that the AU has recently undertaken a comprehensive
reform effort that has resulted in improved financial
management.

In terms of operational challenges, we believe that
a great deal more could be done in the areas of United
Nations-AU capacity-building programmes, joint
assessment missions and planning exercises in order to
enhance regional peacekeeping missions' performance.
The joint adoption of measures aimed at meeting
evolving peace and security challenges is also relevant
in the context of contemporary peacekeeping.

Another critical operational challenge is logistics.
Logistical deficiencies represent a well-documented
and recurrent problem in AU peacekeeping missions
that has compelled the AU to rely almost exclusively
on assistance from outside the continent for logistics
for its missions. A long-term solution would be for the
AU to establish its own logistics base. We take positive
note of the fact that the Department of Field Support
is exploring the possibility of giving the AU access to
United Nations logistics facilities and to a surge capacity
for critical missions' start-up phase, as recommended
by the Prodi report. Nevertheless, we believe that some
form of bridging mechanism will be required until the
AU logistics base becomes operational.

In terms of the political elements of peacekeeping,
we share the View that due to the factors of proximity
and first-hand contact during an outbreak of conflict,
regional organizations remain the most relevant in
initial efforts to maintain peace. In West Africa, for
example, ECOWAS has often taken the lead in peace
efforts when conflicts have erupted. The Economic
Community of Central African States has played a
very strong leadership role in conflict resolution in
the Central African subregion. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has been instrumental in
the quest for peace in South Sudan. The African Union
has also taken the lead in various conflict situations
in Africa, including Darfur, Somalia, Mali and the
Central African Republic. It is evident that regional
and subregional organizations tend to demonstrate
more political will in dealing with conflicts, especially
in their early stages. This can be attributed to the
greater sense of urgency that members of regional
organizations share when it comes to containing and
resolving conflicts, particularly when there is a risk of
mass atrocities or regional instability.

In terms of collaboration and coordination, Nigeria
fully supports the current deeper level of interaction
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, conducted through the annual joint
consultations between Addis Ababa and New York.
There is considerable merit in the close collaboration
between the AU Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat, as well as the institutional mechanisms
that have been put in place, such as the joint task
force and desk-to-desk. Such mechanisms help to
bring together the senior leadership and focal points
in both organizations for discussion of issues of
mutual interest. More attention should also be paid to
information management in order to improve synergy
in the implementation of mandates.

As the AU-United Nations peacekeeping
partnership continues to evolve, there is a need for
intensification of the current collaboration between
the two institutions in order to consolidate the gains
already achieved.

Ultimately, constructive interaction among
members of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council on substantive issues related
to peacekeeping remains relevant to creating a cost-
effective and mutually beneficial United Nations and
AU peacekeeping partnership. Indeed, a strategic
framework embodying a common vision for such
cooperation and a road map for its implementation can
aptly guide this kind of interaction.

