Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
President Mbeki, Ambassador Gambari, Mr. Menkerios
and Mr. Bassole for their very useful briefings this
morning on the situation in the Sudan. They have not
only provided useful insights, but also given us a
comprehensive picture of the interlocking dimensions
of the challenges that lie ahead in the country. I
commend them for their individual and collective
efforts in the Sudan. The Council is now better
informed on what needs to be done in the next 12
months, especially.

The Sudan is at a critical juncture. With the
elections of April over, the business of inclusive
governance, starting with the formation of a
Government of national unity, must gather momentum
in order to translate lofty promises into concrete
results. It is therefore important for the Government of
the Sudan and all political leaders to press forward
with the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). Dialogue rather than force is the
key to solving the Sudan's problems. Accordingly, we
call on all parties to adhere and recommit to the CPA.

The 2011 referendum is a central pillar of the
CPA. Its organization and outcome will have far-
reaching implications. It is therefore important that
preparations for the referendum be inclusive,
transparent, forward-looking and thorough. The
international community, in particular the Security
Council, should support the processes leading to the
referendum. In this regard, the security challenge in the
Sudan referred to by both Mr. Menkerios and
Ambassador Gambari must be given adequate
attention. Neither the Government of the Sudan nor the
African Union acting alone can meet the security needs
in the Sudan. It will take a global effort to cope with
the situation. The Security Council, with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has a key role to play.

Support for and progress in the Doha peace
process will go a long way towards creating stability in
the Sudan, and more especially Darfur. The deep
mistrust that exists among the parties impedes
progress. We therefore call on the parties to engage
constructively and meaningfully in the peace process.

The continued presence of the United Nations
through the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is a necessary complement to the peace process.
It is important, however, for the United Nations to
integrate its peace and security efforts with robust
development assistance in Darfur. The real dividends
of peace will be felt when recovery, reconstruction and
development take place in tandem. Otherwise, the goal
of integration through the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons may remain elusive.

For the United Nations, success in the Sudan will
depend on the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of funding. This issue was well articulated in
the Prodi report (see A/63/666) and should be acted
upon. Of equal significance is the need to look beyond
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund as a means of supporting
African Union peacekeeping capacity. The African
Union lacks the capacity to undertake single-handed
the wide range of activities associated with early
warning, conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction in the conflict zones dotted
throughout Africa. I hope that our consultations today
will help in this direction.

