Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by thanking you and the Jordanian presidency, Sir,
for organizing today's open debate. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing.

With this year marking the centennial of the First
World War, the theme of today's debate is both timely
and relevant. This debate enables us to reflect anew on
the scourge of past conflicts and lessons learned. We
would also like to seek ways to prevent conflicts and
consolidate peace for future generations. While several
factors can be cited as triggers for the outbreak ofthe First
World War, we cannot deny that parochial nationalism
and mistrust among States led to the war. There
was an obvious lack of understanding and tolerance
among the parties to the conflict. On this centennial
anniversary, we believe that genuine recognition of and
remorse over past wrongdoings is the first step towards
preventing another war and securing durable peace.
George Santayana, the American philosopher and poet,

famously said that those who did not remember the past
were condemned to repeat it. The fact that the world
witnessed the horrors of the Second World War, only
two decades after the first, illustrates humankind's
failure to learn from the lessons of history.

Unfortunately, in our region of North-East Asia,
tensions are rising more than ever before due to the
distrust among States. In large part, that stems from
the fact that the Japanese leadership has a distorted
view of what happened during the time of imperialism.
In Europe, for example, in striking contrast to Asia,
Germany's steadfast efforts after the Second World
War to come to terms with its past served as the basis
for genuine reconciliation with other countries, paving
the way towards European integration. Japan, however,
has not been able to properly address or break away
from its militarist past. That is the underlying reason
behind many of the recurring conflicts over historical
issues in the region.

Recently, many Japanese leaders have continued
to show an attitude of historical revisionism by paying
tribute at the Yasukuni shrine, where its past history
of aggression is glorified, by making irresponsible
remarks that the definition of aggression has yet to
be established and by passing on distorted historical
views to its next generation through revised school
textbooks. Japanese political leaders' worshipping at
the Yasukuni shrine, where wartime leaders convicted
as Class A war criminals during the Second World War
are enshrined, is a direct challenge to the foundation
on which Japan rejoined the international community
in the post-war world. Such remarks and actions
undermine future-oriented relations and peacebuilding
among nations in the region. They also run counter
to the objectives and spirit of the United Nations,
which reflect the aspirations of peoples for peace after
experiencing the most horrendous war in history.

Recently, the Japanese Government emphasized
its contribution to global peace with the policy of a
proactive contribution to peace. However, one cannot
but wonder how Japan can play such a role, when it
is actually creating more troubles with countries in
the region. If Japan seriously wishes to contribute
to regional and global peace, it should refrain from
provoking its neighbours with its denial of history.

A matter that is a serious concern not only for
East Asian countries but for the entire international
community itself is the so-called comfort women issue.
In the United Nations, the issue has been discussed
in the context of women's rights, the exploitation of
women in conflicts, war crimes and the prevention of
torture, among others. Indeed, Sunday, 26 January was
a very sad day for the Korean people. A woman passed
away who had been taken by force by the Japanese
Imperial Army to suffer as an enforced sex slave. That
leaves the total number of surviving comfort women at
55. The comfort women issue, which is at the core of the
pending problems between Korea and Japan, is also an
important universal women's rights issue.

The United Nations reports of the 1990s
submitted by Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. McDougall
(E/CN.4/1996/56, E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/13) stated that
the comfort women issue was one of sexual slavery
in armed conflicts, requiring the acceptance of legal
responsibility, compensation and the punishment of
perpetrators. In 2007, the Congress of the United States
and the Parliament of the European Union passed
resolutions, respectively, calling on the Japanese
Government to accept historical or legal responsibility,
apologize and pay compensation. As such, enforced
sexual slavery represents a breach of the conscience of
humankind.

The Japanese Government has yet to take
responsibility for the issue. At the General Assembly
last year, the Japanese delegation mentioned Japan's
contributions to the victims of sexual Violence in armed
conflicts. But it said nothing about the comfort women.
If their definition of the victims of sexual violence in
armed conflicts does not include comfort women, is that
a case of double standards or a denial of the past? The
Japanese Government should urgently pay heed to the
calls of the victims of its crimes and the international
community. It should act by instilling a spirit of peace
and reconciliation in its younger generation by correctly
teaching the lessons of history.

Having said all of that, I still believe that we should
look to the future. History should move forward. We
need to move on. But in order to do so, if for no other
reason than moving on, we should face history and
learn from its lessons.

