At the outset, I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Council and wish it every success in this endeavour. On this occasion, I am pleased to thank His Excellency Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for convening the meeting on this important subject. I welcome the participation of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed. I wish to reiterate that Tunisia appreciates the efforts of the United Nations system to address current challenges, and I thank the other briefers for their valuable presentations. I also wish to express my utmost appreciation to the Russian Federation for its successful presidency of the Council in October. Preventing wars, resolving conflicts, maintaining peace and security and making the world a better place to live were the most important reasons for the creation of the United Nations, whose seventy-fifth anniversary we are celebrating. Over the past seven decades, the United Nations has played a pivotal role in this regard, and it will continue to do so through its various organs, chief among them the Security Council. While the Organization's efforts have spared humankind a new world war and successfully restored peace and stability in many regions, our world today continues to face numerous challenges and threats to security, peace and stability, ranging from direct, conventional threats to indirect, novel threats whose scope and impact grow ever more dire in various regions and at many levels. The world has witnessed countless developments that have spawned new challenges, primarily as a result of the multiple and overlapping nature of threats to peace and security and of the drivers of conflict. The main factors at hand are the emergence of organized terrorist groups as a party to conflicts and their association with transnational organized crime networks; the direct effects of climate change on livelihoods and the attendant threat to the food security of millions, thereby aggravating the causes of violence and conflict; and the rise of cybercrime. The global spread of epidemics poses a threat to humankind as a whole, alongside other causes of fragility, in particular, weak governance, human rights violations, growing inequality and disparities within and between States, and persistent poverty and exclusion in many parts of the world. Most of these factors are broad in scope, and their repercussions are multidimensional and mutually reinforcing. They directly undermine peace and security, spark conflict, play a major role in exacerbating and prolonging crises, and have a direct impact on post-conflict situations and the processes of restoring stability and peacebuilding. Against that backdrop, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with its devastating impact on health, the economy, society, security and politics, stands as the best evidence of the danger that these new threats and challenges can potentially pose to security, peace and stability at various levels. The approaches and tools used to address questions of peace and security must therefore be reassessed. Accordingly, as the epidemic began to spread and became a pandemic, Tunisia called for a new approach based on broad and effective international solidarity and new United Nations-led mechanisms for taking action in a manner that takes into account the needs and situations of all nations and peoples, without exception. Tunisia endorsed the Secretary-General's call for an urgent global humanitarian ceasefire in order to focus international efforts on the pandemic. Our country introduced resolution 2532 (2020), which sets out a comprehensive, coordinated global response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The resolution, a Tunisian-French initiative, was adopted unanimously on | July 2020 and constitutes a milestone in the international efforts to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic. It has succeeded in unifying Council members and consolidating their vision of shared responsibility to push for an immediate end to conflicts around the world. Our country is working to strengthen international cooperation, boost and integrate the response of United Nations agencies to the pandemic and other challenges, make countries and peoples more resilient, contain the impact of the pandemic, bolster peace and security, and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals for all, in line with the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. The concepts of peace and security no longer apply to conflict alone; in addition to conflict resolution, they now encompass preventing conflicts, addressing their root causes and strengthening human development indicators, economic well- being, food security, social peace, good governance, democracy, human rights, the rule of law and institutional effectiveness. It is also necessary to address the trends of violent extremism and terrorism, reduce the effects of climate and environmental change, and control and contain the spread of medical and biological pandemics. For that purpose, we call for a new concept of collective security that accounts for the range of dimensions of the new threats and helps develop appropriate strategies to confront and mitigate them, not to mention ensuring that the Organization's efforts are calibrated to the task of consolidating security and stability, leading to more efficient systems for achieving and building peace. In conclusion, Tunisia renews its commitment to multilateral action and to promoting the concept of collective security and believing in the shared destiny of humankind. It calls for stepping up international efforts and supporting the Organization's role in tackling all existing and emerging challenges that pose a threat to peace and security in the broadest sense. Doing so will render the peacebuilding process more effective and consolidate the foundations of stability, putting an end to conflicts and humanitarian tragedies. We firmly believe that, now more than ever, global stability hinges on supporting the role of the United Nations; helping the Secretary-General to enhance the performance of the United Nations system in facing up to challenges; and strengthening the system's capacity to keep pace with global changes and come to grips with all aspects of the comprehensive concept of peace and security. This is undeniably the shared responsibility of all Member States, especially in our world's current circumstances.
