Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is grateful to the presidency of the Netherlands for
convening today's open debate, and welcomes you,
Prime Minister Rutte, to the Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union, for their
briefings. I have also listened carefully to the statement
by Ms. Toure.

I would first like to pay full tribute to the
peacekeepers around the world who are serving in the
cause of peace. In the 70 years of the history of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, these missions have
made an enormous contribution to the maintenance
of peace and security. In recent years, they have been
faced with more complex environments and mandates,
with ever-increasing asymmetric security risks and
peacekeeper casualties. Their continually expanding
mandates are supported by only limited resources,
and Member States and the Secretariat should work
together to help the peacekeeping operations adapt in
the light of the constantly evolving situations on the
ground. China is determined to participate actively in
the reform of the United Nations peace and security
architecture and internal management, and will work
together with all the relevant parties to improve the
ability of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
maintain world peace.

First, it is important to adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the fundamental principles guiding our peacekeeping
operations. That is both a prerequisite ofand a guarantee
that the missions can conduct their work effectively
and win the trust of host countries. It is important
to fully respect the sovereignty of host countries,
strengthen communication with them and, based on a
response to their real needs, help them achieve peace
and stability and enhance their capacity-building in
that regard. It is important to avoid arbitrarily taking
over responsibilities that fall under the purview of
national sovereignty.

Secondly, Security Council mandates must be
explicit and feasible, and have a clear focus. The
Council must give priority to political settlements,
focus on the core tasks of peacekeeping and take into
full consideration the situation on the ground, the
resources available, the capacities of troop-contributing
countries and other important factors. The priorities
and core tasks must be adjusted in a timely fashion
as the situation dictates. In due course, workable exit
strategies must be formulated, if the conditions allow
and the host countries request it. Troop-contributing
countries must be given more opportunities to take
part in the discussion as mandates are developed and
adjusted, which will also help to improve them.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen the support
and guarantees that the Secretariat provides to
peacekeeping operations. The logistical support for
peacekeeping operations must be optimized so as to
ensure the maximum effectiveness of the resources
allocated to them. Both the Secretariat and the
peacekeeping missions should prioritize the safety and
security of peacekeepers by establishing rules in that
regard, enhancing the in-house monitoring and analysis
of the local security situation, improving early-warning
capabilities and internal information-sharing on
potential security threats and ensuring that funds and
equipment are available for the purpose. It is important
to enhance and guarantee medical capabilities,
particularly for medical treatment and evacuation
during emergencies.

Fourthly, it is crucial to enhance troop-
contributing countries' capacity-building and expand
partnerships with regional organizations. The
international community should take the real needs
of troop-contributing countries, especially when they
are developing countries, into full consideration.
Their capacity-building in peacekeeping must be
strengthened. It is also important to ensure targeted
training and resources for peacekeeping operations.

Attention and support must be given to the
African Union and the other regional and subregional
organizations that are playing an important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security
in Africa. The African Union must be assisted so as
to enable it to establish an African standby force and
quick reaction force as soon as possible. China supports
African Union's proposal on funding for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and hopes to see details on the
African Union-owned peacekeeping operations.

China has actively participated in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and has made major
contributions to them. We are the second-largest troop-
contributing country among Security Council members
and the second-largest financial contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, with 2,500 Chinese
peacekeepers now deployed in 10 missions, including
those in South Sudan, Mali, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Darfur. In the face of complex security
situations and difficult natural conditions, they are
working diligently to maintain peace and protect local
civilians, and winning praise for the United Nations
and its peacekeeping operations.
China is actively honouring the commitment
that our President, Xi Jinping, announced to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We have established
a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops and two
standby peacekeeping police units, and have completed
their registration in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System. We have sent our first
helicopter squad to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Africa and are giving the African Union
active military assistance. The China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund views peacekeeping
capacity-building as an important task, through which
it aims to assist the United Nations in enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers and supporting
developing countries, particularly African countries, in
building their peacekeeping capacities.

Last but not least, China is ready to work with
other Member States to further improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations so that the world can enjoy
lasting peace and universal security.

