The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to pose a serious threat to human security around the world, including in the Middle East. Japan fully supports the ongoing efforts by all parts of the United Nations system to tackle the pandemic. As aco-initiator of the statement signed by over 170 Member States and observers in support of the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Japan strongly hopes that the recently adopted resolution 2532 (2020) will be respected in full by all relevant parties. Thanks to the efforts of both the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government, the number of COVID-19 infections, as well as the death toll in Palestine, remained relatively low during the initial stage. However, the numbers are growing, and we need to do more to contain the virus under the internationally concerted effort. Since the onset of this crisis, Japan has contributed around $10.8 million to international organizations, including UNICEF and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support Palestine's effort to counter the pandemic. Japan highly values the role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in preventing the spread of COVID-19 in densely populated refugee camps. The Agency has again demonstrated its capacity to provide quality services. Japan commends all the front-line workers of UNRWA for their dedication in daily operations under such difficult circumstances. The Agency plays a vital role not only in meeting humanitarian needs, but also in regional stability. So far in 2020, Japan has contributed over $25 million to UNRWA, including about $1.5 million in response to the flash appeal for the COVID-19 response. We expect UNRWA to diversify its donors to realize a more stable financial base. To this end, in mid-June, Japan organized a virtual working-level meeting of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for Palestinian Development and encouraged our Asian partners to continue supporting UNRWA. Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State solution. The conflict between the Israeli and the Palestinian sides should be resolved only through negotiations, based on relevant Security Council resolutions and known parameters. We are very concerned about the continued settlement activities by Israel, including the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures, which undermines efforts towards a peaceful resolution. If the application of sovereignty to the West Bank were to be unilaterally put into effect by Israel, irrespective of the territorial scope of such measures, it would severely undermine mutual confidence between the parties towards achieving a two- State solution and might lead to the destabilization of the region. We have conveyed this firm message to the Israeli side, including during the foreign ministers' telephone conversation on 14 July. We reiterate our strong expectation that Israel will act in a sensible manner. The resumption of dialogue between the parties must be the priority. Japan is ready to play a positive role through its engagement with relevant international frameworks, including the Quartet. In the face of the unprecedented human security crisis caused by COVID-19, international cooperation that places people at the centre must be the way forward for peace in the Middle East.
