Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time we are addressing
the Security Council under your presidency, we wish
to commend you, Madam, for your sterling leadership
and in particular for the dynamism that you and your
delegation have brought to the work of the Council.

Nicaragua reiterates its absolute and total solidarity
with the Palestinian people in their struggle for
freedom and the exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination, with the creation of a Palestinian
State based on pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, allowing for the return of all refugees and
in solidarity with all Palestinian political prisoners.
We also demand the immediate lifting of the criminal
blockade and an end to the settlement policy.

It is with a great deal of pride that we convey our
greetings to the Palestinian national unity Government.
We regret that this year, the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, at a time when the
overwhelming majority of the international community
has pledged to support the Palestinians in their struggle
to claim once and for all their inalienable rights, we
have witnessed yet another massacre - another
genocide of Palestinian children, women and men,
along with the destruction of their homes, schools,
hospitals and infrastructure. We wonder if Israel and
those who support it understand the meaning of the
word "solidarity"?

That criminal aggression lasted more than 50 days,
even as people looked on. Beyond the loss of life, it
left behind a Gaza that is but scorched earth and has
consequences for the future that we are all familiar with:
more refugees, more overcrowding, more destroyed
houses, hospitals and schools, and more Palestinian
children, women and men traumatized by this horrible
assault.

It is important that the funds recently pledged
by donor countries for the reconstruction of Gaza
become a reality. These must be immediate, new and
unconditional so as to provide support and ensure
reconstruction for this long-suffering people.

But I wonder how long we will allow the vicious
circle ofpolicies and practices by Israel: attack, destroy
and massacre, and, once everything has been destroyed,
accept a temporary ceasefire and then wash its hands of
the tragedy that it caused, and, later, start anew.

As a developing country, the State of Palestine has
every right to receive development aid and investments,
but if we allow this vicious circle of mass destruction
and massacres on the part of Israel to continue, the
international community's aid will serve only to help
that people merely survive. They deserve, as we all do,
a sustainable development that is in keeping with their
interests and promotes their well-being. They should
not be destroyed in step with the cyclical agenda of the
occupying Power.

Israel continues to refuse to negotiate in good faith,
hiding behind the veil of impunity that a permanent
member ofthe Security Council has historically offered
it. Each time we have seen progress in the negotiations,
inevitably we have seen Israeli policies and practices
aimed at interrupting that process. We must put an end
to this vicious circle. Countries with responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
cannot continue to allow this impunity or the suffering
of this heroic people.

The Security Council must meet its responsibilities
by adopting a resolution containing a set timetable for
the creation of a Palestinian State based on pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, laying the
foundation for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, and with two States, Palestine and Israel, living
side by side in peace, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the aspirations of
peace-loving people.

Peace in the Middle East will hinge on not only
resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but also on
liberating the Lebanese and Syrian territories occupied
by Israel. The situation in the Middle East beyond
the situation in Palestine and the rest of the occupied
territories must be resolved through dialogue and
negotiation, bearing in mind the legitimate interests of
all the States in the region, without external interference.
We cannot continue to encourage conflicts, finance
terrorist groups or impose regime-change policies.
All of this, as has been shown since 2003, has brought
nothing but death and destruction, extremism and
radicalism. Syria, a brotherly nation, is a victim of
those policies.

In conclusion, I call for us to work together with
Security Council members for a Middle East zone of
peace and development for their peoples.

