Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of Mali for its
successful presidency of the Security Council during
the month of December. We commend you, Mr.
President, for your able leadership and for the practical
manner in which you have conducted the work of the
Security Council during this month.

The programme of work prepared by the Mali
delegation for the month of December was, ifI may
say so, a programme d'actuah'te. Issues such as the
situation in Afghanistan, in the Middle East and in the
Central African Republic, which have polarized world
attention in recent weeks, have been dealt with in the
most adequate manner under your presidency.

The relevance of these issues and the way they
relate to the question of international peace and
security resulted in intense debate in the Council. Sir,
you truly deserve our appreciation for the skilful
manner in which you conducted those meetings.

The public debate on the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
another highlight of the Malian presidency. The
participation of several ministers from the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) subregion,
as well as the contribution made by the non-members
of the Council in the debate, demonstrated the
important role that the Security Council is playing in
the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We commend you, Sir, for your
initiative of convening two informal meetings and a
public meeting on this issue, thus keeping the Council
fully engaged with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo during this month.

During your term on the Security Council, we
have admired your dedication and the keen interest
your delegation has shown in addressing the issue of
peace and security in West Africa. There could have
been no better way of concluding your term on the
Council than by convening a public meeting on West
Africa, as you did earlier this week. The West Africa
subregion deserves the kind of attention that members
of the Security Council have unanimously and
unequivocally called for. It is our earnest hope that the
recommendations contained in the report of the inter-
agency mission to West Africa will be implemented in
the not-too-distant future.

As you will be completing your term in the
Security Council at the end of this month, allow me to
express the appreciation of my delegation to you and to
the members of your delegation for your invaluable
contribution to the work of the Security Council, in
particular on issues relating to Africa. As the current
Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Mali has always provided
to discussions in the Council a regional perspective to
African issues.

I wish to seize this opportunity to express the
gratitude of my delegation to the other outgoing
members - Bangladesh, Jamaica, Tunisia and
Ukraine-for their outstanding contribution to the
work of the Security Council and the cooperation
extended to my delegation.

As we will be assuming the presidency next
month, we look forward to the customary cooperation
of all members in our deliberations. Our predecessors
have set a high standard; we will strive to keep it so
next year.

