The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, the Republic
of Korea, Slovenia, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Uruguay and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. David Tolbert, President of
the International Center for Transitional Justice, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-
Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members ofthe Council have before them document
S/2012/713, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2012/261 and 8/2012/685, containing,
respectively, the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict and a letter dated
6 September 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Colombia, France, Germany, Guatemala, India,
Morocco, Portugal, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, China, Pakistan, Russian Federation

The President: The draft resolution received
11 votes in favour, none against and four abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution
2068 (2012).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements after the
voting on resolution 2068 (2012).


