Mr. Domingos (Angola): We thank the United
States Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry, for presiding
over this important meeting.

We also welcome the adoption of the landmark
resolution 2254 (2015), which delineates the process
that will bring about the end of the Syrian crisis. Its
pledge to support the ceasefire in Syria marks a vital
step forward. We encourage all parties to abide by its
provisions in order to successfully implement a Syrian-
led political transition, thereby ensuring the continuity
of governmental institutions and the maintenance of
the independence and territorial integrity of Syria. We
urge all parties in Syria, as well as the international
community, to maintain their focus and commitment
to the principles stipulated in that resolution and in the
Geneva communique (S/2023/522, annex).

The conflict in Syria has become one of the most
appalling situations confronting the international
community, with far-reaching political, humanitarian
and economic repercussions. The Security Council
has addressed the issue on numerous occasions with a
feeling of despair due to the grim situation faced by
the Syrian people. During the debates on the Syrian
situation, the delegation of Angola often admitted
to its disappointment with the lack of political will
demonstrated by the major stakeholders. Such political
will is necessary to achieve an effective, real and
durable solution to end a war that has claimed the
lives of so many innocent people while also displacing
millions. Now, as we reach the end of this year, we
look forward with a sense of renewed hope due to the
apparent determination by the international community
to defeat terrorism, as well as the positive momentum
for the political resolution to the conflict in Syria.

The recent upsurge in brutal terrorist
attacks - namely, in Paris, Beirut, Iraq, Ankara,
Egypt, Bamako and elsewhere - and the staggering
refugee crisis from Syria seemed to have played the
role of a game-changer by making the international
community understand the implications of allowing
conflicts to degenerate to such an extent, as has been
the case of the crisis in Syria. People suffering under
such deplorable conditions for such a prolonged period
of time, while international organizations and world
Powers are unable or unwilling to protect them, are
prey for the recruitment efforts of radical and extremist
elements. Exclusion, poverty and armed conflict serve
as a breeding ground for violent extremist groups to
spread their ideology of hatred and intolerance, as is
the case with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL)/Daesh and other terrorist organizations operating
in the region.

It is reassuring that the international community
has begun to turn the tide by adopting positive steps
towards a political transition in Syria that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and that
will, hopefully, enable them to independently and
democratically determine their own future, while
repudiating extremist elements such as ISIL/Daesh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra, among others.

We welcome the outcomes of the recent Syria talks
in Vienna and the specific steps outlined with regard
to the political process in Syria, notably the request
for the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan
di Mistura, to convene a meeting with the Syrian
Government and opposition by January 2016. In that
regard, we stress the importance of identifying members
representing the entire spectrum of opposition forces,
and for both sides to start discussing without further
delay the end of hostilities and the establishment of a
sustainable ceasefire. That would constitute the first
step towards a meaningful political process enabling a
new future for Syria.

It is also imperative that the parties to the conflict

begin implementing confidence-building measures on
the ground in order to attain the established deadlines
for the political process agreed by the International
Syria Support Group. That includes a joint national
unity Government, the drafting of a new constitution
and the holding of elections based on that constitution.

Putting an end to the violence is one of the most
pressing issues at the moment. As the refugee crisis has
demonstrated, the humanitarian catastrophe needs to be
reversed by creating conditions for a ceasefire, thereby
permitting the safe return of displaced people and
refugees to their homes. In the meantime, however, we
should not forget the collective obligation to continue
providing humanitarian aid until a normal life can be
restored in Syria.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support to the principles of the Geneva communique
and the constructive measures adopted at the Vienna
meetings regarding the way forward in the resolution of
the Syrian conflict. We also welcome the broad-based
international coalition to fight the so-called Islamic
State/Daesh and other terrorist groups. Auspiciously,
it became evident that inaction was no longer suitable
given the dangerous proliferation of extremism
throughout the world and its impact on the daily lives
of people everywhere. A unified stand in the fight on
terrorism is crucial. Terrorists can prevail anywhere
in the world. The more the international community
is divided and States selfishly pursue their national
interests, the more the terrorists prey on vulnerable and
alienated communities in conflict-ridden areas, thereby
swelling their ranks and increasingly threatening
international peace and security.

