Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in this
debate, and allow me to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. We also congratulate Austria on the
successful conclusion of its presidency.

My delegation wishes to thank the President and
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. We particularly
welcome their acknowledgement of the cooperation
extended to the Tribunal by my Government.

In the period since the Tribunal's most recent
briefing to the Council, my Government has
consistently extended the cooperation and support
necessary to enable the ICTR to effectively execute its
mandate. We have continued to facilitate unfettered
access to witnesses for both the defence and the
prosecution and assisted the movement of witnesses to
and from Arusha. I am pleased to report to the Council
that, in my Government's efforts to ensure the peace
and stability of our citizens, we have continued to
ensure the security of witnesses and, with the support
of the Office of the Prosecutor, established the Rwanda
witness protection service. My Government has
continued to support investigations initiated by both
the prosecution and the defence without prejudice to
either.

My Government remains committed to
continuing its support to the ICTR completion strategy,
as set out in resolution 1503 (2003). Despite the
decisions of the Trial and Appeals Chambers of the
ICTR to reject the Prosecutor's decision to transfer
cases to Rwanda, we remain prepared to receive any
future cases transferred to our competent jurisdiction
by the ICTR and to address all of the issues raised in
objection by the Chambers in respect to their decisions.
We welcome the Prosecutor's recognition of the
reforms undertaken by my Government in the justice
sector and his intention to renew his requests for
referrals to Rwanda.

The recent transfer by the Special Court for
Sierra Leone of five convicts to serve their sentences in
Rwanda is testament to the fact that this Court, after
due diligence, was satisfied that the efforts my
Government had undertaken and continues to
undertake were sufficient to merit transfer.

We continue to maintain that the transfer to
Rwanda is based primarily on the fact that the crimes
falling under the Court's mandate were committed in
Rwanda, mostly by Rwandans and against fellow
Rwandans. The evidence and witnesses used by this
Court are also from Rwanda. The end results of the
justice administered by the Tribunal are supposed to be
more visible in Rwanda than elsewhere, and we thank
the President of the ICTR for his recognition of this in
his statement this morning. We remain confident that
this situation will be remedied.

The recent decisions taken by the Trial and
Appeals Chambers continue to hamper my
Government's ability to pursue and bring to justice
those suspected of genocide all over the world. These
decisions have in tone and content undermined the
efforts my Government has pursued to reject a culture
of impunity and setback the progress registered in
repairing our shattered national fabric, not only in the
justice sector but in all aspects of national
reconciliation and reconstruction. The recent acquittals
of Protais Zigiranyirazo and Hormisdas Nsengimana
and the basis for those acquittals are, in the view of my
Government, most regrettable.

My Government welcomes the arrests of Gregoire
Ndahimana and Idelphonse Nizeyimana and commends
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda for their efforts in this regard. We
equally welcome the efforts of the Governments of
Canada, Belgium, Finland and Sweden to apprehend
and bring to justice persons within their jurisdiction
accused of genocide. We regret, however, that some
countries have failed to extend the necessary
cooperation to either my Government or the Court, and
we would urge them to do so.

My Government has repeatedly stated its view
that the archives of the ICTR should be transferred to
Rwanda upon completion of its mandate. This
conviction is premised on the fact that these records
constitute an integral part of our history, are vital to the
preservation of the memory of the genocide and will
play a critical role in educating future generations to
ensure the prevention of genocide. We recognize the
ongoing process to determine the final destination of
the ICTR archives and will remain engaged in the
ongoing deliberations of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on international tribunals.

At this crucial juncture, my Government shares
the Security Council's desire to reach a reasonable and
effective conclusion to the ad hoc mandate of the
Tribunal. We therefore urge the Council to do all
within its power to ensure that the ICTR completion
strategy is reached without creating an impunity gap
and undermining the efforts of my Government. In
conclusion, allow me to reiterate my Government's
continued commitment to supporting the work of the
ICTR.

