Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this quarterly open debate
which allows the Council to reflect on what has
transpired in the past three months in the Middle East,
as we reflect on the way forward.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of the observer State of
Palestine for their statements.

I will limit my statement to addressing the Middle
East process and Lebanon. Regarding the Middle East
peace process, today marks the end of the nine-month
timeframe that had been set for the parties to have
concluded the direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine. But it has ended with minimal achievements;
indeed, even with a setback for the reconciliation
between Fatah and Hamas. It is clear that the condition
set for the extension of the negotiations has been
an impediment for both parties to move forward.

Nonetheless, the international community and other
mediators should not lose hope. We believe that there is
no alternative to peaceful negotiations.

We encourage the mediators to continue engaging
both sides to make a breakthrough in the stalled
negotiations. In that regard, we express our deep
appreciation to the United States Government, and
especially to Secretary of State John Kerry for his
personal commitment to bringing both parties together
at the negotiating table. We call on the Quartet to put its
full weight behind the prospects of resuming the talks.
We call on the parties once again to avoid taking any
unilateral actions that might negatively affect the peace
process.

We note with concern that the situation in Gaza
is deteriorating, with renewed violence affecting
the economic and humanitarian conditions of the
population. We condemn the continuous firing of
rockets and mortar shells from Gaza into Israel,
breaching the terms of the November 2012 agreement
between Israel and the Gaza authorities.

Rwanda has always supported the solution of two
States for two peoples, with a secure State of Israel
living side by side with a viable Palestinian State, in
peace in security. It is in the interests of both parties to
reach a final agreement. We appeal to them to commit
to doing so and to embrace the opportunities available
in the search for a lasting peace between Israel and
Palestine.
I will now turn to Lebanon. Rwanda expresses
its strong concern at the continuing spill-over effects
of the Syrian conflict in Lebanon. They continue to
escalate. We urge all parties involved in the conflict
to cease all cross-border attacks. We reiterate that
neighbouring countries should respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon. As we all call
on the Lebanese authorities to use all of their means
to discourage acts that may undermine the security of
neighbouring countries.

Finally, we welcome the recent formation of the
Government in Lebanon. The international community
should continue supporting the new Government to
enable it to address the immediate economic, security
and humanitarian challenges facing the country. We
hope that the President-elect and his Government will
uphold Lebanon's sovereignty, unity and stability,
as well as the continuity of State institutions and the
promotion of dialogue. It is of paramount importance
that the Lebanese parties continue to maintain their
commitment to the Baabda Declaration and Lebanon's
policy of disassociation.

