Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I am delivering this explanation of vote on behalf of the United States of America, Germany, Estonia and Belgium. We join the rest of the Council in the unanimous vote in favour of resolution 2536 (2020) today, which renews the sanctions regime in the Central African Republic, as well as the mandate of the Panel of Experts. Our Governments hope that the extension of the sanctions regime, especially the territorial arms embargo, will keep pressure on the armed groups that undermine peace and security in the Central African Republic by threatening its elected Government and its people. It is an important element to accompany the Government of the Central African Republic on its way towards stability and peace. We welcome the Central African Republic's continued efforts to make further progress on key benchmarks pertaining to security sector reform, programmes for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation of former fighters and the management of weapons and ammunition. We strongly encourage the Government of the Central African Republic to intensify such efforts, including in close coordination and cooperation with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and other international partners. Without better management and tracking of the weapons brought into the country, we are concerned that changes in the sanctions regime will significantly increase the risk of the proliferation of rocket-propelled grenades, both within the Central African Republic and within the region. Rocket-propelled grenades are a common weapons system that can be easily stolen and smuggled if not properly stored. The widespread availability of small arms increases the lethality of conflicts in the region, and we remain committed to combating that scourge, including through the African Union's Silencing the Guns initiative. We urge the Government of the Central African Republic to take responsibility for ensuring effective control of all the arms it receives, acting to prevent any risk of proliferation. Despite those concerns, we voted in favour of the resolution in response to the request from the Government of the Central African Republic. Our Governments want to see consensus and concerted action on this file, given the importance of stability in the lead-up to elections later this year. We have been and will continue to be collaborative partners with the Government of the Central African Republic. We strongly oppose any measure or action that would weaken the Government of the Central African Republic, provide support to armed groups or misrepresent the responsible actions of the Council. That is why many of our Governments, either bilaterally or multilaterally, including through the European Union and its Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic, have provided technical support to the Government to help it to improve its storage, management and tracking of weapons by both military and internal security forces, including any new weapons that may be brought in as a result of today's easing. We strongly support the return of the mandate cycle to 12 months, and we are hopeful that this will give the Government more time to achieve necessary progress on the benchmarks, which we strongly encourage. In closing, the unanimous vote to adopt today's resolution is indeed a positive step for the Council. Our Governments wish to thank the Permanent Mission of France for its sustained efforts to reach consensus. However, we would also urge all Council members, especially those providing bilateral security assistance, to work cooperatively with the friends of the Central African Republic to support the strengthening of State institutions in a transparent and coordinated way and to ensure that the December 2020 elections are free, fair, peaceful, transparent and inclusive. The Central African Republic needs unambiguous and coordinated support at this sensitive time.
