Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his leadership and for
his presence in the Chamber today.

The United States reiterates its strong support for
the Office of the High Representative's mandate as
the final authority on the interpretation of the civilian
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords and
reaffirms, as other speakers have also done, that the
option to use the Bonn powers remains a legitimate right
of the High Representative. We welcome the progress
made towards Government formation following the
October elections, urge the new parliamentarians
in the Federation and the new entity Government
in Republika Srpska to begin the hard work of
implementing reforms, and encourage the Presidency
to agree on policy priorities allowing formation of the
State-level Government.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has several opportunities
on the immediate horizon to achieve its goals and
strengthen its relationship with the Euro-Atlantic
community. We are pleased that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is completing the necessary steps towards
European Union candidacy. Separately, in December
NATO allies agreed to allow Bosnia and Herzegovina
to submit its first annual national programme, proving
that progress towards Western integration is possible
by making difficult but necessary reforms. We
encourage the country's leaders to take advantage of
this opportunity soon.

While there are opportunities, many challenges
remain. Nationalist rhetoric exacerbates divisions
among the three constituent peoples. There are calls
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
from some who wish to see the country less stable, less
secure and more divided. A common characteristic
among those who seek division is their resentment
of authorities or institutions that prevent them from
exploiting the country's tumultuous political landscape
for personal gain.

The United States is concerned about recent
rule of law developments in the Republika Srpska
that are inconsistent with democratic norms and a
European future. We are also troubled by the lack of
local elections in the city of Mostar since 2008, as
the High Representative has pointed out. The United
States encourages greater engagement on the part of
his Office on resolving these and other issues and to
facilitate confidence-building and collaboration among
stakeholders. Expanding cooperation, strengthening
the rule of law, making institutions more functional,
and tackling corruption are vital steps to ensure a
bright future for the country.

The United States looks forward to a time when the
Office of the High Representative is no longer essential,
but the current state of affairs indicates that we are not
there yet. Only when the 5+2 conditions established
by the Peace Implementation Council are met can we
in the international community confidently say that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will have fully implemented
its responsibilities under the Dayton Peace Accords
and can responsibly take care of its own affairs. When
it becomes clear that State-level institutions are viable
and respected, international supervision through the
Office of the High Representative will no longer be
required. Until that day, the United States will continue
to fully support Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office
of the High Representative in realizing the Security
Council's vision for the country as a peaceful, stable
and multi-ethnic democracy fully integrated into the
Euro-Atlantic community.

