Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Our
debate today is a further demonstration of the attention
being accorded by the Council to the situation in Africa
in general - and West Africa in particular, which
remains one of its major concerns.

We took note of Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh's
introduction of the progress report of the Secretary-
General on the recommendations of the Security
Council mission to West Africa (S/2003/ll47), for
which we thank him.

We also welcome the initiative to enable Council
members to gain a greater understanding of the facts on
the ground and to learn about aspects that the report
does not convey - not because it attempts to mask
such facts, but simply because the written word is not
capable of reflecting them. Here, I would like to
emphasize how much those visits give rise to, and
further reinforce, among the peoples of the region, a
sense that the Council is taking responsibility for
managing the crises that are within its purview. Indeed,
how many people in Sassandra, on the outskirts of
Monrovia or in what was not so long ago the hell of
Kenema, have the slightest idea that the Security
Council devotes more than half of its time to the threat
to international peace and security represented by the
spiral of violence and destruction that they face on a
daily basis?

At a time when multilateralism is being
questioned and thrown into doubt and the Council
sometimes seems to be a relic of the past, such visits
are beneficial to the United Nations. They place the
Security Council in a better light and strengthen the
Secretary-General's initiatives in a part of the world
where solidarity is still a meaningful concept that
forms the cornerstone of human security. We hope,
therefore, that these visits will continue, and that the
missions will, to the greatest extent possible, be more
inclusive.

In deciding to send a mission to West Africa, the
Council had a clear goal: to find ways and means to
consolidate the peace process in the subregion with a
view to preventing the escalation and regionalization of
the conflicts. Clearly, some progress has been made,
although the situation remains fragile.

We welcome the coordination initiatives being
undertaken by Mr. Ould-Abdallah in the subregion,
through the United Nations Office for West Africa. We
take note with satisfaction of the Secretary-General's
commitment to propose, in the near future, steps to
implement his recommendations. But we should
nonetheless underline the fact that West Africa is at a
crossroads. We are focusing our comments today on
cross-cutting questions relating to peace and security in
the subregion, in particular the difficulties faced by the
countries of the subregion as viewed by the subregion
itself - difficulties that require coordinated Council
action, as well as the coordination of the Council's
activities with those of the Economic and Social
Council.

Essentially, tension must be defused in hotspots
and the cycle of violence must be slowed or stopped,
despite the continued existence of all of the factors that
originally led to this disastrous situation. Although we
have made some progress, we have not eradicated
malaria, which has now taken a back seat to HIV/AIDS
as a result of massive population movements, serial
rape and the dismantling of the health infrastructure,
with one conflict leading to another and with one
epidemiological or natural disaster after another. This
is a matter of urgency.
African mythology is replete with references to
crossroads, which are represented as very dangerous
places - places where all paths come together from
surrounding areas, where each person might meet up
with an enemy, but also where a decision must be made
as to which path to take. The enemies of West Africa
are well known. They are multifaceted, because such
enmities have historical, internal and external causes. I
would like to refer to just a few of them.

At the historical level, I would like to note the
short period of time that has been available for building
the nation-State in the post-colonial period, as well as
the reduction in strategic importance as a result of the
end of the cold war.

Internally, there has been a lack of democracy and
bad governance, which favour the survival of the
regime at the expense of the survival of the population,
and institutional security at the expense of human
security, as well as political, economic and social
exclusion; increased long-term human rights violations;
the absence of justice; and the poor management of
public affairs.

At the external level, the construction of the
nation-State in West Africa has been halted because of
the structural and economic reform that has been
imposed upon it. The result is a weakening of the
capacity of States to deal with the contradictions
inherent in any society and a loss of initiative and of
ownership by the State of its development policy.

Furthermore, the State will gradually lose its
ability to ensure respect for law and order and to offer
its citizens basic social services. As a result, we are
witnessing the weakening, and sometimes the loss of
the sense of belonging on the part of impoverished and
marginalized communities. This is fertile ground for
warlords to recruit soldiers, resulting in the exacerbation
of differences and ethnic or religious rivalries in the
context of competition for limited resources and for
power, and of the illegal exploitation of resources.

The proliferation and illicit spread of small arms,
as well as the recruitment and use of child soldiers, is
contributing to the construction of that horrendous
architecture, which the Security Council must act to
dismantle. It must generate the necessary momentum to
promote a process that will lead to lasting peace,
through the consolidation of the truce we are
witnessing today and of confidence and dialogue.

The dynamic of a lasting peace requires
strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS to restore
peace and stability in the subregion, so that it might be
in a position to fulfil its initial mandate - to promote
the development and economic integration of West
Africa and to enable the subregion to make a positive
contribution to the input that West Africa must provide
to the building of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development.

The dynamic of a lasting peace also requires
building alliances of peace and cooperation, including the
cross-border coordination of non-State armed groups.

Let me say, in conclusion, that the restoration of
peace requires the following conditions: internally, the
determination of the parties to make peace and to
restore mutual confidence and dialogue; and externally,
military, financial, and humanitarian support. It is at
this stage that the Council must act. Indeed, a truce,
ceasefire or peace agreement is worth only as much as
its effective implementation.

As this debate is taking place, we face an
important challenge: to consolidate the dynamic for
peace in Cote d'Ivoire by assisting, in an adequate
fashion, at the logistical and financial level, in the
process of disarmament and demobilization that is
under way by deploying rapidly United Nations
peacekeeping forces, with a View to restoring and
strengthening confidence and to promoting the return
of order and respect for the rule of law. The Council
will thereby help to stabilize the subregion and to
promote development in an environment of peace and
security.

