The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
Argentina.

I thank the Secretary-General for participating in
this open debate. I also thank the Permanent Observer
of the State of Palestine for his statement. I also thank
the representative of Israel.

At the outset, I will briefly address the situations in
Syria and Iraq, before turning to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as the central focus of our quarterly debates.

While the world's attention is focused on the
military campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Syria, efforts to reach a
political solution to the Syrian crisis tragically seem
to have been relegated to second or even third place.
We must therefore bear in mind that the expansion
and consolidation of ISIL and the spread of sectarian
violence throughout the region are the result of the
prolonged and uncontrolled militarization of the
Syrian conflict, which is rooted in the inability and
unwillingness of local, regional and international
actors to reconcile their differences by peaceful means.

Therefore, just as in Iraq the formation of an
inclusive new Government is a central component
of the strategy to help stop the spread of extremism,
so in Syria must the resolution of the conflict by
peaceful means be at the centre of the priorities of the
international community. Without peace in Syria there
will be no peace in the region and the expansion of ISIL
and other extremist groups will continue.

We therefore hope to be able to start working soon
with the new Special Envoy, Mr. De Mistura, to begin
to forge the consensus needed for effective action by
the Security Council. At the same time, we take this
opportunity to reaffirm our demand that all actions
in the fight against ISIL be framed with respect for
international law and for human rights, including the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, and observe the highest
standards for the protection of civilians.

Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on
12 October Argentina added its contribution to
the efforts of the international community for the
reconstruction of Gaza. After 50 days of extreme
violence and unprecedented devastation, rebuilding
Gaza and meeting the vast needs of the victims is a
humanitarian, political and moral imperative. It is an
urgent task. The cooperation of all stakeholders under
the leadership of the Palestinian Government of national
consensus will be essential for turning promises into
tangible results.

While reconstruction work begins, and the work of
rebuilding from previous years continues, it is crucial to
bear in mind the message that resonated with such force
in Cairo: we must bring to an end this destructive cycle
through a durable solution that goes beyond the sort of
short-term assistance that leaves the underlying causes
of violence intact. The people of Gaza do not need only
humanitarian assistance. The people of Gaza do not
need only cement, bricks and wood. What they need
ultimately is freedom. Reconstruction must therefore be
accompanied by a process of genuine political change
to end the 47 years of illegal occupation. Otherwise,
we are volunteering to continue managing the conflict
by accepting the fallacy that, with sufficient resources,
the occupation can be more dignified. Let us make no
mistake: that is impossible! Dignity and occupation are
absolutely incompatible concepts.

We believe, therefore, that it is necessary to do
more than where we have done to date. It is not enough
to condemn the excessive use of force by Israel or
the launching of rockets by Hamas; to be horrified at
the killing of civilians; to weep when we witness the
murder of women and children; to repeat time and
again that the building of settlements is illegal and
hinders peace; or to express our deep concern about
the impunity enjoyed by extremist settlers and their
acts of incitement and violence in the holy places of
Jerusalem. This is not enough. We have had enough of
such repetitive rhetoric. We have had enough, above all,
of such unnecessary violence.

Over the past 20 years, various negotiating formats
and initiatives have been tried and have failed. Far
from resolving the conflict, they have perpetuated the
status quo at the expense ofthe rights of the Palestinian
people. But these 20 years have not been useless; they
have served to crystallize within the international
community a set of principles and parametres that
outline a two-State solution, contained in the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is crucial that progress be made in its
implementation before it is too late. We believe that
the Security Council should assume its political and
institutional responsibilities, acting as a key player in
this task by helping to create the conditions necessary
for this to be occur.

That is why we support, and will continue to
support, all proposals containing the elements which
enjoy the overwhelming acceptance of the international
community to resolve the conflict, which are based
on international law and inspired by justice, seek the
full independence of Palestine, and guarantee the
right of Israel to live in peace and security. From this
perspective, we have determined and supported from
the beginning the initiative launched by President
Abbas and endorsed by the League of Arab States for
the Security Council to adopt a resolution containing
parametres, targets and clear deadlines for ending
the occupation. The fact is that for too long, using the
excuse that the peace process must be protected, the
Security Council has tacitly consented to practices
that have actually undermined the recognition of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, which are
one of the main objectives of the negotiations.

We are not naive. While peace can be achieved
overnight, violence, too, can happen overnight. We
are not naive. The interests and reasons that continue
to block effective action by the Security Council are
known to all. We must decide whether we want to
continue to be part of the problem or to begin to be
part of the solution. My country believes firmly that the
Council cannot continue to look the other way, since
it is clear that every time it has failed in its mission
the human cost has been intolerable. And in a region
where extremists are imposing an agenda of more and
more violence and more and more hatred, it is our duty
to support those who strive to build peace, not merely
infrastructure. It is our duty to those who wish to build
peace through peaceful and legitimate means. Argentina
continues to be ready to support those efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.

Mr. Oyarzabal took the Chair.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.


