Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Today's
adoption of resolution 2077 (2012), on piracy off the
coast of Somalia, just two days after the holding of
an open debate of the Security Council on piracy (see S/PV.6865), during which a presidential statement was
delivered (S/PRST/2012/24), illustrates the degree to
which the scourge of piracy is a major concern for the
entire international community. My delegation would
first of all like to express its deep appreciation to all
the delegations, especially that of the United States of
America, for the efforts that led to the adoption of the
resolution.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia has for a long time
jeopardized the stability of that country as well as that
of the countries of the subregion. It has also disrupted
commercial flows, fuelled criminal networks and
contributed to illicit trafficking on a vast scale. Given
the results achieved to date, the battle being waged
on land and at sea to address the underlying causes of
the scourge are proving to be increasingly effective.
However, those efforts are being undertaken against
the backdrop of certain allegations that are a source
of concern to the delegation of Togo that have to do
with illegal fishing and the illegal dumping of waste,
in particular toxic waste, in the waters off the coast of
Somalia. Togo views those allegations as serious on
various levels, to the extent that they require action
by the international community in order to investigate
whether that is in fact taking place and, if so, stop it.

The Secretary-General has himself indicated, in
his report on the protection of Somali natural resources
and waters (S/2011/661), that while the dumping of
toxic waste may have taken place in the past, there
is no evidence that it is currently taking place. The
Secretary-General also indicates that, without adequate
monitoring or reporting systems, it is difficult to
provide detailed information related to allegations
of the dumping of waste and of illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing off Somalia's coast. Since
the absence of such mechanisms make investigations
difficult, it therefore follows that adequate monitoring
and reporting systems should be put in place in order
to be able to expand those inquiries. In that regard,
Togo believes that the sixth preambular paragraph and
paragraph 28 of resolution 2077 (2012) are insufficient
and do not go far enough, as they merely take note
of the lack of ability to provide detailed information
about those allegations owing to the absence of such
systems - instead of calling for them to be established
in order to bridge that gap in combating poverty.

Togo urges the Security Council, not having done
so in adopting resolution 2077 (2012), not to miss
the next opportunity to call for the establishment of
adequate mechanisms to determine whether or not
the allegations are true. If they are in fact found to be
accurate, the Council should ascertain the seriousness
of the situation and respond in an appropriate manner.
We believe that to be the only way in which we can
dispel any doubts about the issue and definitively clear
up the matter of any potential future responsibilities of

the Organization.

