Mr. Holliday (United States of America): We
welcome the Foreign Minister of East Timor, Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Special Representative Sharma for their
continued efforts to advance political and economic
development in East Timor.

The United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) is a success, and the United States
has been a strong supporter of the efforts of East Timor
to build a free and more hopeful future. While progress
is being achieved, we recognize that much remains to
be done. As a result, we agree with the Secretary-
General that UNMISET should be extended past May
2004, at reduced levels, to consolidate gains made
during the past two years of the Mission. We applaud
the progress made by the Government and the people
of East Timor in the development of a civil
administration. As the Secretary-General reports,
however, the East Timor administration continues to
have limited capacity. We also welcome the proposal
for continuation of a limited number of civilian experts
in East Timor's ministries. We expect that any
assistance of this type past May 2005 would be
provided through normal bilateral and multilateral
donor support, rather than through a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

In his report (S/2004/117), the Secretary-General
states that a critical element in bolstering East Timor
security is the passage of legislation and the adoption
of regulations and policies defining the roles of, and
relations among, the various East Timorese security
forces. As we stated in October, the Government of
East Timor should do its part to nurture respect for the
rule of law, including taking action to address
allegations of police misconduct. We encourage the
Government of East Timor to take those necessary
steps as soon as possible. The human rights violations
committed in East Timor in 1999 have not been
forgotten. The process of accountability for those
atrocities should achieve its intended goal, and that is
justice.

The security situation in East Timor is still
fragile. The Council will need to consider in the
coming weeks how best to meet the future security
needs of East Timor. We believe that there are issues
that remain unresolved regarding the strengthening of
police capability. In that regard, we believe that the
police component of the Australian proposal is very
important.

