Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia has called this emergency meeting of
the Security Council to discuss the aggressive actions
of the United States and its allies against Syria. This is
now our fifth meeting on the subject in a week.

President Putin of the Russian Federation made a
special statement today.

"On 14 April, the United States, with the support
of its allies, launched an air strike on military and
civilian infrastructure targets in the Syrian Arab
Republic. An act of aggression against a sovereign
State on the front lines in the fight against
terrorism was committed without permission from
the Security Council and in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms and principles
of international law. Just as it did a year ago, when
it attacked Syria's Al-Shayrat airbase in Syria, the
United States took a staged use of toxic substances
against civilians as a pretext, this time in Douma,
outside Damascus. Having visited the site of the
alleged incident, Russian military experts found
no traces of chlorine or any other toxic agent. Not
a single local resident could confirm that such an
attack had occurred.

"The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has sent experts to
Syria to investigate all the circumstances. However,
a group of Western countries cynically ignored this
and took military action without waiting for the
results of the investigation.

"Russia vehemently condemns this attack on
Syria, where Russian military personnel are helping
the legitimate Government to combat terrorism.

"The actions of the United States are making
the already catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Syria even worse, inflicting suffering on civilians,
for all intents and purposes enabling the terrorists
who have been tormenting the Syrian people for
seven years, and producing yet another wave
of refugees fleeing the country and the region
in general. The current escalation of the Syrian
situation is having a destructive effect on the entire
system of international relations. History will
have the last word, and it has already revealed the
heavy responsibility that Washington bears for the
carnage in Yugoslavia, Iraq and Libya."

Russia has done everything it could to persuade the
United States and its allies to abandon their militaristic
plans threatening a new round of violence in Syria and
destabilization in the Middle East. Today, and at the
Council meeting we called yesterday (see S/PV.8231),
the Secretary-General expressed his concern about how
events are developing. Washington, London and Paris,
however, preferred to let the calls for sanity go unheard.

The United States and its allies continue to
demonstrate a flagrant disregard for international law,
although as permanent members of the Security Council
they have a special duty to uphold the provisions of
the Charter. It was a disgrace to hear an article of the
United States Constitution cited as justification of
this aggression. We respect the right of every State to
honour its own fundamental law. But it is high time that
Washington learned that it is the Charter of the United
Nations that governs the international code of conduct
on the use of force. It will be interesting to see how the
peoples of Great Britain and France react to the fact
that their leaders are participating in unlawful military
ventures that invoke the United States Constitution.

These three countries constantly lean towards
neocolonialism. They scorn the Charter and the Security
Council, which they attempt, shamelessly, to use for
their own unscrupulous purposes. They do no serious
work in the Council. They refuse to consult with us,
while falsely assuring everyone of the opposite. They
are undermining the Council's authority.

The alleged use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
city of Douma has been cited as the excuse for this
aggression. After an inspection by our specialists,
Russia's representatives stated unequivocally that no
such incident took place. Moreover, people were found
to have taken part in staging the incident, which was
inspired and organized by foreign intelligence services.

After the matter emerged, the Syrian authorities
immediately invited experts from the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to try to
establish all the circumstances through a field mission
to Douma. The visa formalities were dealt with quickly
and security guarantees given. As the air strikes began,
the specialists were already in Syria and preparing to
begin their work.

I would like to remind Council members and
everyone else that on 10 April (see S/PV.8228), when
our draft resolution (S/2018/322) on ensuring the
security of the work of the OPCW's special mission was
blocked, we were assured that there was no need for
such a document. They said that no additional effort on
the part ofthe Security Council was necessary to ensure
that the mission could reach Douma and conduct an
investigation of the chemical incident. Now, however,
we can see that we were absolutely right.

Yesterday, some of our colleagues - some out of
naivety and others out of cynicism ~ told us that this
situation had allegedly arisen owing to the lack of an
independent investigative mechanism. The aggression
today has shown, as we said, that this had nothing
whatever to do with it. The OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mission (JIM) was in place during
last year's attack on the Al-Shayrat airbase, but that
did not stop the United States from launching a missile
attack. After that, the JIM. spent six months tailoring
its conclusions to justify the strike. We have said over
and over again that they do not need any investigations.
They did not need them then and they do not need them
now. The organizers of the aggression did not even wait
for the international organization that is authorized to
establish the basic facts to do so. Apparently they had
established and instantly identified the perpetrators,
after disseminating rumours about them through
social networks with the help of the militias they
sponsor and the non-governmental organizations that
are their clients. This was backed up by mythical
secret intelligence. Their masks - or rather the White
Helmets - have come off once again.

We have become accustomed to the fact that their
efforts to achieve their dubious geopolitical aims,
the aggressor countries deliberately blame the so-
called Assad regime for every evil. There has been a
trend recently to shift the blame onto Russia, which,
as they tell it, has been unable to restrain Syria's so-
called dictator. All of this goes according to a tried-
and-true formula, whereby a provocation results in a
false accusation, which results in a false verdict, which
results in punishment. Is that how these people want
to conduct international affairs? This is hooliganism
in international relations, and not on a petty scale,
given that we are talking about the actions of key
nuclear Powers.

Several missiles were aimed at the research centre
facilities in Barzeh and Jamraya. There have been two
recent OPCW inspections there with unrestricted access
to their entire premises. The specialists found no trace of
activities that would contravene the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Syria's scientific research institutions are
used for strictly peaceful activities aimed at improving
the efficiency of the national economy. Do they want
Syria to have no national economy left at all? Do they
want to kick this country - only a few years ago one
of the most developed in the Middle East - back into
the Stone Age? Do they want to finish whatever their
sanctions have not yet accomplished? And yet they still
contrive false breast-beating about the sufferings of
ordinary Syrians. But they have no interest in ordinary
Syrians, who are sick of war and glad about the
restoration of the legitimate authorities in the liberated
territories. Their aggressive actions merely worsen the
humanitarian situation that they claim to care about
so deeply. They could end the conflict in Syria in the
space of 24 hours. All that is needed is for Washington,
London and Paris to give the order to their tame
terrorists to stop fighting the legitimate authorities and
their own people.

The attacks were aimed at Syrian military
airfields that are used for operations against terrorist
organizations, a highly original contribution to
the fight against international terrorism, which, as
Washington never tires of saying, is the sole reason
for its military presence in Syria, something that we
are extremely doubtful about. Rather, it is becoming
increasingly clear that those in the West who hide
behind humanitarian rhetoric and try to justify their
military presence in Syria based on the need to defeat
the jihadists are in fact acting in concert with them
to dismember the country, a design confirmed by the
categorical refusal of the United States and its allies to
assist in the restoration of the areas of Syria that have
been liberated by Government forces.

Their aggression is a powerful blow and a threat to
the prospects for continuing the political process under
the auspices of the United Nations, which, despite the
real difficulties, is moving forward, albeit at varying
speed. Why do they bother endlessly pinning all their
hopes on the Geneva process when they themselves are
driving it straight towards yet another crisis? We urge
the United States and its allies to immediately halt their
acts of aggression against Syria and refrain from them
going forward.

We have proposed a brief draft resolution for the
Council's attention on which we request that a vote
be held at the end of this meeting. We appeal to the
members of the Security Council. Now is not the time
to evade responsibility. The world is watching. Stand
up for our principles.

