Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Madam President, as this
is our first open meeting under the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council, allow me to take
this opportunity to wish you the very best for the month
ahead. We look forward to working with you and your
team and assure you of our full cooperation.

I also want to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
for his important briefing to the Council today. We fully
support the efforts to forge a political agreement to end
the conflict in Yemen. I also thank the Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, John Ging,
for his comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the country.

Let me turn first to the political situation. We
commend Special Envoy Griffiths on his determined
and active diplomatic efforts, including his important
visits to Yemen and the region. These efforts have helped
create a window of opportunity to restart negotiations
on Al-Hudaydah and on a wider political settlement
to end this conflict and the intolerable suffering of
the civilian population. All parties must seize this
opportunity and engage sincerely and constructively
with the Envoy in good faith and without preconditions.

We call for an overall de-escalation to create an
environment conducive to talks. This includes a halt
to missile attacks and threats against shipping in the
Red Sea, as well as air strikes and fighting in civilian
areas - actions that we have repeatedly condemned.

The Council must also increase its efforts to
encourage engagement and de-escalation by the
parties. We echo the call of the Special Envoy on the
parties to, first, fully suspend or freeze the fighting
in Al-Hudaydah; secondly, engage in the upcoming
political consultations in Geneva based on the Envoy's
framework presented to the Council on 18 June; thirdly,
ensure the effective inclusion and participation of
women in any political consultations; fourthly, respect
international humanitarian law, including as concerns
the protection of civilians and medical care, as well as
ensuring humanitarian access; and, fifthly, exchange
detainees and prisoners detained as a result of the
conflict, as a confidence-building measure.

I would now like to turn to the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. As we just heard from Mr. Ging,
22 million people, or three out of every four Yemenis,
are in need ofhumanitarian assistance or protection. We
share the concerns outlined by Mr. Ging in his briefing.
Let me pause here to join the Special Envoy and others
in praising the work of the many brave humanitarians on
the ground. We are encouraged to see the Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef ports open and functioning. As they are a
lifeline for millions of Yemenis, it is essential that they
remain that way. At the same time, we are concerned
by reports of the risk of reduced commercial imports,
including food and fuel.

The continued pause inthe offensive is encouraging.
However, the reported escalation last week, including in
Al-Hudaydah, is cause for concern. Like others, we are
deeply concerned by the reported attack this morning
on a hospital and a fish market in Al-Hudaydah, which
has reportedly led to a significant loss of life.

As we have repeatedly heard from the United
Nations and its partners, a full-scale offensive against
Al-Hudaydah would aggravate the humanitarian
disaster even further, put hundreds of thousands of
lives at risk and pose the threat of a new, widespread
cholera epidemic and famine. Urban warfare or a siege
would be equally catastrophic.

Since the outbreak of the conflict three years
ago, 3 million children have been born in Yemen.
Al-Hudaydah alone is home to 300,000 children. We
are deeply troubled by the disastrous effects of the
humanitarian situation for children in Al-Hudaydah
and beyond, including the risk of stunting, which was
already staggeringly high in Yemen before the crisis
began. As we agreed during the debate on children and
armed conflict held on 9 July (see S/PV.8305), when the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2427 (2018),
we have a responsibility to do all we can to protect
children trapped in conflict. The best way to do so in
Yemen is by preventing the conflict from entering its
fourth year.

