The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to brief the Council today on my three-day
visit to Egypt, Israel, the occupied Palestinian territories
and Jordan.

Since the situation in Gaza and Israel escalated last
week, I made it my priority to contribute to efforts to
halt the violence, with the priority aim of protecting
civilians. I cancelled a previously planned trip to travel
to the Middle East instead as a clear signal of the need
for international diplomatic mobilization to prevent a
further escalation that would put the whole region at
risk, and to strengthen the commendable efforts, led by
Egypt, to reach a ceasefire.

I warmly welcome today's ceasefire announcement.
I commend the parties for stepping back from the
brink, and I commend President Morsy of Egypt for
his exceptional leadership. Our focus now must be
on ensuring that the ceasefire holds and that all those
in need in Gaza - and there are many - receive the
humanitarian assistance they need.

It is a huge relief for the people of Gaza and Israel
and for the international community that the violence is
stopping, but we are all aware of the risks, and we are all
aware that there are many details that must be solidified
if a broad, durable ceasefire is to take firm hold over
the longer term. It is imperative that both sides stick to
the ceasefire in order to allow these underlying issues
to be addressed in a sustainable fashion.

Today's announcement follows a week of
devastating violence in southern Israel and Gaza,
including the terror attack today on a bus in downtown
Tel Aviv, which I strongly and immediately condemned.

This brought us to an important moment, after a week
of intensive diplomacy to reach a ceasefire. In that
regard, I met with Egyptian President Morsy, League of
Arab States Secretary-General Elaraby, Israeli Prime
Minister Netanyahu, Palestinian President Abbas,
Jordan's King Abdullah and Foreign Minister Judeh
and many other leaders in each location, including
the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Egypt, the
Minister ofDefence, the Foreign Minister and President
of Israel, and Prime Minister Fayyad. I also met with
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton while
in Jerusalem. I have just spoken with Prime Minister
Netanyahu of Israel for a second time today.

My paramount concern throughout has been for
the safety and well-being of all civilians, no matter
where they are. Innocent people, including children,
have been killed and injured on both sides. Families on
both sides were forced to cower in fear as the violence
raged around them. It pained me to be back here under
circumstances similar to those that prevailed when I
visited in 2009 during Operation Cast Lead. Recent
events have been eerily reminiscent.

This morning, I heard from the United Nations
team in Gaza. They reported on the impact of
violence, including increased civilian casualties, which
reached more than 139 Palestinians killed, more than
70 of them civilians, and more than 900 injured,
with the displacement of 10,000 Gazans, who are
now in 12 schools of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) and two others run by local
authorities. UNRWA has emphasized the critical need
to support ongoing programmes on food assistance,
health and sanitation, which are experiencing funding
shortfalls and will now be burdened by having to
support additional displaced persons. I am asking our
emergency and humanitarian teams to be prepared to
do whatever they can to alleviate the suffering.

Attacks on both sides continued today as the
ceasefire approached. The bombing today in Tel
Aviv injured 23 people, including three severely. The
indiscriminate firing of rockets targeting Israel also
continued. One long-range rocket landed in the outskirts
ofJerusalem yesterday, with no injuries reported. Since
14 November, rocket fire has resulted in the deaths of
four Israeli civilians, with 219 reported injured, most
of them civilians. Three are in serious condition. One
Israeli soldier was killed yesterday, and 16 Israeli
soldiers have been wounded, one critically.
Overall, in the same period, more than 1,456 rockets
have been fired from Gaza into Israel. One hundred and
forty-two fell inside Gaza itself. Approximately 409
were intercepted by the Iron Dome anti-missile system.
Ten Fajr-S missiles were shot at Tel Aviv suburbs and the
sea, five of which were intercepted by the Iron Dome
system. Three long-range missiles hit the outskirts of
Jerusalem, which is unprecedented.

Since Israel's targeted assassination from the air,
on 14 November, of Ahmed Al-Jaabari, the chief of the
military wing of Hamas, and with Israel's offensive in
Gaza in its eighth day, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
publicly reported that it had conducted strikes against
more than 1,450 targets in Gaza. Air strikes targeted
sites across the Gaza Strip and included, but were not
limited to, rocket-launching sites, military bases, police
stations and tunnels along the border with Egypt.

The Israeli Air Force also targeted residential and
office buildings that the IDF said belonged to members
of Palestinian armed groups. Hundreds of buildings
were hit by Israeli Air Force attacks. Media office and
personnel of Al-Quds and Al-Aqsa television were
targeted on 18 and 20 November, resulting in the deaths
of three media professionals and injuries to 10 others.

I consistently condemn indiscriminate rocket fire
from Gaza into Israel. At the same time, I also believe
that the excessive and disproportionate use of force that
endangers civilian lives is intolerable. It is unacceptable
for citizens on both sides to permanently live in fear
of the next strike. Put simply, all parties must respect
international humanitarian law to ensure the protection
of all civilians at all times.

Earlier today, I travelled to Egypt for the second
time this trip to support the ceasefire talks in the final
phase taking place under the auspices of President
Morsy, with the active support of several regional
and international leaders. Visits of Foreign Ministers
of several countries, including France, Germany, the
United Kingdom, the United States and many Arab
countries were a further strong indication of the
concerns ofthe international community and its shared
goal of stopping the violence.

In my meeting with President Morsy only hours ago,
he said that he was very close in his effort to achieve
a ceasefire. He also reiterated the need to address the
underlying issues of concern to both sides, so that the
ceasefire could be sustainable. In addition, President
Morsy expressed his concern that the comprehensive
Arab-Israeli peace, to which Egypt is committed, had
not yet been achieved. I underscored the importance
of President Morsy's efforts given his leadership and
contacts with all sides.

I know that Palestinians and Israelis both have
fundamental concerns about the status quo ante. As
President Morsy said, those underlying issues need to
be addressed. The United Nations is prepared to help
to facilitate all efforts in that regard. But people are
dying every day and cities are being targeted every day.
The humanitarian crisis is growing exponentially the
longer the crisis continues. We need the ceasefire now,
followed immediately by negotiations on the underlying
issues. That is the sequence that can save lives now.

The crisis underscored that the status quo is
unsustainable and that long-term solutions must be
found to the problems of Gaza, and for the Palestinians
as a whole. Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009)
remain unimplemented. Once calm is fully restored
and the violence ends, a broader ceasefire will have to
address all the underlying causes of conflict, including a
full opening of the crossings, Palestinian reconciliation
and an end to weapon-smuggling.

It is clear that the international community must
speak with one voice to prevent areturn to violence. Iplan
to keep in touch with world leaders, and I have asked my
Special Coordinator, Robert Serry, to remain in Cairo
to support the efforts to achieve a sustainable ceasefire.

Finally, let me conclude by stressing, as Ihave during
all my discussions during this intense trip, that in these
testing times, when the entire region is experiencing
profound transformations, we must not lose sight of the
fact that peace must remain our ultimate priority goal.
Our devotion to a two-State solution ending a prolonged
occupation and ending the conflict between Israel and
the Palestinians is more urgent than ever. Achieving
that vision, which has been affirmed repeatedly by the
Council, is long overdue and paramount to the stability
of the region. Only a just, comprehensive peace can
bring lasting security to all.

I am leaving shortly for New York. I wish the
members of the Council a happy Thanksgiving.

