The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Government of Senegal for organizing this timely and
important meeting.

Today, our peace operations increasingly face
asymmetric threats from violent extremists and
terrorist groups. The casualty figures in Mali are a
stark and tragic reflection of that. It is a sad fact that
our peacekeepers are now being specifically targeted
by Violent extremists and terrorists. Yesterday again,
our peacekeepers in Mali came under attack. One of
them died, seven others were wounded, and two Malian
civilians were also killed by the unknown assailants.
The Secretary-General condemns this Vicious acts,
underlining that such attacks targeting United Nations
peacekeepers may constitute war crimes under
international law.

If United Nations peace operations are to be able
to work safely and carry out their mandates in today's
complex conflicts, they must develop strategies to face
these new conditions. The fundamental question is
how they can do so. Today's discussion could be very
helpful in answering that question, and we thank you,
Sir, for this initiative.

We should first recall that the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations emphasized that
United Nations troops should not undertake military
counter-terrorism operations. One conclusion could be
that peacekeeping operations should not be mandated
to militarily defeat violent extremist and terrorist
groups. However, terrorists and Violent extremists are a
reality in many contemporary conflicts - a reality that
has to be dealt with. These destructive and dangerous
forces make conflicts even more intractable. They
thrive on impunity and governance failures. They
exploit deep-rooted grievances. These factors in turn
are fertile ground for violent extremism and terrorism
to grow further.
This is the context in which the United Nations
often must operate. In response, our action and footprint
have to be more nimble and comprehensive, and we
need more flexible support arrangements. We will need
more sophisticated and more predictable uniformed
capabilities to strengthen mobility, responsiveness and
a deeper understanding of the operating environment.
Developing our intelligence and analysis capacity
will be critical in that pursuit. We will also need to
adjust how we conduct our core tasks, including our
good offices, our capacity-building, our community
engagement and stabilization measures - all the tools
that are available to the United Nations.

Further, the political objectives of our peacekeeping
operations need to be clearly defined and communicated.
We must find new and creative ways of achieving
political goals in situations where some parties are
not speaking partners or willing participants, and we
must devise strategies to build coalitions and support
around political objectives at the local, national and
regional levels.

I see three priorities for preparing our operations to
face asymmetric threats.

First and primarily, we must do all we can to
ensure the safety and security of our personnel. This
means greater situational awareness, analysis and force
protection measures. We are already doing that in Mali,
but we need to do more. We must, for instance, utilize
new technologies and deploy uniformed units with
built-in, robust self-protection tools.

Secondly, we must adapt how we deliver our
mandates. The fact that the United Nations is a potential
target should encourage us to think more deeply about
how we are to operate in this new, more dangerous and
unpredictable environment. Support for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts should be grounded in a nuanced
understanding of who the different parties are, how
they are resourced and who their allies are. That varies
from case to case. An overgeneralized approach can
be counterproductive and possibly expose the United
Nations to more risk. In such environments we should
also think beyond a security-focused approach. The
entirety of the tools at the disposal ofthe United Nations
should be considered, including sanctions regimes,
normative instruments, capacity-building, stabilization
and development aid. We must build State capacity that
is accountable, legitimate and respects human rights
and the rule of law, so as to avoid perpetuating drivers
of conflict and extremism in the first place.
Thirdly, we must fully take into account how
and when the United Nations can support national
and regional efforts to prevent violent extremism and
terrorism. In his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, the Secretary-General indicated the need
to integrate the prevention of violent extremism in
peace operations, both in terms of mandates and the
relevant activities of the United Nations country
teams. The General Assembly has called on Member
States to implement the recommendations of the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism as they apply
to the national context. When requested, the United
Nations is ready to support such efforts at the national
level. We are providing technical assistance in areas
such as criminal justice, border controls, kidnapping
for ransom, dealing with foreign terrorist fighters and
the financing of terrorism. We are also supporting
youth engagement and skills development. And we are
encouraging Member States to exchange information
among themselves, as well as expertise and resources,
in order to strengthen international cooperation on
countering terrorism. One important tool to provide
all-United Nations strategic assistance is the integrated
assistance for countering terrorism initiative for the
Group of Five for the Sahel, mandated by the Council
in 2014.

I would like to conclude with a final reflection. The
United Nations is an Organization of States, but it is
also an Organization of normative values. We work for
the peoples of the world. Our mandate is built around
inclusion, not exclusion. Over the past few years,
Member States came together in an impressive display
of unity to develop a blueprint for peace, sustainable
development and dignity for all on a healthy planet. The
2030 Agenda recognizes that all our challenges and
all our opportunities are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing. Another important tool in our hands, on
which I would like to congratulate Member States, are
the identical resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262). This innovative concept opens up
several avenues towards a comprehensive response to
many ofthe threats we face in today's world. If- and it
is a big "if" - we implement the 2030 Agenda and use
the full potential of the sustaining peace resolutions the
Council and Assembly have adopted, discussions like
the one we are having today will hopefully be much less
urgent and much less necessary than they are today.

