Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I am grateful
to Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and
I welcome First Deputy Prime Minister Dacie and
Ambassador Citaku back to the Security Council.

As this is the first Council meeting on Kosovo this
year, I would like to begin by looking forward to what
2016 holds in store. It will be a year of firsts: Kosovo's
first Olympic games, its first film nomination at the
Oscars - I am sorry that Kosovo did not win - and,
perhaps more importantly still, its first contractual
relationship with the European Union in the form of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement - all
this for country that only celebrated its eighth year
of independence earlier this month. But if Kosovo is
to fulfil the promise of 2016, the start of the year also
shows us that there are significant steps still ahead. I
want to focus on three of these today.

First, like others in this Chamber, the United
Kingdom shares the Secretary-General's concern
over continued violence and the use of inflammatory
rhetoric. Everyone has the right to protest peacefully,
but disrupting the work of the Assembly and bringing
violence to the streets of Pristina serves no purpose.
It only damages Kosovo's development, its image and
its people.

Last Friday saw an important moment for Kosovo
when its Assembly elected Deputy Prime Minister
Thaci as Kosovo's next president. But it also saw
further deeply worrying scenes of violence inside and
outside the Assembly, which we condemn. Dialogue,
not disruption, is the only way forward. I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate the United Kingdom's
fullest support for President Jahjaga's mediation efforts
to resolve the political crisis. As a long-standing and
close friend of Kosovo, the United Kingdom will offer
our support Kosovo's new President to continue these
important efforts. It is of course for Kosovo's political
leaders to reach a solution, not for the international
community. Every politician in Kosovo must take
responsibility for his or her own actions and for the
impact of those actions on Kosovo and its people.

My second point relates to the signature and
ratification of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement, which is a clear milestone in Kosovo's
European journey. It was fitting recognition of Kosovo's
progress and achievements over the past years. Kosovo
now needs to capitalize on this progress. So we regret the
delays in the implementation of the agreements reached
between Kosovo and Serbia. I encourage both sides
to focus on delivering on promises, to concentrate on
implementation of agreements reached and to continue
to demonstrate political courage and leadership.

We have seen the results of such leadership during
the latest reporting period. A successful application
to the International Telecommunication Union and a
renewed commitment from Kosovo's Prime Minister
on the association of Serb-majority municipalities
and, as the Secretary-General's report highlights,
there has been welcome progress on the integration of
former Serbian civil protection personnel into Kosovo's
institutions (S/2016/99).

That leads into my third point. To really seize
the potential of 2016, Kosovo needs to continue such
cooperation at all levels of society, including politics
and business. There have been some great examples
already this year benefiting all communities, continuing
cooperation between mayors of Mitrovica North and
Mitrovica South, and in the links being forged between
business leaders in the Pristina and Belgrade chambers
of commerce. The international community should
play its part and help. The United Kingdom helped to
fund the business forum convened by the two chambers
of commerce in December. The success of that event
shows the progress can be made in areas of mutual
benefit without mediation if there is a will to do so.

Serious underlying challenges remain, not
least in the rule of law, corruption and, of course,
in the political crisis. Kosovo's leaders must take
responsibility for addressing these challenges in the
interests of all Kosovo citizens. That said, eight years
after independence, the overall trend is clearly positive
and the progress is undeniable. In the light of that, it
is the United Kingdom's long-standing view that we
should reduce the frequency of these Council meetings
in order to reflect this progress.
Yes, challenges remain, but the reality on the
ground does not warrant this level of Council attention,
especially when we have so many other far graver
challenges confronting the Council. It long past time to
acknowledge that it is the European Union and not the
Security Council that will bring momentum to further
progress. Our efforts must therefore focus on supporting
dialogue in Brussels and on the normalization of
relations, not on these briefings here in New York.

