Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would also like to express our thanks
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait, for his able leadership of the Council in
February.

I hope that in the time allowed I will be able to
comment on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/154), the briefings of Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo
and Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, and the statements
of the other Council members who took the floor this
morning. I count on your understanding, Mr. President.

First of all, I would like to address the Joint Special
Representative for Darfur and the Head of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, and thank him
for his briefing and for his affirmation that the situation
in Darfur today is characterized by a general absence
of war. This is largely due to the adoption in June of
resolution 2363 (2017), which has transformed the
situation in Darfur and moved it into the peacebuilding
phase. In this phase, we are all joining efforts aimed
at successfully bring an end to tensions and return to
status quo before 2003.

Between 2003 and 2018, Darfur underwent a
great transformation, and I personally witnessed and
participated in all of the different phases and processes
in this time frame, always in search of peace - in
Chad, Abuja, Doha, Geneva, Addis Ababa, Bahir Dar
and elsewhere around the world. I am pleased and
honoured that we are now reaping the fruits of our
efforts to achieve peace. Peace is important and it is
part of the beliefs and constituents of the Sudanese
people throughout history.

I also thank the members of the Council for
their concern for the situation in Darfur and for their
recommendations, which we will definitely implement.
We thank them for understanding the phase that the
peace process has reached in Darfur and in other parts
ofthe Sudan. We have reviewed the most recent periodic
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the UNAMID mandate in Darfur, which is presented
every 60 days. We continue to believe that limiting
the reporting period to 60 days is a constraint on
UNAMID and the Secretariat at a time when Darfur is
witnessing complete stability and significant progress
in all aspects, resulting in reports that look very much
alike and contain nothing new. I would like to add that
since there is nothing new in these reports, except some
petty crimes and incidents reported at police stations,
this proves that the situation in Darfur has indeed been
transformed.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
2363 (2017), which provides for the reconfiguration
of UNAMID and its gradual withdrawal, we affirm
that the Darfur situation has entered a new phase of
peacebuilding and working towards achieving stability,
security and peace in all states of Darfur. This is in line
with what the Sudanese Government has continually
called for since 2015, namely, that we must adapt to
the significant transformations that have taken place
in Darfur, by which the nature of the conflict has
changed. In fact, nothing remains of the conflict except
with respect to the two issues of displaced persons and
development, which are issues of importance throughout
the developing world and directly linked to the agenda
of peace. The time has come for the Secretariat to
change its approach and bring it into alignment with
the position of the Security Council.

The people and the Government of the Sudan are
now on the verge of a new phase of peace, stability and
serious work in which they are seeking development in
Darfur and throughout the country. As they embrace
peaceful coexistence, they begin the reconstruction
of their country with no difference between the State,
popular, collective or individual efforts. The world
saw the Sudanese girl Imtithal Mahmoud walk for 30
days from Fashir to Khartoum, covering a very long
distance, which heralded the arrival of peace cultured
in the Sudanese people. We hope that this will motivate
the international community to support and encourage
the Sudanese Government as it moves forward with
the support of the people of Darfur to consolidate and

sustain peace.

One of the major projects is the campaign to collect
arms from the citizens now that the reasons that led
to the acquisition of these arms in 2003 no longer
exist. Reports indicate that as planned, this campaign
has been very effective, despite limited resources. We
are determined to carry on with the campaign. As we
have affirmed previously, it is necessary to collect
weapons in order to achieve stability and security.
The Secretary-General and everybody else have
seen the positive impact of the weapons-collection
campaign on the security situation in Darfur. The
Government will therefore spare no effort to make
this campaign a success. In this regard, we emphasize
the importance of our partnership with UNAMID and
the ongoing consultations and meetings with the Joint
Representative for Darfur. We congratulate him on his
continued efforts aimed at bringing peace to Darfur
and Africa.

We look forward to concluding phase two of the
UNAMID downsizing, closing some of its sites and
achieving staff reductions pursuant to resolution
2363 (2017). The Sudanese Government emphasizes
that it will continue to cooperate with UNAMID so
as to allow it to fulfil its mandate completely. We
also affirm the importance of this cooperation in all
areas, which has been documented in the report before
us and previous reports, particularly with respect to
unloading containers, issuing visas, giving movement
permission and access to the Mission and humanitarian
partners, as well as responding to UNAMID's request
to open a temporary operations base in G010. We would
ask UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to reconsider the issue of constructing the
Zalengei-Golo-Rokero road, which would greatly serve
the people of the region and rehabilitate the service
facilities there.

We thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the
Sudan for her report, and the Security Council for
reducing the number of members of the Panel of Experts
by one, who is Abhai Kumar. We confirm the statement
of the previous Chair of the sanctions committee, to
the effect that the sanctions regime must respond to the
positive developments in general in Darfur, in line with
resolution 2363 (2017), and that this can happen only
by reducing the number of members of the Panel of
Experts. The Panel must conclude its work and lift the
sanctions. We are pleased to inform the Council that the
Sudanese Government has approved the upcoming visit
to Khartoum of the Chair of the sanctions committee,
Ambassador Wronecka, in April.

As for what some members of the Council said
with respect to the number of displaced persons, I note
that the resident representative of the United Nations
in the Sudan, in coordination with the Humanitarian
Aid Commission, confirmed six months ago that the
number of displaced persons did not exceed 1.7 million.
We are hopeful that that number has fallen further in the
six months since that announcement. We would request
that the correct figures be promulgated, as issued by
the United Nations relevant bodies.

In conclusion, we commend all the strenuous
efforts made to consolidate the peace process. We
once again welcome the dawn of peace and the launch
of development, ending the conflict once and for
all. The delegation of my country thanks UNAMID
for its efforts in various fields and for the sacrifices
of its peacekeepers in the past years. We also thank
troop- and police-contributing countries and reiterate
the readiness of the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate with all regional and international partners
in all matters related to UNAMID so as to guarantee
its success until the last of its components leaves the
territories of my country.
