Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire thanks Mr. Thomas Markram,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for his useful briefing on the most recent
developments on the topic under consideration
this morning.

My statement will focus on two points, namely, the
elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons programme
and the challenges ahead.

The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire notes the destruction
of all Syrian chemical weapons removed from Syrian
territory by States parties to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as well as
25 of the 27 chemical-weapons production facilities
declared by the Government of that country. The
cooperation efforts between the Syrian Government,
the OPCW and the United Nations Office for Project
Services, which led to the amendment in Beirut of the
tripartite agreement on the destruction of the remaining
chemical-weapons production facilites, are to be
applauded and encouraged. Such cooperation, which is
also reflected in the preparation and regular submission
of Syria's monthly reports to the OPCW Executive
Council, offers hope for the actual destruction of
chemical weapons.

In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire is pleased to have
signed, in Paris on 23 January, the declaration of
principles issued by the meeting held at the initiative
of France on the topic of combating impunity through
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons. While it does not replace
the long-standing instruments for combating the use of
chemical weapons, such an initiative helps to strengthen
the existing mechanism. In that context, my delegation
would like to thank all States that have contributed
to the Trust Fund for Syria Missions, established in
November 2015 to support the OPCW and the Fact-
finding Mission.

It should be noted that, despite the encouraging
progress, major challenges remain. My delegation
therefore urges the Syrian authorities to continue their
cooperation with the OPCW with a view to an adequate
response to outstanding issues, in particular the complete
destruction of the remaining chemical-weapons
production facilities, the declaration of the Syrian
Arab Republic regarding its chemical weapons arsenal,
and the activities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre.

cote d'Ivoire believes that any use of chemical
weapons is a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the hard-won international standard
that prohibits those weapons. It therefore encourages the
OPCW, the Fact-finding Mission and the Syrian Arab
Republic to continue their cooperation on eliminating
chemical weapons in Syria.

My delegation reiterates its call for a political
settlement of the Syrian conflict. We call on the Syrian
parties to resume peace talks as part of an inclusive
political dialogue, as provided for by resolution 2254
(2015), which sets out a road map for a political process
to end the crisis in Syria.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the Council to
restore its unity, without which it cannot take positive
action with a View to establishing a consensus-based
mechanism tasked with attributing responsibility for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, and thereby to
end their use in any conflict once and for all.

