Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express its
sincere thanks to Special Representative Salame and
Ambassador Olof Skoog for their clear briefings at the
beginning of this meeting.

I would like to focus on three important aspects
with regard to the situation in Libya: first, ending the
political crisis: secondly, the human rights situation of
migrants; and lastly, the economy of predation.

First, with regard to the political process, the Libyan
people have been waiting for an end to their country's
political transition for a long time, and we commend
Mr. Salame for his tireless efforts to revitalize the
political process. He continues to have our full support.
Our main challenge continues to be the lack of political
will among the Libyan parties to make the necessary
compromises. It is important that they work for credible
and tangible results in order to be able to appeal to
all Libyans to join the march to peace and stability.
We understand the call for elections, but they must
be well prepared and can take place only in a secure
environment. We strongly condemn the cowardly
attack of 2 May on the High Commission for National
Elections. In the coming months we will have to pay
specific attention to improving the security situation
through dialogue with and between the armed groups.

My second point concerns the human rights
situation of migrants. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains deeply concerned about the serious human
rights violations and abuses against migrants that
continue throughout Libya. Trafficking networks
exploit migrants and are closely linked to the militia
and terrorist groups that have been destabilizing the
country. The Security Council has stated its resolve
on numerous occasions to address the destabilizing
practices of those trafficking networks. It is time to
turn our words into action. As part of a comprehensive
effort to dismantle those networks and improve the
human rights situation of migrants, in cooperation
with our partners and with the support of many States,
including Libya and countries in the region, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands has proposed targeted
sanctions against six prominent traffickers. We expect
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya to come to a swift agreement
on that important issue, which affects the wider region
as well as Libya itself.

Thirdly, with regard to the economy of predation,
the business of human trafficking is only one example
of the criminalization of Libya's economy. We need to
work urgently on the economic, political and security
fronts simultaneously in order to facilitate a political
solution and stability for Libya. The Libyan people
continue to lose millions of dollars in revenue thanks
to fuel smuggling, and the fact that armed militias are
sabotaging the increase of oil production is particularly
worrying. Such issues can be addressed only by
engaging with the armed groups, and we commend the
steps taken by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya in that regard.

In conclusion, the Libyan parties must realize
that they are at a crossroads. They can either redouble
their efforts to finally bring peace to Libya or bear the
responsibility for leaving their country in a prolonged
state of instability and disarray. It is up to them to
show the courage and leadership necessary to make the
necessary compromises. At the same time, they cannot
do this alone. The international community, including
the Council, should continue to stand ready to help
address the Libyan crisis using every tool at its disposal.

