Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in this debate. We highly appreciate your
efforts and congratulate you for ably guiding the work
of the Security Council for the month of June.

We also take this opportunity to thank Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and Under-Secretary-
General Susana Malcorra for their presentations and to
acknowledge the laudable work that their respective
departments continue to carry out.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the delegation of Morocco on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Rwanda's fundamental commitment to
peacekeeping is borne out of our national experience of
the 1994 genocide and the failure of the international
community to respond in a timely and decisive manner.
It is our conviction that our experience should not be
revisited anywhere, and as result we are proud to
support United Nations-mandated peacekeeping
operations in the Sudan, Liberia, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire
and Haiti.

The nature of conflicts has significantly changed.
The increasing role of non-State actors engaged in
conflict with other non-State actors or with legitimate
Governments has had a tragic impact on civilians. We
also meet at a time when United Nations peacekeeping
operations are under severe strain due to possible
reduction in resources as a result of the global financial
and economic crisis and the continued lack of clarity in
peacekeeping mandates. It is therefore imperative that
there be a complete rethinking of peacekeeping
operations.

My delegation believes that given the challenges
faced in conflict-affected areas, force preparation is an
essential factor. As a troop-contributing country,
Rwanda is of the considered view that a well-prepared
peacekeeping force is in a much better position to
adequately effect the mandate assigned to it.

A number of Member States, particularly from
the African continent, are committed to peacekeeping
but require the support of the international community
in providing equipment that they are not able to muster
because of minimal resources and competing priorities.
Equipment such as helicopters, which the international
community has failed to provide to missions like the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), is a necessary force multiplier that
would greatly impact the mobility and effectiveness of
peacekeeping in that region.

The availability and provision of equipment
equally has a bearing on force protection which is a
prerequisite for effective and robust peacekeeping. The
timely reimbursement of troop- and police-contributing
countries would certainly go a long way in sustaining
and maintaining available equipment and ensure that
peacekeepers are able to execute their mandates.

09-3860]

The ability of peacekeeping missions to have
access to real-time and accurate information in conflict
areas would significantly impact their ability to
respond in a timely and decisive manner to threats
against civilians. In this regard we would urge the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to urgently
explore partnerships with regional organizations and
countries, in line with the recommendations of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), to share information in
conflict-afflicted zones.

In view of the Prodi report, the international
community should consider strengthening regional
standby forces, particularly in the Africa region, in
coordination with regional organizations such as the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and others. This would resolve the
challenge of quick response to emerging peacekeeping
requirements. In this regard, we are pleased to hear
reassuring statements by members of the Security
Council and the emphasis by the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Le Roy, on
the Department's commitment to strengthening the
African Union's peacekeeping capabilities.

A review of peacekeeping policy through
consultations with Member States and relevant United
Nations organs is crucial. For example, it would be
advisable for the Secretariat to have the flexibility to
review the policy on contingent-owned equipment
instead of waiting for the relevant working group to sit
after three years. If in that period it is necessary to
improve or adjust any aspect of the provisions for
contingent-owned equipment, the Secretariat could
advise Member States through relevant organs and take
appropriate action.

Security Council resolution 1353 (2001)
recognizes the need to strengthen cooperation between
the Security Council and troop-contributing countries
in order to enhance United Nations peacekeeping for
efficient and effective peacekeeping operations. My
delegation is firmly of the view that through
strengthened cooperation and political will we can
achieve effective and credible United Nations
peacekeeping operations into the future.

