Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and the
Secretary-General's valuable briefing. We are honoured
by the presence of the Foreign Ministers of France and
Germany, and also welcome the Prime Minister of Mali
to this important meeting.

The Security Council visited Mali a week ago,
where we were able to observe the progress made in the
country at the political level. We were also able to learn
at first-hand about the delicate humanitarian situation
and the continuing deterioration in security due to the
increase in terrorism and organized crime.

Peru believes that the full implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali must remain the priority for the Government
and the people of Mali, with the support of the
international community. The establishment of
provisional authorities; the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process; the
reintegration of approximately 1,400 combatants; and
the efforts to achieve development in the north of the
country are achievements that reflect the will of the
parties to implement the agreement.

Despite those achievements, much remains to
be done. It is essential that all parties join efforts to
ensure that the progress achieved is reflected in an
improvement of the living conditions for all Malian
citizens. To that end, we consider it necessary, first of
all, to work without delay on the reforms relating to
the revision of the Constitution and decentralization,
as well as on the holding of peaceful, transparent
and inclusive legislative elections to be held in June.
We welcome the establishment of the committee of
experts on the constitutional review and the national
consultation framework. We encourage all parties to
work on the necessary reforms in an inclusive manner
so as to enhance social cohesion.

Secondly, we must address the constant security
deterioration, the continuing violence and the critical
humanitarian situation in various parts of the country,
particularly in central Mali. We regret that at least 134
civilians, including women and children, were killed in
an attack in Mopti in the course of our visit. We support
the efforts made to strengthen the armed forces, which
rely on the trust and backing of the people, in order to
equip them with the technical skills and training that
will enable them to confront terrorist and rebel groups.

It is equally important to combat inter-ethnic,
intercommunal and religious violence among the
communities in the centre of the country through
dialogue initiatives at the local level. It is key to
complement those actions with an independent judicial
system capable of investigating and prosecuting human
rights violations, while contributing to accountability
and the fight against impunity.

Thirdly, we must continue to work to eliminate
economic and development inequality between the
capital, Bamako, and the other regions of the country.
Bringing about sustainable peace will be possible
only through a comprehensive approach that includes
improvements in security, political dialogue and the
rule of law as essential prerequisites for addressing the
root causes of the conflict. In that process, it is crucial
to promote measures to ensure increased participation
and empowerment of women and young people, which
is key to defining and building the future of the country.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that, in
order to achieve stability in Mali, the various efforts,
initiatives and mechanisms deployed on the ground
must maintain political and operational coherence.
We especially recognize the work being done by
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in a particularly difficult
operational environment. We support the provision of
the necessary resources and capacities to enable it to
carry out its mandate effectively in the best possible
security conditions.

