Mr. De La Sabliere (spoke in French): From
21 to 25 November, the members of the Security
Council visited Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi and Uganda, in that order. The
purpose of the mission was to assess the progress of
the Congolese and Burundian peace processes and the
implications for the region. It was also an opportunity
to recall the Security Council's support for those
processes and for the two United Nations forces that
are assisting them.

It also enabled the Council - which has been
closely following those two situations and which in
recent months has taken decision to strengthen the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), now the
largest United Nations mission, and to create the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) - to
send a number of messages: messages of
encouragement, and also the message that it is
necessary to step up and accelerate efforts in both of
those countries, along with a message concerning the
implementation of regional commitments.

Our terms of reference were clear and precise.
The fact that they were known in advance facilitated
the mission's work. This effort at transparency and
communication, in fact, amplified the Council's
message when we arrived on the ground. I think it is a
good practice. I would add in my preliminary
comments that this was the right time to carry out this
mission. Council members will recall that we decided
on this mission in principle several months ago; we
then set the date in consultation with the two Special
Representatives.

I believe we could not have chosen better. The
mission was part of the regional cooperation effort,
which was relaunched with the Great Lakes
Conference, convened from 19 to 20 November in Dar
es Salaam. As well, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi, we were part of the strong support
for the action being carried out at a key moment in the
process by Carolyn McAskie and Bill Swing, whose
work on the ground we greatly appreciated.

It was a key moment because in both countries
the transition process is entering its final stage. We
were able to discuss that situation, which is rather
delicate to manage, with President Kabila and
President Ndayizeye, as well as with the other, most
directly concerned players. In Kinshasa and
Bujumbura, the Governments and the Parliaments are
now committed to preparations for the elections. That
was the mission's context.

The written report of the mission will be
distributed today, or tomorrow at the latest. I think it
goes right to the heart of the matter. It includes an
account of each of the mission's stages, as well as a set
of conclusions and recommendations. On that basis,
the Council will convene a public meeting in a few
days, in which the representatives of the countries
visited, as well as the States and organizations most
concerned, can speak following the members of the
Council. It will certainly enrich the Council's
discussion to know their reactions.

Today, however, on behalf of the mission, I
would like to thank the Heads of State, President
Kagame, President Kabila, President Ndayizeye and
President Museveni, who received us at length, as well
as the main actors in the transitions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi, with whom we
met. The mission was welcomed everywhere with great
interest, which reflects the attention that is given to the
Council's positions and action.

I would now like to discuss our analysis. The
report of the mission to be distributed makes a
distinction between the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that of Burundi. The two
situations are different and have their own logic,
history and pace. However, in today's initial oral
presentation, which by definition is brief, I would like
to focus on a certain overall vision, which might be
useful for the Council, and give my general
impressions, which, I believe, are shared by other
members of the mission.

I would like to begin by saying that we came
back encouraged, even though much remains to be
done. We were encouraged because each of us,
following the meetings we had with both Congolese
and Burundian officials, felt there was a widely shared
determination to move to elections. I would add that in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo the local
population in particular desires elections, which
constitutes an additional responsibility for the principal
actors of the Congolese transition. In Burundi, the
spirit of reconciliation and power-sharing has made
amazing progress.

We have come back encouraged also because,
when we compare the situation today to what we saw
during our last mission, in June 2003, we see the extent
of the progress achieved. In the Democratic Republic
of Congo, the institutions of the transition have been
established and have begun their work. There were
high and low points, but the incidents in Bukavu and
Kinshasa last May and June have been overcome. In
Burundi, a general ceasefire has been concluded. Calm
prevails over 95 per cent of the territory apart from
what is called rural Bujumbura, where the Forces
nationales de liberation are still rampant. In Burundi,
the framework for the end of the transition and the
post-transition period has largely been agreed, and the
people are to adopt the constitution by referendum on
22 December.

Thus, we are encouraged, but that should not
conceal our sense that nothing has been finished yet,
because the difficulties and obstacles should not be
underestimated.

A telling example of that is that in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the text of the
constitution has still not been agreed upon. That is
disturbing. In both countries, much legislative work
remains to be done - although it is more advanced in
Burundi - not to mention the preparation of electoral
lists. As we have told both our dialogue partners, there
is no time to lose, even though they should continue to
favour dialogue. It is the responsibility of the
Congolese and the Burundians to properly carry out the
transitional process. In the Democratic Republic of
Congo, the presidential authority must further its
dialogue.

For its part, the international community engaged
in the two countries must be able to exert effective
influence. To that end, better use must be made of the
mechanisms for coordination in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, as desired by the International
Committee in Support of the Transition, which calls for
the establishment of the second and third joint
commissions, as decided in September in New York. I
believe that our message was understood.

My third general comment is that it is equally
crucial that the elections scheduled for next year -
and those dates must be respected - should not be
jeopardized by new outbreaks of violence. That has
been the aim of the Council's efforts for the past six
months in deploying the United Nations Operation in
Burundi and strengthening the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). That is also the reason behind
the efforts expected of the authorities of Kinshasa and
Bujumbura in the area of disarmament and the
restructuring of the defence and police forces.

In that regard, much remains to be done in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The creation of
new integrated brigades - 10, if possible, before the
elections - and a significant integrated police force
are a priority. That requires the support of the
international community, which must remain
mobilized. Several countries have agreed to make a
significant contribution to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in those areas. That is essential. In Burundi,
things are more on track; it is now a question of will
and determination.

My fourth general remark is, how can we not be
struck by the fact that peace remains fragile in the
region? Instability, which is particularly appreciable in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, should not jeopardize the process under way.

The problem represented by armed groups was
raised with all the heads of State. The presence on
Congolese territory of former Armed Forces of
Rwanda (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe Rwandan rebels is
first and foremost a problem for the Congolese
themselves because of the suffering it causes the
people. Furthermore, the possibility of organizing
elections in the Kivu depends on the resolution of that
problem. It has become a problem also for Burundi,
because the FNL is receiving support in the Congo
from the ex-FAR and Interahamwe. It is, of course, a
problem for Rwanda as well. We have acknowledged
that fact, even if the Council does not have the same
assessment as the Rwandan authorities as to the
magnitude of the threat.

In any case, this problem must be resolved, with
the support of MONUC for the Congolese army - in
keeping with MONUC'S mandate - in the spirit of
cooperation and confidence that must characterize
relations among the countries of the region, with full
respect for State sovereignty. That was the thrust of the
statement issued by Council members following the
threat of military action coming from Rwanda.

Let me reiterate that all the members of the
mission believe that this problem should be resolved
quickly. We mentioned that fact in our
recommendations as well as the implementation of
confidence-building mechanisms among States, which
is crucial.

The regional dimension of certain problems
makes it clear that the success of the Great Lakes
Conference must now be followed up by the swift
implementation of the Dar es Salaam Declaration by
establishing priorities.

I would like to make a few final comments.

We must begin thinking about the post-electoral
period, because the elections are not an end in and of
themselves. Stability must be maintained following the
elections. We have often made mention of this, because
the Congolese and Burundian peoples, who have
suffered greatly, deserve such stability. They deserve
also to embark once again on the path to development,
with the support of the international community.

Impunity must be combated with the utmost
resolve; the peoples of the region deserve no less. The
region has experienced a great many human rights
violations, and that challenge is currently being taken
up. I believe that the Security Council has work to do
in that area. It must think about the steps that should be
taken with respect to the FNL, a movement that is
committing atrocities and that is opposed to the peace
process. The Council would also be moving in the right
direction if it acts as soon as it receives the report of
the Secretary-General concerning the establishment of
an international judicial commission of inquiry in
Burundi.
Those were the comments I wanted to make while
awaiting the report of the members of the mission,
which, as I said, will be issued shortly. I would like to
thank them for their support and for the spirit that
prevailed in our work. I believe that, during the course
of the week, we made clear the unity of the Security
Council - a unity that is crucial to the effectiveness of
its action in the region.

