Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): It is
indeed a pleasure and an honour for the Security
Council to welcome to the Chamber His Excellency
Mr. Rene Preval, President-elect of the Republic of
Haiti, who has just provided us with a very informative
statement on the current situation in Haiti. On behalf of
the Congolese delegation, I am pleased to convey to
him our heartfelt congratulations and most sincere
wishes for success in the discharge of his important
new responsibilities.

The history of Haiti is replete with remarkable
events of unique human and historical importance. On
1 January 1804, Haiti became the second country of the
American continent, after the United States, to declare
its independence, thereby playing a pioneering role in
the process of liberating peoples in what is usually
referred to as the new world, namely, the Americas.
Haiti is linked to Africa by memories of a common
history that involved unimaginable ordeals. Africa in
general, and the Congo in particular, are therefore
concerned whenever Haiti finds itself in difficulty, and
thus wish to demonstrate their solidarity in any way
they can.

The situation in Haiti in recent years has been
characterized by a series of stages requiring special
attention from the international community as a result
of their seriousness. A public administration that has
largely been destroyed, a judicial system that has been
significantly weakened, a legislature that has broken
down as a result of an unreliable electoral system, great
insecurity caused by armed groups and, lastly, major
economic and social problems which have led to
enormous distress and frustration for the people of
Haiti, especially its young people - that is generally
the scenario in Haiti today.

We are pleased that the Security Council has
spared no effort in helping Haiti by adopting the
various resolutions that established the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
defined its role. We would like to take this opportunity
to commend the decisive efforts and role of
MINUSTAH, under the admirable leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Juan Gabriel
Valdes, during the electoral process. We also wish to
express our appreciation to the Organization of
American States and to the other regional and
international partners who have recently provided
crucial support to the Transitional Government and the
Provisional Electoral Council.

In that connection, allow me to pay tribute to the
Provisional Electoral Council, whose efforts have
contributed to the success of the elections. Clearly, the
new Government will work to strengthen the Council
in order to make it permanent and consolidate the
progress made thus far. We also wish to reaffirm the
importance of holding, in the coming days, the second
round of parliamentary elections, as well as the
municipal and local elections, which will constitute the
pillars of democratic governance in Haiti.

While commending the efforts made by the
Government of Mr. Gerard Latortue during the
transition period, we must not overlook the
achievements of the Haitian people themselves, who,
through their broad participation in the electoral
process, demonstrated their commitment to change,
and, in a peaceful manner, entrusted Mr. Rene Preval
with a mandate to bring peace and sustainable
development to the country. The President has thus
been called upon to place his country on the path
towards the restoration of lasting peace, growth and
national reconciliation by drawing upon the momentum
generated by the recent elections and the popular
support he has received.

There can be no lasting peace in Haiti without
real prospects for growth; nor will there be
development in that country without national security,
stability and reconciliation. In that connection, it will
be important for the new Government to re-establish its
authority throughout the country as soon as possible.
International assistance will be necessary initially; but
the efforts of the Haitian authorities, like those of
international actors, must be aimed at ensuring that the
administrative and security systems resume their roles
in every city, town and community in Haiti. My
delegation therefore believes that it is crucial to
provide assistance to the new democratic institutions,
including the Parliament - which will definitely
require a period of adjustment - and the
municipalities, territorial collectives and other State
structures. Haiti will also need support in the judicial
area, as well as in the professionalization of the police.
The country will in particular require a
comprehensive development plan to combat poverty,
unemployment and social inequality. As Mr. Latortue
emphasized when he addressed the Council, Haiti

"will need fewer military personnel but many
more engineers - many more men and women
dedicated to solving the problems of economic
and social development. I wish to reiterate what
many others have said before me: the root cause
of the problems of instability in Haiti does not
have only military solutions. We must search for
the deep-rooted cause of instability in the
poverty, unemployment and social inequality that
exist in Haiti." (S/PV.5377, p. 5)

We welcome the fact that all donors at the World
Bank meeting held in Washington on 21 February last
recognized the need to establish a programme to
support democracy in Haiti after the elections.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
express our support for continuing the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in accordance with
resolution 1658 (2006) of 14 February. We would
encourage President-elect Rene Preval to foster a
climate of dialogue that brings together all political
actors in a spirit of national reconciliation, in order that
they may work together to achieve development for
Haiti and promote the well-being of its people. The
international community must henceforth be
encouraged to support the efforts of the new
Government and to extend to it its full cooperation. We
emphatically call for such support.

The international community must therefore
consider developing a genuine and dynamic long-term
partnership with Haiti to ensure the effectiveness of the
efforts of all stakeholders. Through that momentum the
people of Haiti will be given real prospects for
economic and social development and for the reduction

of poverty and injustice so as to promote true
democracy.

I would like to conclude by stating that the
Haitian people have a bright future before them. That
future is in their hands: it belongs to them. They can
bring about a real renaissance. Likewise, on both the
bilateral and multilateral levels, we call on the
international community to assist the people of Haiti
while respecting their particular characteristics and the
sovereignty of their country and institutions.

