Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to convey my warm greetings to you, a dear
colleague and a capable representative of your great
country. Let me take this opportunity also to convey,
through you, to the Foreign Minister of Malaysia our
cordial welcome and thanks for the benefit of his
guidance at this morning's session.

Bangladesh commends the initiative of the Security
Council and its President, Malaysia, for convening this
meeting. This gives the States Members of the United
Nations an opportunity to come up with ideas on how
best the cause of international peace and security can be
served and also on how best the issue of post-conflict
peace-building - in particular its disarmament,

 

demobilization and reintegration aspects - can be
addressed. Our deliberations will, hopefully, help identify
areas that are of interest to the United Nations and the
international community.

Bangladesh would like to convey its special
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General for her very
pertinent statement at the start of our debate earlier today.
The five points which she identified for the Council's
particular attention are extremely important and her views
are shared by my delegation.

The international situation today remains fluid. A
climate of uncertainty persists. Commitments made in some
major areas of international cooperation remain to be
fulfilled. The gap between the developed and developing
countries, particularly the least developed countries,
continues to widen. The problems that derive from poverty
and social injustices are in many instances being
compounded. Lack of development, poverty and social
injustice constitute a deep source of frustration and even a
possible cause of new conflicts, with easily available ex-
combatants to re-enter situations of violence. The
consolidation of peace, security and democracy on a global
scale will require a reversal of growing international
inequalities. Disputes among nations and within nations,
violent conflicts, aggression, foreign occupation and
interference in the internal affairs of States continue to
frustrate the object of peaceful coexistence of States and
peoples.

As we look at the nature of conflicts and social strife
that many parts of the world are experiencing today, we
notice that inter-State wars and foreign occupation have
been on the decline since the end of the cold war.
However, intra-State conflicts, social strife, deprivation,
abuses of human rights, ethnic aggrandizement and
xenophobia continue to pose problems that result in
violence and impinge on international peace and security.
In wars and conflicts of today, parties involved quite
often take recourse to actions which constitute flagrant
violations of human rights and international law,
particularly humanitarian laws. The weaker and vulnerable
groups of society become easy and innocent victims of
conflicts. Abuses of the rights of women and children are
most common.

We believe that international peace and security can
best be strengthened not by actions of States alone, but by
men and women through the inculcation of a culture of
peace and non-violence in every human being and in every
sphere of activity. The elements of a culture of peace
draw from age-old principles and values which are
respected and held in high esteem by all peoples and
societies. The objective of a culture of peace is the
empowerment of people. It contributes effectively to the
overcoming of authoritarian structures and accompanying
exploitation through democratic participation. It works
against poverty and inequality and promotes development.
It celebrates diversity and advances understanding and
tolerance. We regard the culture of peace as an effective
expedient to minimize and prevent violence and conflict
in the present-day world and effectively contribute to the
building and strengthening of peace in post-conflict
situations.

The maintenance and consolidation of peace and
security depend in large measure on favourable conditions
for durable peace after a conflict. The transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building obviously needs the close
attention of the international community. Such a
transition, if not properly managed, can seriously
undermine every positive peacemaking effort. In fact, we
have witnessed societies emerging from a conflict
situation to indulge in fresh intra-State or intra-group
conflicts. This is an aspect of peace and security and
peace-building that cannot be overemphasized.

After a war or conflict, the maintenance of peace
and security in a country or a region cannot be ensured in
an environment of poverty, hunger and ignorance,
economic deprivation and lack of accountability in the use
of political power. In a post-conflict situation, the ground
remains fertile for the outbreak of fresh conflicts on
minor issues or no pretext as armed combatants, who are
in most cases not a disciplined force, are prone to involve
themselves in conflicts at slight instigation. In a situation
like this, the disarmament and reintegration of ex-
combatants are essential. However, the ex-combatants
should be integrated into the mainstream of society in a
way which enables them to get involved in the peace
process and contribute to normalizing the situation. In this
regard, our experience has been quite positive.
In Bangladesh, the Government negotiated an end to
a long-standing problem in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in
December 1997 with the signing of a peace accord which
met the legitimate concerns of the population of that area.
Following the signing of the accord, the ex-combatants
disarmed themselves by surrendering their arms to the
Government. They are being successfully integrated into
society, in particular in the development activities of the

 

area through administrative councils headed by their
leaders.

Let me reiterate in conclusion that Bangladesh is
committed to the cause of international peace and security.
We have been a major contributor to the peacekeeping and
peacemaking efforts of the United Nations and are prepared
to work constructively with the Member States in the
promotion of the objectives of the United Nations Charter.

