The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poakre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Francois Lonseny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in the Central African Republic.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance With the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Belgium.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council
table.
2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/l28, which contains a letter dated
3 March 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Francois Lonseny Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, as well as His Excellency
Mr. Ian Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium.

As this is Mr. Fall's last briefing to the Council in
his current capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic, I
wish, on behalf of Council members, to thank him for
his tireless efforts in helping to stabilize the situation
in the Central African Republic. In doing so, Mr. Fall
played an important role in bringing the Government of
the Central African Republic and the rebels to the
December 2008 inclusive political dialogue, which led
to the signing of the peace agreements. May I, together
with the other members of the Council, wish him
continued success in his future undertakings.

I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.


