Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to join others in
welcoming our new colleagues from Tunisia and from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We look forward to working
closely with them on issues before the Security
Council.

My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his candid and extremely useful
briefing. We commend him and the staff of his Office
for their continued hard work and the initiatives taken
aimed at creating a multi-ethnic society. We encourage
his continued focus on the imperatives of post-war
reconstruction and on achieving sustained economic
growth and sustainable development.

When the Council last discussed the situation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, my delegation expressed the
view that recent democratic developments, particularly
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, could have a
profound impact on reconciliation and regional
stability and growth. We expressed the view that the
international community should take advantage of
these opportunities to advance the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. Petritsch's briefing today, however,
demonstrates just how fragile the situation is, and how
necessary it is for the international community to
continue to provide sustained support for the
implementation of the Dayton Accords within a
regional framework in order to ensure that the gains
made over the past five years are not threatened.

We see the recent political changes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including last November's elections and
the revision of election rules and procedures, as
positive and essential to the process of establishing a
firm, multi-ethnic political and judicial basis for
progress. It is against this background that we join
others in seeing the bid by the Croat National Congress
to establish Croat self-rule as a dangerous move away
from the multi-ethnic political structure envisioned in
the Dayton Accords. My delegation attaches
importance to the need for all parties to work within
the established legal institutions and constitutional
framework. The pace of progress can only be hampered
by the continued promotion of national and ethnic
differences.

We remain hopeful that, despite the activities of
the forces of separation, the High Representative will
continue to focus in his talks with the different parties
and political representatives on cooperation in various
areas, including in effective border monitoring and in
fostering and promoting multi-ethnic institutions.

Another area of concern for us it the slow pace of
economic development. In his recent report to the
Secretary-General, the High Representative confirmed
that economic and social conditions remain precarious
for most of the population, and that unemployment is
extremely high. We encourage the building of
economic capacity and sustainability, and call on the
international community to continue to supplement
these efforts by providing the necessary resources.

While some progress has been made in the return
of refugees, the overall number remains low. The
reluctance of refugees and internally displaced persons
to return to their homes is related to the political and
economic situation, as well as to the need to provide a
safe and secure environment for all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We agree with Mr. Petritsch that indicted war
criminals must be brought to justice. We see the recent
judgement of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia involving the war crime of rape
as sending a strong signal to those who believe that
they can continue to escape justice.

In conclusion, Jamaica continues to support the
work of the High Representative, the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Stabilization Force aimed at establishing a firm
foundation for effective and sustainable democracy.

