The President: I thank the representative of Mali
for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

My delegation is deeply shocked by and strongly
condemns the recent violence unleashed by Israeli
security forces against Palestinian civilians, including
innocent women and children. My delegation is
particularly shocked by the large number of deaths and
injuries that were caused by the excessive use of force
and the indiscriminate deployment of heavy weaponry,
such as helicopter gunships and tanks, by Israel.

I wish to take this opportunity to express my
delegation's profound condolences to the families of all
those killed and wounded. In my delegation's view, the
actions by the Israeli security forces constitute serious
breaches of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, which is applicable to all territories
occupied by Israel since 1967. Israel, as the occupying
Power, should scrupulously ensure that all the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention are fully
implemented.

The events of the past few days resulted
undoubtedly from the irresponsible and provocative
visit by Mr. Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The
sensitive nature of his action was well known, and
what happened can only be viewed as a deliberate
provocation. This has unfortunately caused a serious
setback to the delicate peace negotiations under way.

In view of the setbacks, it is now more than ever
required of the parties to end violence and to exercise
the utmost restraint, which are prerequisites for a return
to the peace process. My delegation therefore calls on
both the Palestinian and Israeli parties to resume
negotiations towards a peaceful settlement. It is most
important that they do not play into the hands of those
who wish to derail the peace process. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the proposed summit to be
held in Paris tomorrow, as well at the one to be held in
Cairo on Thursday.

Full peace will never return to the Middle East
until a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of
the question of Palestine is reached on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Only an
independent State of Palestine will give the Palestinian
people back their humanity. The image of that 12-year-
old - that sad and cold image - must serve as a
reminder to all of us of the urgency of establishing an
independent State of Palestine. The international
community should not further victimize the Palestinian
people. There has been enough human suffering. The
Security Council has a responsibility towards the
people in the Arab occupied territories.

To that end, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
special representative to address the issue. We also call
on the international community to provide the
necessary humanitarian assistance to the people of
Palestine.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

