The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo's for her comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to thank the civil society representatives,
Dr. Hala and Ms. Amina Khoulani, for their valuable
briefings today. Poland will continue to support all
efforts aimed at the creation of a peaceful, sovereign,
democratic, independent and integral Syria. However,
strong support for the United Nations-led process in
Geneva and the Special Envoy for Syria is not enough.
We need practical steps, and Special Envoy Pedersen
indicated them in his five-point plan presented to the
Security Council earlier this year (see S/PV.8475). In
that framework, there is the extremely important issue
of detainees, including abductees and missing persons
in Syria.

Eight years of war have brought unspeakable
suffering to the once peaceful country. Thousands of
people remain in arbitrary detention, where many are
subjected to various forms of ill-treatment, including
torture and rape. At the same time, thousands remain
missing, with their relatives deprived of any information
of their fate.

Poland calls for the release of all arbitrarily held
detainees, particularly children, women and the elderly.
Progress in that area would help to raise the level of
confidence between the parties and would greatly
contribute to the efforts to reach a lasting peace in
Syria. It is one of the most important, if not the most
important confidence-building measure between the
parties to the conflict. Work on that particular issue
should be implemented now as a priority and further
steps should swiftly follow. We strongly believe
that this could be one of the first steps in enabling a
negotiated political transition process. It requires the
full and constructive engagement of all the parties to
the conflict to participate in the negotiations in good
faith and without preconditions.

In conclusion, continued efforts to build confidence
between the parties, including endeavours on the issue
of detainees and missing persons, remain high on the
list of priorities to contribute to the political process. It
is also a matter of respect for the fundamental human
rights standards with which all sides are obliged to
fully comply.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

