Mr. Gamsakhurdia: "Georgia for Georgians", which he
tried to implement in 1992, having annulled the
existence of entities on Georgian territory and having
sent Georgian troops to attack Sukhumi and Tskhinvali
in order to reinforce by force the reign of illegality that
had already been established.

Genocide had already been carried out then in
South Ossetia, and the Ossetians had been subjected to
destruction and mass expulsions. Thanks to the selfless
actions of the Abkhaz and South Ossetian peoples and
the efforts of Russia, it was possible to terminate the
bloodshed, to conclude the ceasefire agreement, to
create mechanisms for peacekeeping and for
considering all aspects of a settlement. In 1992 in
South Ossetia and in 1994 in Abkhazia, peacekeeping
forces were created, agencies were established to
promote, with the facilitation of Russia, a
strengthening of confidence, and to promote a
resolution to address the objectives of social and
economic recovery and the issues of political status.
Those steps were supported by the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which were involved in the work of the
appropriate mechanisms and sent their observers to the
zone of conflict. The peacekeeping and negotiating
mechanisms were complex. Nevertheless, they succeeded
in functioning and helped to bring the positions closer
together and to achieve specific agreements.

However, the genuine prospects for peace that
once were dashed when, at the end of 2003, power was
seized in Georgia through revolutionary means by
Mikheil Saakashvili, who immediately began to
threaten that there would be a solution by force to the
Abkhaz and South Ossetian problems. In May 2004,
units of special troops and internal troops of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia were introduced
into the Georgian-Ossetian conflict zone. In August,
Tskhinvali was subjected to artillery shelling and an
attempt was made to seize it.

With Russia's active mediation, the Prime
Minister of Georgia, Mr. Zurab Zhvania and the leader
of South Ossetia, Eduard Kokoity, signed a ceasefire
protocol. In November 2004, another document was
signed on means for the normalization of relations on
the basis of a stage-by-stage approach. Following
Zhvania's mysterious death, in February 2005,
Saakashvili categorically rejected all agreements. That
determined his attitude towards the Abkhaz settlement,
the basis for which was the agreement signed in
Moscow on 14 May 1994 on a ceasefire and the
separation of forces. In accordance with that
agreement, collective peacekeeping forces were
deployed in the zone of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict.
In addition, the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia was established, as well as the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia.

The introduction by Saakashvili in 2006 - in
violation of all agreements and decisions of the United
Nations - of a Georgian military contingent into the
upper Kodori Valley, undermined the progress made in
the settlement process of the mechanisms, including the
implementation of the March 2003 agreements achieved
by President Putin and President Shevardnadze regarding
joint efforts on the return of refugees and the opening of
rail connections between Sochi and Tbilisi.

By openly continuing to ignore Georgia's
commitments and agreements in the framework of the
United Nations and the OSCE, Saakashvili established
a puppet administrative Government for Abkhazia and
South Ossetia in order once and for all to drive the last
nail into the coffin of the negotiating process. Every
year of Saakashvili's rule has been characterized by his
total inflexibility and unceasing provocation, including
the staging of incidents in the zones of conflict in the
form of attacks on Russian peacekeepers and his
deprecating attitude towards the democratically chosen
leaders of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

As a result of Tbilisi's actions, the Abkhaz and
South Ossetian conflict flared up once again in the
early 1990s. Since then, Russia has done everything in
its power to assist in settling those problems on the
basis of the recognition of the territorial integrity of
Georgia. Russia took that position despite the fact that
Georgia, in declaring its own independence, had
violated the rights to self-determination of the people
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. In accordance with the
law of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the
procedure for the resolution of issues linked to the

secession of a republic from the Union, autonomous
entities within the Union's republics had the right to
independently resolve the issues of whether or not to
remain part of the Union and of their legal status in the
event of the republic's cessation from the Union.
Georgia prevented Abkhazia and South Ossetia from
exercising that right.

Nevertheless, Russia has consistently maintained
its policy, while in good faith carrying out its
peacekeeping and mediating functions. Russia has
attempted to help achieve peace agreements and
demonstrated restraint and patience in the face of
provocation. Nor did we abandon our position after the
unilateral proclamation of Kosovo's independence.

Through the aggressive attack on South Ossetia
on the night of 8 August 2008, which caused numerous
casualties, including among peacekeepers and other
Russian citizens, as well as preparations for similar
actions against Abkhazia, Saakashvili himself put an
end to the territorial integrity of Georgia by using
crude and blatant military force against people whom,
in his own words, he wanted to see as part of his State.
Saakashvili left them no other choice but to provide for
their own security and to seek to exercise the right to
self-determination as independent States.

In that regard, we cannot fail to recall the role
that was played by those who have throughout the
years pandered to the militarist regime of Saakashvili,
supplied him with offensive weapons in violation of
the regulations of the OSCE and the European Union,
dissuaded him from shouldering his obligations on the
non-use of force and inculcated in him a complex of
impunity, including, among other things, with regard to
his authoritarian actions to crush dissidents in Georgia.
We know that, at specific stages, the external patrons
attempted to restrain Saakashvili from irrational
military escapades. But he clearly was completely out
of control.

It is alarming that not everyone was able to arrive
at objective conclusions in connection with Georgia's
aggression. The glimmer of hope that once existed for
the implementation of the joint initiative by the
Presidents of Russia and France of 12 August 2008
quickly vanished when Tbilisi in fact rejected the
initiative and Mr. Saakashvili's defenders followed his
lead. In addition, the United States and several
European capitals are promising Mr. Saakashvili
protection through NATO, are calling for the rearming
of the Tbilisi regime and are already supplying him
with new deliveries of weapons. That is a direct
invitation to new escapades.

In the light of the appeal of the South Ossetian
and Abkhaz peoples, the parliaments and presidents of
the two Republics, the views of the people of Russia
and the positions of both chambers of Russia's Federal
Assembly, the President of the Russian Federation took
a decision on the recognition of the independence of
South Ossetia and Abkhazia and on concluding with
them treaties on friendship, cooperation and mutual
assistance. In adopting that decision, the Russian side
has based itself on the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and other
fundamental international documents, including the
1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law
Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States. It is necessary to emphasize that, in accordance
with the Declaration, every State must refrain from any
violent actions that might deprive people of their right
to self-determination, freedom and independence. The
actions of States must also comply with the principles
of equality and the self-determination of peoples.
States must also have governments that represent all
the people living on their territory. There can be no
doubt that Saakashvili's regime in no way complies
with those high standards established by the
international community.

Russia, which has sincere feelings of friendship
and cordiality for the Georgian people, is confident
that, sooner or later, Georgia will find worthy leaders
who will genuinely be able to care for their country
and develop relations of mutual respect on an equal
footing, as well as good-neighbourly relations with all
the peoples of the Caucuses. Russia will be ready to
promote that in any way possible.

