Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Vilovie, Urbina and
Mayr-Harting for their informative briefings in their
capacity as the Chairs of the three Security Council
Committees entrusted with combating international
terrorism.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
wholeheartedly welcome the efforts of the Committee
and its expert group to implement the Committee's
programme of work. The comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) undertaken
on 30 September by the Committee was an important
phase of its work five years after its establishment. We
hope that the important recommendations that the
Committee formulated at the conclusion of that
exercise will be rapidly translated into concrete and
effective measures aimed at achieving the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In order to support the initiatives and efforts of
the Committee, we have always believed that the
Committee and its expert group should undertake visits
to willing States. Such visits would enable it to
improve its dialogue with interested States and to
evaluate their implementation efforts and technical
assistance needs. In addition to training and awareness-
raising projects, in particular the regional workshops,
such visits will be decisive for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

We also urge the Committee to maintain ongoing,
direct dialogue and exchanges of experience with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
order to better guide its work.

The current sanctions regime against Al-Qaida
and the Taliban has proven to be effective, and the
relevant initiatives undertaken by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) following the adoption of resolution 1822
(2008) only improve that regime by adapting it to a
new international context.
Ensuring a reliable and transparent procedure for
adding or removing individuals or entities from the
consolidated list, as well as efforts to streamline
exemptions for humanitarian reasons, reinforce
counter-terrorism activities while respecting human
rights. We welcome the new impetus injected into the
work of the Committee by the effort to ensure reliable
information that will better justify the addition or
removal of names from the list. We commend in this
respect the important role played by the Monitoring
Team through its effective cooperation with all
Member States and other organs and entities of the
United Nations system.

Indeed, the current review of all the names on the
consolidated list is essential and requires the
cooperation not only of the States directly involved,
but also of all Member States in order to achieve,
before 30 June 2010, as required by resolution 1822
(2008), a reliable and uncontested list.

Furthermore, we believe that the success of the
informal meetings organized on 18 June and
28 October to allow States to exchange information
and discuss human rights protection in the
implementation of the sanctions regime clearly
demonstrates the progress achieved by the Committee.
The visits of its Chairman to the Russian Federation,
Brussels and Vienna give added value to the work of
the Committee. This tradition is useful and should be
continued.

We are also convinced that the current
discussions on the recommendations of the Monitoring
Team contained in its tenth report, as well as the
lessons drawn from the review process, will help to
correct deficiencies and make the sanctions regime
more effective, in particular through the imminent
adoption of a new resolution.

Above all, if we want a sustainable and effective
sanctions regime, it is important to prioritize the issue
of technical assistance to countries with undeveloped
capacities in order to prevent them from becoming
ready havens for individuals targeted by sanctions.
Otherwise, all the progress achieved to date will be
largely compromised.

With respect to the 1373 Committee, we are
pleased to note that, with the support of CTED, it has
completed the 191 Preliminary Implementation
Assessments for resolution 1373 (2001). The
preliminary evaluation undertaken in June 2009 of the
support of the Executive Directorate for the Committee
has resulted in appropriate recommendations, which we
support.

The direct dialogue that the Committee has
launched with the permanent missions of certain
countries in New York; the country visits, including
that to Burkina Faso in February; the training
workshops and awareness-raising seminars in which
the Committee and CTED have taken part; the close
cooperation and exchanges of experience with regional
and subregional organizations, including the African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism in
Algiers; and the assessment process for the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) have helped
to paint a clearer picture of the way in which States are
fulfilling their obligations under the resolution and to
formulate recommendations. The revised global survey
of the implementation of the resolution has contributed
to improving the Committee's regional and subregional
evaluations.

We are convinced that the recommendations
formulated following this exercise, if faithfully
implemented, will help to bridge the gaps in the
resolution's implementation. The same holds true for
the conclusions reached at the two thematic discussions
on technical assistance and cooperation. Given the
results, the Committee and the Executive Directorate
are to be commended for their work over the past six
months.

In conclusion, because the fight against terrorism
is a complex undertaking that calls for joint efforts, we
welcome the cooperation established among the three
Committees themselves and between them and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Task Force established by the Secretary-General in the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

