I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her informative briefing. We fully support the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the United Nations-facilitated political process in Libya. In that regard, we sincerely hope that the new Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Libya will be appointed as soon as possible. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the latest developments in Libya (S/2020/360), which, however, paints a grim picture of the situation on the ground. We are disappointed to see that the fighting and military escalation continue despite the promises made by both parties to the conflict to respect the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. To make matters worse, the growing number of attacks, including shelling, mortar fire and small arms fire, is causing more civilian casualties, as well as damaging and destroying vital civilian infrastructure such as health-care facilities and schools. Considering the already dire humanitarian situation and the spread of COVID-19 in the country, the indiscriminate attacks against hospitals are the most appalling. The latest attack on a shelter for displaced people in Tripoli must be condemned in the strongest terms. All violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law need to be addressed, and the perpetrators must be held accountable. The parties to the conflict must return to the negotiating table. The responsibility to stop the ongoing escalation lies not only with the conflicting parties but also with the international community and the Council. That brings me to the issue of the arms embargo implementation. Unless the flagrant violations of the United Nations sanctions regime and the outside actors' involvement stop, Libya does not stand a chance for peace. It is a positive development that the Berlin process is continuing despite the restrictions imposed to fight the pandemic. We call on all the participants to uphold the commitments they made at the Berlin Conference. Estonia continues to support the United Nations-led three-track approach to the political process in Libya. It is regrettable that the draft ceasefire agreement that was negotiated by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in February has not yet been signed. We urge the parties to take concrete steps in bringing forward a political solution to the conflict in Libya.
