Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has noted with some
regret that the situation in the territory of Palestine is
gradually deteriorating. The conflict is growing, and
every day the cost in human lives increases. The
negotiating process has been deadlocked; the parties
are unable to resume their contacts, which are
particularly necessary today in the area of security in
order to overcome the violence and resume the peace
process. The situation has further deteriorated as a
result of the isolation of the West Bank and Gaza and
the virtual economic blockade of that territory.

We note that very serious efforts have been made
in the Security Council in recent days to elaborate an
agreed response to the situation in the occupied
territories. On many important aspects of the draft
resolution under discussion, members of the Security
Council were very close to agreement, and it appeared
that the achievement of consensus was possible.
Unfortunately, however, we cannot fail to draw the
conclusion that it was impossible to arrive at a text that
was acceptable to all. At the same time, we are
convinced that at this critical period the Security
Council is not entitled to remain on the sidelines and to
divorce itself from the tragic events in the West Bank
and Gaza. We believe that it is now necessary to focus
on finding a way to resolve the situation through the
combined efforts of all the parties concerned. For that
reason, we voted in favour of the draft resolution that
was presented by the Non-Aligned Movement caucus.

We believe that it is important to put an end to the
violence - that is the why we voted in favour - as
well as to normalize the situation around the
Palestinian territories and to remove the blockades,
including the economic one. At the same time, it is
important to ensure that the negotiation process is
resumed in a context in which the legitimate interests
of the parties can be satisfied. We believe that the draft
resolution of the Non-Aligned Movement would not
have imposed precepts on either the Palestinians or the
Israelis, but would have instructed the Secretary-
General to establish contacts with the parties for the
purpose of producing a mutually acceptable formula
for creating a mechanism to protect the civilian
population.

On a broader scale, the Russian Federation will
continue to make every possible effort to reach a
speedy resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict on the
basis of the agreements between the parties directly
involved in the conflict, and to facilitate the optimum
format for international assistance for such
negotiations.

