Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia commends the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2376 (2017), endorsing the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
establishment of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. The fact that it has been not only
unanimously adopted, but also sponsored by all 15
members of the Council is an indication of how much
we support this process.

We have seen extraordinary progress in the
peace process in Colombia. The consolidation of the
ceasefire, the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), the
establishment of a new party and the incorporation of
the FARC into the political life in Colombia are key
indications that progress is being made.

Bolivia wishes to thank and pay tribute to the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, both to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his entire team, who in this short period of time, has
efficiently supported, through the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism, all the progress made in
the peace process. We particularly commend the men
and women who have acted as observers as part of the
Mechanism, which was deployed last year. They have
done an impeccable job.

We cannot forget that the real protagonists of
this process are the leadership of the Government -
President Santos - and the leadership of the FARC in
their commitment to the victims of decades of war and
clashes and, in essence, to the Colombian people. We
also cannot forget that there is still a great deal of work
to be done. We must focus on the main areas ofthe peace
agreement, in particular those that refer to transforming
the living conditions of the most vulnerable members
of society and closing the gaps between urban and rural
areas. We hail the progress made in the area of the
granting of land deeds.

As we know, the United Nations Verfication
Mission in Colombia, the second Mission in the country,
will be responsible for verifying the political, economic
and social reincorporation of more than 10,000 former
FARC combatants and implementing protection and
security measures to protect them, pursuant to the
points already indicated in the previous meeting on
the final agreement. This is perhaps one of the most
complex parts of this process. Bolivia believes that
achieving lasting and sustainable peace in Colombia
will depend on the successful reintegration of former
FARC combatants into civilian life. It is highly likely
that in this phase of the peace process the relevant
bodies will turn away from the peace process and the
progress being made will not be made a priority by the
relevant organs. That is why, in these circumstances,
the Security Council in particular and the international
community in general must lend more decisive support
to Colombian progress.

Bolivia also wishes to commend the agreement
reached between the Government of Colombia and the
National Liberation Army to implement a bilateral and
temporary ceasefire, which was recently announced by
a round of talks held in Quito. We are ready to support
this process in the way that we are requested to do so.

