The President: At the outset, I should like, on
behalf of the members of the Security Council, to
express our deepest sympathy and condolences to the
victims of the terrorist attacks that took place in
Indonesia on 1 October 2005.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of October, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Mr. Lauro Baja Jr., Permanent
Representative of the Philippines to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of September 2005. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Baja for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Indonesia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jenie
(Indonesia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist bombing that took
place in Bali, Indonesia, on 1 October 2005,
which has again fallen victim to a heinous act of
terrorism.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the victims of these
attacks and their families, and to the people and
the Government of the Republic of Indonesia.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of these intolerable acts to justice,
and urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and resolution
1373 (2001), to cooperate with and provide
support and assistance, as appropriate, to the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia in this
regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/45.

I give the floor to the representative of Indonesia.


