Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the exemplary way in which you have been conducting
the work of the Council during the month of July. I am
grateful to you, as well as to the other members of the
Council, for having once again given me the
opportunity to address the Council in my capacity as
Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

We have repeatedly shared with the members of
the Security Council our opinion that the parties - the
Israelis and the Palestinians - by themselves can
never extricate themselves from their deep-seated
conflict. Lamentably, the Council has not acted firmly
to implement a plan to realize the vision of two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace within
recognized borders. International efforts to date,
laudable as they may be, have been too modest and
piecemeal.

A three-year programme for the establishment of
a Palestinian State, introduced by President Bush in his
speech of 24 June, gave no details as to the steps that
will lead us to that stated goal. It also emphasized the
party with the least resources, the Palestinians, by
calling on them to end suicide bombings and to impose
radical national reforms, while placing no concrete
demands on Israel to end the occupation.

The recent "quartet" meeting in New York
correctly referred to the need to make parallel progress
on the political, economic and security tracks, and it
expressed concern over the humanitarian situation of
the Palestinians. However, a concrete plan for
implementing the vision of two States remains elusive.

The Palestinians have earnestly embarked on a
process of reform, as recognized even by Israeli
Cabinet members who recently met with Palestinian
ministers. The Palestinian activist leaders extended
their hands in peace, so that Israel would withdraw
from the occupied territory and cease its illegal
practices. However, what was Israel's response? It
continues the reoccupation of the majority of West
Bank towns, the stifling closures, the arbitrary
detentions and killings, the settlement activities, the
attacks on the Palestinian leadership and the
destruction of the physical and institutional
infrastructure in the occupied territories. Moreover, last
week, in a frank violation of international humanitarian
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention, it destroyed
the homes of suspected Palestinian militants,
imprisoned their relatives and threatened to deport
them from the West Bank to the Gaza Strip, in a
flagrant example of illegal collective punishment.

As if that were not enough, in a hideous display
of what could be described only as State terrorism, it
carried out this latest attack on a densely populated
area of Gaza City, which resulted in the death of 17
persons, mainly innocent women and children, while
supposedly targeting only one senior Hamas activist.
All of this is unacceptable, and it must be clearly
condemned by the entire international community and
its representative organs, including the Security
Council.

Our Committee has always condemned the killing
of innocent civilians, be they Palestinians or Israelis. It
has also regretted, on many occasions, the lack of
decisive action that has led to violations of
international humanitarian law and the blocking of the
resumption of substantive talks to find a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions and
of the principle of land for peace.

Once again, I should like to urge the Security
Council to assume definitively its responsibilities in the
attainment of international peace and security and to
take the appropriate measures in a decisive way. As the
Secretary-General suggested earlier, there must be a
robust international presence in the region to guarantee
the safety of both Palestinian and Israeli civilians. At
the same time, there must be a concrete plan to realize
the vision of two States within the borders drawn in
1967.

The need for a solution that would restore to the
Palestinian people their rights - primarily the right to
self-determination and sovereignty - while respecting
the interests of the Israeli people is known to us all.
The Arab States clearly supported that solution through
the balanced peace initiative that they adopted at the
Arab League Summit, held in Beirut in March. It is up
to Israel to respond in good faith if it really wants
peace.

History will judge us severely if we continue to
shy away from our responsibilities and do not prevent
the loss of more innocent lives and the increase in
devastation and suffering, as well as the possibility of a
much larger outburst of violence in the entire region.
Our Committee can only warn of the dire
consequences, in the hope that this time, there will be a
prompt and adequate response.

