Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the United
Kingdom's initiative to explore the role of reconciliation
in peace processes and sustainable peace. The discussion
is particularly timely in the light of the challenges that
peacemakers continue to face. Generations in Europe
have felt and understood the devastating effects of
violent conflict. Today war within the European Union
is unthinkable, because we have worked hard to build
confidence and trust. Yet, without continuous work to
reconcile, there is no future for peace, even in Europe.
The need to advance knowledge on reconciliation on
a global scale is urgent. Today's conflicts repeat in
cycles. Peace agreements fail more often than they
succeed. We believe that we must arrive at a better
understanding of why that happens.

Reconciliation is key to sustainable peace. It is a
process that enables the restoration of social relations
on the basis of fundamental values, such as human
dignity and human rights, including the right to life
and the right to physical and psychological integrity. It
is a complex process that has to be considered from the
outset in any peace-support efforts and requires a truly
integrated approach.

In all those aspects, the Peacebuilding Commission
has a central role to play by bringing together
the various actors of the United Nations system.
Moreover, the active advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission to the Security Council could be further
drawn upon to ensure that appropriate attention be paid
to reconciliation at all stages of the conflict cycle.

Our policies and practices need to be continuously
upgraded. For example, 75 per cent of Security
Council-mandated missions aim for reconciliation,
but no commonly accepted definitions or guidelines
on what that means and how to achieve it exist. The
concept of reconciliation needs to be sharpened in
order to operationalize it more effectively. We are
ready to contribute to that. We need to learn more about
how various elements of reconciliation have worked in
different settings, and with what impact. In doing so,
we need to gain better awareness of how to support
national and local reconciliation strategies in countries
emerging from conflict, whether and how to support
reconciliation processes as part of exit strategies and
how the Council can engage with other parts of the
United Nations system, including the Secretariat, to
support those processes.

We also need to recognize that neither the United
Nations, the EU nor any other multilateral organization
alone can advance reconciliation. Reconciliation
happens at the individual and interpersonal level, the
societal level and the institutional level. We are enablers;
it is the conflicting communities that are the agents. We
can provide a framework, tools and safe spaces, but to
offer support, we need a solid, and preferably common,
understanding of what makes reconciliation effective.

Religions should be factored into reconciliation
approaches and our diplomatic practice. Diplomatic
practices could benefit from improved religious
literacy. The setting up by the European Union of an
international exchange platform on religion and social
exclusion is one example of how we are working on
that; training and exposing our own diplomats to the
many facets of religion in different parts of the world
is another.

Peace agreements can become more sustainable
by involving political and societal actors in peace
negotiations, in addition to the primary conflict parties.
Traditional and religious leaders and their networks are
also seen as having the capacity and public trust to find
solutions for sustainable peace. Women reconcilers
often take the first steps towards mobilizing their
communities and engaging with their enemies; their
efforts need support. Youth movements are growing
rapidly, and their perspectives and efforts must be
learned from. Reconciliation and healing are usually
associated with the post-conflict stage, but are also
overlapping processes that take place during conflict
and can prepare the ground for peace or can prevent
further violence.

To conclude, we reiterate our determination to
continue this important work on how to better support
reconciliation processes both within peacekeeping and
peacebuilding contexts.

