Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the President of the Security
Council, the Swedish Prime Minister, for organizing
this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2018/465) and appreciate the valuable
inputs from the briefers.

A large increase in violations against children in
2017, as reported by the Secretary-General, is alarming.
It serves to underline the need for redoubling our
efforts to prevent the emergence of new conflicts. If we
cannot protect children today, we will fail in preventing
conflicts tomorrow. In turn, that means we will face
a vicious circle of increases in both the number of
conflicts and the loss of children's lives.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/465) once
again shows that, unfortunately, the scale of violations
is alarming in many places, especially in the Palestinian
occupied territories and Yemen. Throughout 2017, a
large number of Palestinian children continued to be
killed, injured, arrested and detained by Israeli forces.
The exponential increase in the level of such violations
during peaceful protests this year puts the Israeli
regime at the top of the list of global child-killers. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms the brutality
of the Israeli forces against Palestinian children.
Such acts are clear manifestations of war crimes and
crime against humanity, and they are carried out with
total impunity. They must come to an end and their
perpetrators must be brought to justice. Failing to do so
will only embolden Israel to kill more children.

That situation is the result of the Council's failure
to meet its relevant responsibilities due to the use of the
veto power by the United States, which thus extended
unconditional impunity to the Israeli regime. Despite
all the atrocities it has perpetrated against Palestinian
children, the Israel Defence Forces has unfortunately
never been blacklisted in the reports of the Secretary-
General. We hope that the 2018 report will put Israel at
the top of the list of violators of the rights of children in
armed conflicts. That will bring accuracy, credibility
and impartiality to that list.

The situation of children in Yemen, where,
according to UNICEF, more than 2,200 children have
been killed and nearly all children are in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance, is at best comparable
only to the situation of Palestinian children. Saudi and
Emirati forces, which seek only a military solution
in Yemen, are responsible for the continuation of that
conflict. Creating a separate category for the so-called
improving violators in the Secretary-General's reports
last year (S/2017/821) and this year, due to well-known
political considerations, did not help to halt their
brutality perpetrated against Yemeni children or change
the realities on the ground. As the Secretary-General's
report indicates, the killing of Yemeni children
continued unabated, most recently in an airstrike on a
wedding in July, during which at least seven children
lost their lives.

The policy of deliberately killing children as a
war tactic is utilized by Israel, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, as well as by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The aim of such a policy
is to put maximum pressure on adversaries. The most
notable cases are the mass killing of children by Israel
in Lebanon in 2006, by ISIS in Syria in 2013 and by
Saudi and Emirati forces in Yemen in 2018.

We call for accountability for any war crimes
against children anywhere, be it in Palestine, Yemen,
Myanmar or elsewhere. Adopting a selective approach
in such cases is tantamount to betraying the most
vulnerable people - children - whom this process is
designed to protect.

