Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in French): I am
delighted, Mr. President, to see you, the representative
of a friendly country, presiding over the work of the
Council for this month. We would also like to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
China, for having guided the work of the Council last
month.

(spoke in Arabic)

As we meet today, the whole world awaits the
Council's response to a senseless and flagrant act of
terror - a heinous war crime perpetrated by the Israeli
forces - that crosses every line and rides roughshod
over international law. I refer to one of the most
heinous crimes known to humanity: the assassination
of the martyr Sheikh Ahmed Yassin - one of the
outstanding symbols of the Palestinian resistance.

Furthermore, Israel has shown no remorse,
declaring publicly that it perpetrated that crime in a
premeditated manner and that it was planned at the
highest level of the Israeli Government, and has
indicated that it intends to implement and carry out
more crimes - led by Mr. Sharon, the hero of the
Sabra and Shatila massacres.

Israel has done so in total defiance of the
Council. But the Council must take a stance in keeping
with its raison d'etre - one that would restore its own
credibility - before it can hope to restore to the
Palestinian people a modicum of their rights to resist
the occupier of their land.

Israel would not have dared commit such a
heinous crime had it not been for the unjust and
indecisive position of the Council, which has remained
silent in the face of Israel's previous crimes. Israel has
taken that as a green light to carry out further crimes.
Needless to say, there is a vast number of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions that Israel
has shown no inclination to implement.

What can we call the crime that was committed
yesterday? It was simply one of the most heinous
crimes of terrorism. How long can the Council remain
silent and fail to take action with respect to a State that
is one of the most heinous occupying Powers known to
humankind - a Power that has carried out the most
egregious terrorist crimes known to humanity?

We appeal to the international community, to
international organizations, and in particular to the
Security Council to put an end to this escalation by the
occupation authorities, who have stifled every glimmer
of hope for a return to the peace process by threatening
to exile or kill President Arafat and by building the
expansionist wall - despite the international
community's condemnation. They then proceeded to
carry out a series of assassinations of those who own
the land - culminating in yesterday's crime.

Should not the Council start taking action? We
are bored beyond belief. We have listened to one
statement after another. Even the Security Council
Chamber itself must be bored. The occupier is
persisting in its defiance of the Security Council and its
resolutions. Day after day, we hear reports of ever more
serious crimes. The situation does not augur well for
the future, with very little possibility of a return to the
peace process - let alone the road map, which has
been totally disrupted by the Israeli war machine.

We are here today to say that no policy of
assassination has ever been known to destroy the will
of a people to resist. The assassination of iconic
political leaders will not stop the Palestinian people
from trying to resist, let alone the Arab peoples -
from the ocean to the Gulf - who are filled with rage.
They are awaiting a decision of the Security Council,
because the Council is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security and international
law.

My delegation has warned against Israel's abuse
of the international campaign against terrorism on the
unfounded pretext that its actions all fall under the
framework of the fight against terrorism. Is any
terrorism more serious than that which is often seen on
satellite television: the scenes of the carnage
perpetrated by Israel against the defenceless Palestinian
people?

Today, my delegation would like to stress that the
events of yesterday represent a real danger to
international peace and security and could inflame the
region, which is already volatile. It is therefore up to
the Council to do what is right by adopting the
necessary measures to restore justice. Otherwise,
injustice and escalation will continue, and it will be
senseless to talk about resolutions and charters.

