Mr. Serry: We have previously spoken of 2013 as
a decisive year for the peace process, a year that would
be pivotal for salvaging a two-State solution, a year
that would decide whether the Palestinians - already
accorded non-Member observer State status by the
General Assembly - could realize their aspirations
to statehood, self-determination and an end to the
occupation that began in 1967 through a negotiated
solution, the only solution that would also bring
Israel the security and recognition in the region that
it deserves. And we spoke of it as a year that would
test the commitment of the international community to
re-engaging and breaking the deadlock in this conflict,
in the face of competing priorities in the region and
elsewhere. We also warned that the consequences of
inaction could be dire for everyone, putting an already
precarious situation on the ground at risk even further.

And it has certainly been an important year, in
which we have finally witnessed the renewal of direct
talks, brokered by the United States and now in their
fifth month. Spurred by the unwavering personal
involvement of Secretary of State Kerry, leaders
on both sides have taken courageous steps, despite
domestic headwinds and public scepticism. Israeli
and Palestinian negotiators have engaged quietly in
some 20 rounds, and neither side is ready to give up
or walk out of the talks. The Quartet envoys continued
to consult with each other and engage with the parties,
as well as with Arab partners. The European Union,
in its Council conclusions issued today, expressed its
full support for the efforts of the parties and of the
United States towards a just and lasting settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It offered
"[a]n unprecedented package of European political,
economic and security support to both parties in
the context of a final status agreement."

All of this testifies to the ongoing international and
regional support for the process.

The parties are approaching another important
timeline in the negotiations, the third release of
prisoners, scheduled for 29 December. We urge both
sides to refrain from steps that would increase mistrust
and undermine the prospects for progress in the critical
period ahead when bolder decisions are required to
bridge the gaps towards a final status agreement. There
is good reason to be concerned about the fragile situation
on the ground. Indeed, the current environment is far
from conducive. Continued settlement activity cannot
be reconciled with the goal of a two-State solution and
is illegal under international law. The United Nations is
also concerned about recurrent violence and incitement.

During the reporting period, Israeli security forces
carried out some 217 search-and-arrest operations. A
total of 352 Palestinians were arrested and 206 injured,
including during demonstrations against the barrier.
Six Israeli soldiers were also injured. Six Palestinians
were killed, including when on 26 November Israeli
security forces shot dead three allegedly Al-Qaida-
affiliated Salafist extremists near Hebron, who were
reportedly carrying explosives and weapons and
planning lethal attacks on Palestinian and Israeli
targets. One Palestinian was shot dead on 30 November
while in Israel without a valid permit, and another died
on 28 November of injuries sustained at Qalandiya
checkpoint in March.

In a troubling incident on 7 December, a 14-year-
old Palestinian was shot in the back by Israeli security
forces and died in Jalazun refugee camp, next to the
Israeli settlement of Beit El, allegedly after throwing
stones at Israeli forces. This shooting follows a recent
series of serious injuries to Palestinians from live fire
and rubber-coated metal bullets directed by Israeli
security forces at or near the camp. We urge the Israeli
authorities to reach a speedy conclusion to their inquiry
into the circumstances of this fatal incident, and to act
with maximum restraint and avoid the use of excessive
force.

Palestinian security forces, working to maintain law
and order in the West Bank, carried out major security
operations in Jenin and Nablus, which included the
arrest on 1 December of more than 20 alleged Salafist
extremists. Violence between Palestinians and settlers
continued. Settler attacks injured eight Palestinians,
including four children. So-called price-tag attacks
by settlers on Palestinian property included several
incidents of racist graffiti and vandalism in the West
Bank. Palestinian stone-throwing attacks, on the
rise in recent months, injured four settlers, including
two children. Demolitions of unlicensed Palestinian
structures in Area C and East Jerusalem have been
increasing. A total of 74 structures, including more than
30 in the Jordan Valley last week, were demolished,
leading to the displacement of98 Palestinians, including
55 children.

The United Nations has repeatedly called for a
halt to demolitions and for Palestinian access to a
fair planning regime that meets their residential and
development needs. Three Palestinian administrative
detainees, on hunger strike since 16 November in protest
at their detention, have been transferred to hospital in
Israel due to deterioration in their health. We reiterate
that people in administrative detention should either be
charged or released.

Turning now to Gaza, as reported previously,
thanks to a generous Turkish contribution a safety net is
in place to allow the most critical water, sanitation and
health-related facilities to continue operating. However,
Gaza's deficient infrastructure was not able to cope with
the impact of the current inclement weather. While the
West Bank was also affected, heavy flooding in many
parts of the Gaza Strip has resulted in the displacement
of approximately 10,000 people. The United Nations
is actively engaged with relevant parties in addressing
the most urgent issues. Shelter, flood-water removal
equipment and non-food items, particularly fuel, are
being provided to those in need with the support of the
United Nations humanitarian system on the ground.
While Israel was hit by the same inclement weather
conditions, it responded to an urgent request to provide
four water pumps for Gaza. With the Erez crossing
flooded and temporarily inoperable, Israeli authorities
have expanded the operations and opening hours of the
only other crossings, at Kerem Shalom. We hope that
the Rafah crossing will also resume normal operations
as soon as possible in order to help address the difficult
humanitarian situation.

As the Council is aware, we have been expressing
our deep concern about the critical energy situation
in Gaza, especially since the Gaza power plant ceased
operations on 1 November. I have been working closely
with the Palestinian Authority and other relevant parties
to address the issue. I am pleased to report that the
Government of Qatar has come forward with a donation
of $10 million for the Palestinian Authority to purchase
fuel for the plant. In addition, a Qatari shipment of
18,000 metric tons of fuel is expected to reach an
Israeli port in due course. The Israeli authorities have
confirmed their cooperation in transferring 450,000
litres of fuel per day through the Kerem Shalom
crossing. As a result, the Gaza power plant resumed
operations as of yesterday. That is an important but by
no means sufficient development in order for Gaza's
structural energy problems to start being addressed.

I am pleased to note the decision of the Government
of Israel to resume the transfer of construction materials
for United Nations projects in Gaza, under an agreed-
on mechanism for the materials' secure transfer and
use. Work has now resumed on critical construction
projects - part of the half-billion-dollar package the
United Nations is implementing in the Strip - such
as schools, social housing and water and sanitation
facilities. While we recognize Israel's legitimate
security concerns, it remains important that Israel also
reinstates its September decision to begin allowing
imports of construction materials for the private sector.
The United Nations remains ready, with other Quartet
partners, to help to define agreed modalities for the
secure transfer and use of such materials.

During the past month, the security situation in
and around Gaza has witnessed relative calm. One
rocket and four mortar shells fired from Gaza landed
in Israel, and Israel conducted one incursion and four
airstrikes, none of which caused casualties or damage.
Six Palestinian civilians were injured by Israeli live
fire near the border and three were arrested. Since in
the past year the lowest level of violence and civilian
casualties in 13 years has been registered in Gaza
and southern Israel, the continued preservation of the
ceasefire understanding of a year ago will provide a
basis for progress on other issues as well, including
further opening of the crossings.

Turning to Syria, the Council was briefed
earlier today by the Secretary-General on the use
of chemical weapons. Yet the vast majority of the
killings and destruction continues to be carried out
with conventional weapons. As they try to settle their
scores by military means, the warring parties continue
to disregard their legal and moral responsibilities to
protect the civilian population. With almost half of the
population displaced and in need of urgent assistance,
the humanitarian tragedy is worsening every day,
particularly with the onset of winter.

Since the United Nations is now working very hard
to prepare for a "Geneva II" conference on 22 January,
we should also be seeing steps from the Syrian parties
and the international community aimed at helping the
conference succeed. All the Syrian parties must work
now to achieve a cessation of violence, humanitarian
access, the release of detainees and the return of
refugees and internally displaced people to their homes.
All those with influence on the Syrian sides should
help them prepare for constructive engagement in
Geneva and for taking immediate confidence-building
measures.

In the Golan, the situation remains volatile. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will brief the
Council later this afternoon on the details.

Turning to Lebanon, there was a serious incident
yesterday with the shooting of an Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) soldier by a Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
soldier in the vicinity of Naqoura. The Secretary-
General deplored the incident and called for calm. The
IDF and the Lebanese Armed Forces are cooperating
with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) to ascertain the facts. Both reaffirmed
their commitment to working through the established
liaison and coordination arrangements with UNIFIL
so as to ensure that this remains an isolated incident,
and reaffirmed their commitment to the cessation of
hostilities under resolution 1701 (2006). The Secretary-
General commends both sides for exercising restraint.

The security situation has been tense since the
terrorist attack against the Iranian Embassy last month.
On 4 December, a senior Hizbullah commander was
assassinated in Beirut. On 22 and 29 November, the
Lebanese army defused a car bomb in the Bekaa and
another in Zahle. Separately, there have been reports of
further deaths of Hizbullah militants fighting in Syria,
in violation of the Lebanese Government's policy of
disassociation. By 3 December, some 40,000 refugees
had crossed the border into Arsal, fleeing fighting in
the Syrian region of Al-Qalamoun.

On 30 November, a fresh round of fighting in
Tripoli between Sunni and Alawite neighbourhoods
led to 14 fatalities, including two children, as well as
one soldier of the Lebanese Armed Forces, which were
heavily deployed. On 2 December, the city's security
was placed under the responsibility of the army for
six months, with the support of the Internal Security
Forces. The situation is currently calm.

There have also been incidents of concern in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Ain el-Hilweh, where
clashes led to two fatalities on 1 and 3 December. In
the southern city of Sidon, two LAF checkpoints were
attacked yesterday, resulting in the death of one soldier
and four of the assailants.

Meanwhile, the political situation remains
deadlocked. The Council has urged all parties in
Lebanon to engage constructively to facilitate the
formation of a Government as soon as possible. It is
vital that all parties assume their responsibility in that
regard so as to address effectively the acute security and
humanitarian challenges facing the country. Serious
commitment is also required to holding presidential
elections on time in 2014, before the end of President
Sleiman's term.

Let me conclude. As this year comes to a close, the
parties are engaged in a serious effort to implement
their commitments to a negotiated two-State solution.
We sincerely hope that this effort will lead next
year to decisive and irreversible progress towards a
comprehensive settlement realizing the vision of two
States for two peoples - Israel and Palestine, living side
by side in peace, security and mutual recognition of each
other's legitimate rights, including self-determination,
with each State ensuring equal civil rights for all its
citizens. If both parties, with the continued effective
support of the international community, take the bold
steps needed to see through what they have started this
year, we in 2014 will reach a moment of truth regarding
a two-State solution.

