Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The ongoing escalation of the situation in the
Palestinian territories, particularly in East Jerusalem,
is a matter of great concern to Moscow. It is causing
increased suffering among peaceful Israelis and
Palestinians, exacerbating the lack of trust between
them and reducing the possibility ofa political solution.
Russia firmly rejects any terrorist manifestation and
we again calls on both parties to stop the violence,
cease acts of provocation and take immediate measures
to de-escalate the situation. Any violent act against
peaceful citizens is intolerable and unacceptable.
It is of key importance to normalize the situation
around the holy sites in East Jerusalem, which are
considered sacred by Jews, Muslims and Christian. At
this stage, we must avoid any step that would disrupt
the status quo or lead to violent action against either
Palestinians or Israelis. A situation that has lasted
for decades nevertheless cannot last indefinitely.
The holy sites in Jerusalem must be dealt with in a
mutually beneficial way. That is possible only through
negotiations on all issues relating to Jerusalem and the
permanent status of the Palestinian territories.

In calling for immediate steps to reduce the
tension, we also note that we need to consider the
root cause of what is taking place in the Palestinian
territories, which goes back to the 1967 occupation of
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. It is
the dangerous decades-long lack of a proper resolution
to the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians that
lies at the root of the current escalation. We cannot turn
a blind eye to that fact. Israel, as the occupying Power
under the norms of international law, has the primary
responsibility for the situation in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. Until we achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian problem in
the context of an internationally accepted basis for a
peaceful settlement, Israel, on the basis ofinternational
conventions, must comply with humanitarian principles
in its dealings with the populations of the occupied
territories.

We are also concerned by the situation in the Gaza
Strip. We welcome the steps taken by Israel to simplify
the access of necessary supplies into the Strip. But it
bears saying that the individual steps taken to attenuate
the blockade have not met the main demands of the
Security Council and the international community,
namely, the complete removal of the blockade and
the restoration of control to the central Palestinian
authorities over the Strip.

We are ready to continue our efforts, including
through the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators, in order to de-escalate the situation in
Palestinian-Israeli relations. The Quartet's ministerial
statement issued in New York on 30 September
(SG/2220) called for specific steps to restore mutual
trust and a stabilization of the situation so that both
peoples can hope for a two-State solution. An important
continuation of the Quartet's efforts would have been
the trip to Israel and Palestine that was supposed to
take place a few days from now but was postponed
at the request of Israel in connection with the recent
events. We hope that the planned visit by the Quartet
to the region can take place as soon as possible. It
is also important to consider organizing a Security
Council mission to the Middle East, which the Russian
delegation proposed some years ago.

Despite the overall turbulent situation in the
whole region and the growth in regional terrorism,
the Palestinian-Israeli problem remains the epicentre
of the Middle East situation. The fact that it has not
been resolved is one of the main factors for the lack
of stability in the entire region, That fact continues to
shake up the region, which helps extremists to recruit
new members to their cause. A renewal of direct
talks between Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the
two-State solution, would represent a very important
contribution to establishing stability in the region and
security for the people living there.

In July 2014, Mr. Abbas sent to the Secretary-
General a request to place the Palestinian State under
the United Nations system of protection. The Security
Council soon received a letter from the Secretary-
General saying that the matter was under consideration
in the Secretariat. As we know, the Secretariat has
prepared its study in that regard. We hope that the
Secretary-General will officially convey the results of
that study to the Council.

