Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We commend Pakistan for
having convened this debate, which constitutes an
excellent opportunity to highlight the importance of
strengthening a comprehensive approach to counter
terrorism. Brazil joins previous speakers in expressing
our condolences to you, Mr. President, to your country
and to the Pakistani people on the terrible terrorist
attacks that took place in Pakistan last week. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his presentation.

Brazil has long supported international efforts on
counter-terrorism. We have always condemned, and
always will condemn, terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. In fact, repudiation of terrorism is a
tenet enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution and serves
as a guiding principle for our foreign policy.

As a multidimensional threat, terrorism must
be addressed through a holistic approach that takes
into consideration its underlying causes. Radicalism
and violence often stem from long-standing social,
political, economic and cultural exclusion, amid which
a culture of intolerance may thrive. Development and
inclusiveness are key tools to combat terrorism. Fully
aware of the interdependence between peace, security
and development, Brazil commends the approach
contained in the Pakistani concept note (S/2013/3, annex) in that regard.

Brazil fully supports the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Its various pillars provide
a comprehensive and integrated perspective on the root
causes of terrorism. Tackling the conditions conducive
to the spread ofterrorism is the best means ofpreventing
the recurrence of this phenomenon in the long term.

As we have noted on a number of occasions,
prevention is always the best policy. Focusing on
preventive aspects means the promotion of democratic
values, international cooperation for social and
economic development, and political, ethnic and
religious tolerance.

Countering terrorism should never justify disregard
for basic individual rights and the rule of law. The fight
against terrorism must be undertaken in compliance
with international law and human rights law. Otherwise,
the very legitimacy of our efforts would be at stake.

We encourage the Council to continue to reflect
on ways to strengthen due process within the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. The work of the Ombudsperson
has proved to be a valuable tool to increase fairness in
the consideration of delisting requests.

Cooperation and capacity-building are essential
tools in an effective strategy to fight terrorism. Many
countries have the political will to implement the
pertinent resolutions of the Security Council, but lack
the necessary capacity to do so. Brazil is pleased to
see capacity-building as a top priority for the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee can also play
a positive role in that regard by facilitating technical
assistance to Member States. We commend the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for its efforts in organizing workshops and seminars
in different regions and call for the continuation of that
practice.

Brazil reiterates that there are no excuses for
terrorist acts. We reaffirm our commitment to a
coordinated and multidimensional response to the
challenges posed by terrorism, based on a comprehensive
View of this scourge. We remain convinced that
cooperation and dialogue within the United Nations
will enhance the tools at our disposal in the fight against
this phenomenon. The Security Council has a duty not
only to condemn acts of terrorism and work to prevent
the spread terrorism, but also to do so coherently and
universally, wherever and whenever international
terrorism strikes.

