Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to extend to
you my sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
should like also to thank you for having convened this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. Let me
also express my country's support for the statements
either made or to be made later by the speakers on
behalf ofthe League of Arab States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.

I should like to begin by offering our condolences
to the United States of America in connection with the
victims of the criminal terrorist acts that took place in
Boston last week. I wish also to reaffirm the sympathy
and solidarity of the Saudi people with the American
people. We feel deeply the grief suffered by the families
of the victims, and we wish a speedy and full recovery
to the injured, who include Saudi nationals.

Regrettably, the achievement of peace and the
reaching ofajust and equitable solution to the question
of Palestine seems to remain a disappointing mirage.
Israel continues to show its defiance and its disdain for
the international community's will by proceeding with
the expansion of settlements and by reaffirming its
determination to persevere in that policy. In addition,
it mistreats and devalues the lives of the Palestinian
prisoners held in its jails by subjecting them to
oppression and starvation, which led this month to the
death of the martyr Maysara Abu Hamdieh.

Moreover, settlers continue to launch brutal attacks
and assaults on Palestinians, the latest of which was
the deliberate running over on 9 March of a 9-year-old
Palestinian child by the name of Malik Adel Al-Shaer.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on the Council
to act to protect prisoners. We call on the Human Rights
Council, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and humanitarian organizations, as well as human
rights organizations, to closely monitor the situation
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, and to expose
violations of their political, human and physical rights,
as well as the severe criminal negligence that is inflicted
upon them. We call on the international community to
compel Israel to respect the rights of children, just as
we draw the international community's attention to
the report issued by UNICEF in February 2013 that
explicitly depicts the brutal and inhuman punishments
meted out by Israel and its occupation forces on the
Palestinian children held in their prisons.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, indeed, all Arab
countries continue to unequivocally choose peace as the
strategic option; their good intentions were reflected
in the launching of the Arab Peace Initiative in 2002.
However, the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people and its continued contempt for and threats
against Haram Al-Sharif are undermining any chance
to achieve ajust peace. Such a peace must be based on a
globally agreed two-State solution, according to which
the independent State of Palestine would be established
with holy Jerusalem as its capital on land occupied by
Israel within the borders of4 June 1967.

The time has come to end the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territories, the Syrian Arab Golan and
occupied Lebanese territories. The time has come
for the Middle East to enjoy a just, comprehensive
and equitable peace. The time has indeed come for
Palestinian refugees to return from the diaspora and
have their aspirations realized pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). The time has come for
all citizens of our region to enjoy the fruits of peace
and to live in security and stability. It is time for our
societies to achieve the development and prosperity
they deserve. We have had enough aggression, enough
settlements, and enough occupation.

The situation in sister Syria is deteriorating by the
day. So far, more than 70,000 people have been killed,
as noted in the joint statement issued this month by
United Nations humanitarian agencies. Similarly, in the
past week the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has provided alarming figures about Syrian
refugees, whose numbers are expected to reach more
than 3 million. This problem has become an untenable
economic burden on neighbouring countries. In fact, it
has become a serious threat to security and stability in
the region.

Through resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly, the world has condemned the Syrian regime,
which continues to struggle to maintain power over the
bodies of Syrian children, women, the young and the
elderly. Moreover, the League of Arab States, which
represents the conscience of the Arab community,
has stressed the need to reach an equitable solution by
enabling the Syrian people to defend themselves, to
preserve their rights and dignity, and to achieve their
aspirations to freedom.

We have lately witnessed the bold steps taken by
the Syrian opposition to unite and form the National
Syrian Coalition, which has been recognized by more
than 100 countries in the world as the representative
of the Syrian people. Moreover, the Coalition has been
invited to assume the Syrian seat in the League of Arab
States. The time has come for the Syrian people to
regain their due position in international organizations
and bodies.
The Syrian people have spoken loudly and declared
their will by demanding the departure of the Al-Assad
regime, which lost its legitimacy as soon as it committed
aggression and atrocities against its own people. The
search for an equitable solution in Syria must begin by
allowing the Syrian people to open a new chapter in
their lives - a chapter upon which the sun of freedom
will shine and which will allow them to exercise their
genuine right to choose their own leadership and
their representatives away from the authority of this
tyrannical regime.

