The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council to be held this year, I should like to
welcome the new members of the Council: Costa Rica,
Kenya, Portugal, Sweden and Japan. We all look forward
with confidence to their participation in the work of the
Council, which will be of invaluable assistance in the
discharge of the Council's enormous responsibilities as it
tackles so many challenges.

I should also like to express the Council's gratitude to
the outgoing members for their important contributions to
the Council's work. The representatives of Botswana,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia and Italy all, in an excellent
manner, contributed their talents to the conduct of the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to my
predecessor, Ambassador Francesco Paolo Fulci, Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations, for the
service he rendered as President of the Council for the
month of December 1996. I am sure I speak for all the
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Fulci for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central America: efforts towards peace

Report of the Secretary-General (S/1996/1045 and Add.1 and 2)


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain and Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Martini
Herrera (Guatemala) took a seat at the Council
table; Ms. Ramirez (Argentina), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Londorio-Paredes (Colombia), Mr.
Tello (Mexico), Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr.
Aass (Norway), Mr. Laclaustra (Spain) and Mr. De
Rojas (Venezuela), took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on Central America: efforts
towards peace, documents S/l996/ 1045 and Addenda l
and 2.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1997/ 18, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Mexico, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Venezuela.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 10 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of a letter of the same date from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala addressed to
the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as document S/ 1997/23.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Guatemala, on whom I now call.


