Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and for Assistant Secretary-General
Keita's important briefing.

The Secretary-General's 90-day report (S/2019/44)
informs us that Darfur has never been more stable
since the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) was first established.
Intercommunal violence has diminished and the
security situation has improved, despite the fact that
clashes have persisted between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid in
the Jebel Marra area.

However, in this context of greater stability, we
note with concern the recent measures issued by the
Government that may jeopardize progress in Darfur.
In particular, we refer to the state of emergency
decreed throughout the country and the dissolution
of the federal and provincial Governments. That is
particularly sensitive when we recognize that only a
political agreement will make it possible to achieve
sustainable peace in Darfur.

The pre-negotiation agreement between the
Government and some armed groups that are not
signatories of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
was an important step towards peace in Darfur,
pending the start of negotiations among all parties to
the conflict. It now remains to see the effect of the
surprise measures on this process, which is entering a
complex stage owing to the progressive withdrawal of
the mission. In this context, we reiterate the call on all
parties to cease hostilities in Darfur once and for all
and to resolve outstanding substantive issues, such as
the use of land and natural resources, through dialogue.

In the area of human rights, we deplore the
continuing serious violations of fundamental rights,
many of which have been attributed to the Sudanese
Armed Forces, with women and children being
particularly vulnerable. Conflict-related sexual
violence continues to be considerable. In this context,
the early implementation of the framework for
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations in preventing and responding to
sexual violence is of the utmost importance. We believe
it is essential that UNAMID be able to effectively
exercise its mandate throughout Darfur, especially in
the area of Jebel Marra, which is particularly affected
by this scourge. We therefore call on the Government
to ensure that the mission and humanitarian personnel
have unrestricted access to that area.

On the other hand, we are pleased to see that
UNAMID's close coordination with the United Nations
country team and local authorities has led to a significant
reduction in the intensity of intercommunal violence.
We welcome efforts aimed at addressing the drivers of
the conflict, such as access to water resources and the

rehabilitation of local police stations and rural courts.

In this context, we welcome the return of part of the

displaced population to their places of origin, which we
hope will be continued with the adequate provision of
basic services. We are also pleased that the UNAMID
reconfiguration process is proceeding as planned. We
appreciate the efforts of the staff of the mission and
of the United Nations team to carry out the transition
process, focusing on the priorities established.

For that reason, we also welcome the recent
joint visit of the three Assistant Secretaries-
General - Bintou Keita, Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
and Mourad Wahba - and note the need for the donor
community to contribute to these efforts. Resource
mobilization will be essential to facilitate a successful
peacebuilding process in the long term. In this
regard, we stress the importance of giving priority to
investments in development with a view to achieving
sustainable peace.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the African Union, the United Nations team and the
agencies of the system, and in particular for UNAMID
for its strenuous efforts to achieve a successful
transition in Darfur amid the enormous challenges it
faces every day.

