Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured, Mr. President, to deliver my second
statement in a week in the Security Council under your
presidency: a few days ago I delivered a statement on
youth, peace and security (see S/PV.8243), and now
I am speaking on the situation in the Middle East. I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing today and for his ongoing efforts to
advance the peace process in the Middle East. I would
also like to thank him for his efforts to address the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza and his
work for Palestinian reconciliation.

The Middle East continues to face major
challenges as a result of the continued occupation of
Arab territories, which began in 1967 and has far-
reaching consequences for the region and its peoples.
The entire world remembers the occupation with every
piece of land that is confiscated, every settlement that
is approved or built and every Palestinian family that
suffers - whether in the West Bank as a result of the
separation wall, or in the besieged Gaza Strip.

We must again reiterate that the right of the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State
based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
is an inalienable right under international law. It is an
eternal right. The only way to achieve the legitimate
Palestinian rights is by addressing the root causes of
the problem, namely, the occupation. The peace process
must also be revived in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions to
end the occupation and to realize the two-State solution
so that both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples can live
in peace and security like other peoples of the world.

The issue of Jerusalem has a special place in the
hearts of millions of people around the world. That
sensitive issue requires particular attention. However,
we acknowledge that international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions are the only international
legal basis to achieve these objectives away from
historical and religious reasons. Otherwise, there could
be grave consequences. Any arbitrary action would
have serious repercussions and would render the two-
State solution no longer viable.

The appeal to uphold the international resolutions
and international law is not extravagant, particularly in
a region beset by conflicts and at a time when the world
faces serious challenges and does not need further
instability. That appeal takes into account threats that
could lead to the collapse of the international order and
lead sooner or later to the suffering of all peoples of
the world.

Guaranteed safety and security is a right of all
peoples in the region so that they all, including the
Israelis, can live in peace within their borders and in
good-neighbourly relations with other nations of the
region. However, Member States may also agree that
equality and the rights ofpeople are the basis forjustice
and stability. We cannot believe that peace, security and
well-being can prevail in the region while the Palestinian
people suffer under decades-long occupation.
As part of the appeal for peaceful coexistence by
President Fattah Al Sisi on a number of occasions, we
therefore urge both parties - the Palestinian and the
Israeli - to recognize the truth that both peoples will
continue to exist as neighbours on this land. The choice
is either to find a way to coexist on the basis of equal
rights and duties or to give in to rhetoric and hardline
positions. That may ultimately serve the interests of
some and strengthen their position. However, it will
negatively affect both peoples for many years and have
grave consequences as a result of incitement and hatred.

