Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay would like to thank Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, for their
detailed briefings.

Uruguay welcomes the renewed momentum
generated by the London Conference on Somalia on
11 May, which will be key to various issues in the political
process. We particularly appreciate the significant
progress that has been made in the constitutional
review process, with the presentation by the Federal
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs to the international
community of a preliminary comprehensive master plan
aimed at completing the review within two years. Also
at the London Conference, the Federal Government of
Somalia committed to holding universal elections in
2021 and to establishing an electoral legal framework
by the end of 2018.

In relation to those commitments, Uruguay
commends the National Independent Electoral
Commission for finalizing its five-year strategic plan
for the period 2017 to 2021, which includes details of
the electoral operations to be undertaken as well as a
timeline for a constitutional referendum and universal
elections. We consider it essential to ensure that Somalia
moves towards positive change through reconciliation,
reaffirming support to its sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity, so that it
can become democratic, stable and prosperous.

Despite some improvements that have resulted from
security measures taken by the Federal Government
of Somalia, and the continued efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the security situation in
Mogadishu remains volatile. Uruguay condemns the
continuing problems posed by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which is the main threat to peace and
security in Somalia and which remains latent in the
central and southern regions of the country despite
the steps that have taken to combat it. Uruguay is
particularly concerned about Al-Shabaab's readiness
to resort to violence against civilians and humanitarian
workers to hinder relief efforts. Progress on security-
sector reform is urgently needed, and it is Vital that
the Federal Government of Somalia be the one to take
ownership and lead the process.

Uruguay recognizes that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) remains essential
to guaranteeing security in Somalia in the medium
term. The transition of AMISOM. must be organized
and supported in such a way as to mark the end of the
international security presence in Somalia, without
squandering the achievements of the past 10 years,
as the Secretary-General rightly states in his report
(S/2017/751).

Uruguay again emphasizes the need to protect
civilian populations, especially women, children and
the elderly. It encourages the Federal Government of
Somalia to seek mediation and stability, especially in
areas where access to supplies and humanitarian aid is
vital. We are also interested in seeing respect for the
civil rights of Somali women, with a view to ensuring
their full participation in the country's political life.

Although all children associated with Al-Shabaab
captured in Puntland have been released, the prison
sentences of 40 of the children have not yet been
rescinded. Uruguay j oins the call made by the Secretary-
General, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and UNICEF and urges the authorities of
Puntland to facilitate the liberation of these children
and to continue working with the United Nations on
their reintegration.

Uruguay remains alarmed by cases of sexual
violence against internally displaced women and girls
living in settlements for internally displaced persons. It
is essential to improve the legal framework, the systems
for the protection of human rights and the capacity and
legitimacy of institutions to help combat impunity,
improve accountability for human rights violations and
thereby encourage reconciliation.

