Mr. Gomes (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
Today's consideration of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/771) on developments in my country and the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) gives me the
opportunity to thank the Council for the special and
sustained attention that it has focused on my country
over the past two decades.

Allow me to take this opportunity to also express
our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report and for his continued efforts to
help ensure peace and political stability in our country.
I thank his Special Representative, Ambassador Jose
Viegas Filho, for introducing the report and thank him
and his entire team in Bissau for the remarkable work
they are doing.
I would also like to express our gratitude to
the members and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, who recently visited
Guinea-Bissau. This was his second visit, which
highlights his personal interest in and commitment to
stability and progress in our country. We thank him
for his encouraging briefing and greatly appreciate
his objective and confident view of our country. We
also thank Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau, for the work he
carried out with total objectivity.

Six months ago, the Security Council engaged in
timely and serious consideration about what could or
should happen in Guinea-Bissau, given the numerous
internal contradictions and the persistence of a political
impasse that seemed insurmountable. As the Council
knows, the Conakry Agreement, which was to serve
as a road map and mark the way out of the crisis, has
been difficult to implement, in particular because of
the differing, even contradictory, interpretations that
have hampered it. As a result, its validity and binding
character were called into question beginning the
day following its signature, on 14 October 2016, in
the capital of the Republic of Guinea, by some of the
participants in the negotiations conducted under the
auspices of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) mediator, the President of the
Republic of Guinea, Mr. Alpha Conde.

I will not rehash the many ups and downs of Guinea-
Bissau's recent political history, since the successive
reports that have been submited to the Security
Council in recent years make ample mention of them.
I would rather, if I may, dwell on the organization of
the legislative elections that are due to take place on
18 November, that is to say, in less than three months.

A new hope was born in Guinea Bissau following
the Lome agreement of 14 April, thanks to the fruitful
impetus of the ECOWAS member countries, whose
tireless support and active solidarity I should like to
salute here and now. In that regard, I am pleased to
highlight the leading and decisive role played by all the
Heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States, and thank them for their understanding
and for having always been at our side in the search for a
consensual and lasting solution to the political crisis in
Guinea-Bissau. In particular, I thank Mr. Alpha Conde,
President of the Republic of Guinea, and Mr. Faure
Gnassingbe, President of the Republic of Togo, for
their invaluable and fraternal support in their capacity,
respectively, as mediator and outgoing Chair of our
subregional organization.

Indeed, thanks in particular to the persistent efforts
of ECOWAS and the good will of political parties,
civil society and other important actors in Guinea
Bissau, the political crisis, which had raged practically
uninterrupted since 2014 and made it difficult for
Parliament in particular to function fully found a
happy outcome, thereby enabling the appointment by
the President of the Republic, Mr. Jose' Mario Vaz, of a
consensus Prime Minister, whose primary responsibility
is to create the necessary conditions for the holding of
legislative elections on the scheduled date.

The inclusive Government that I have the honour to
lead took office on 26 April. A calendar had already been
adopted two months prior to that date. Nevertheless,
the Government was able to catch up in the process of
organizing elections without cutting any corners.

It is not unusual, after such a long period of crisis
in a country as fragile as ours, for it to be difficult and
even laborious to quickly restore a climate of trust
between political parties and other protagonists in
national life. One of our major concerns since we set
about carrying out the task entrusted to us has always
been to prioritize dialogue. We have decided, whenever
possible, to take no major decisions that commit
the parties represented in our Government without
consulting with them first. Let me stress that ours is
a consensus-based and inclusive Government. Indeed,
in our current context, it is not advisable to adopt
unilateral acts that could upset the balance that we are
still trying to establish and that might have a negative
impact on the electoral process and, ultimately, on the
organization and the success of the elections.

It is true that the holding of elections is essential to
political stability in Guinea-Bissau. However, it is also
true that Guinea-Bissau has experienced successive
political crises for more than two decades, despite its
long-standing tradition of success in organizing five
different rounds of elections since the establishment
of a multiparty political system in the country.
In other words, it is entirely legitimate to
question the real sources of political instability
in my country, which arise on a recurring basis.
The correct answers to those questions will lead us to
a diagnosis that is likely to provide strategies for all
stakeholders to follow in the current crisis with a view
to its definitive resolution.

The recurring political crises in Guinea-Bissau
involve a number of factors, including the following
elements. The collapse of State institutions following
the failure of the economic development of our national
post-independence project has had a considerable impact
on shaping the political crises that we have witnessed
to date. That widespread situation is characterized by
social and political malaise and has engendered classic
survival strategies across all fields to access the fragile
State structures of Guinea-Bissau, including enormous
vulnerability to transnational and organized crime.

As a result of those crises, the gaps among social
groups are growing. Individuals who should in principle
make up the elites within the State institutions are instead
obliged to be part of an everyone-for-themselves system.
That approach to socioeconomic survival is encouraged
by some who exploit the institutions by monopolizing
them rather than by serving the State. Therefore,
we have for years seen a succession of progressive
monopolization processes by individuals and groups of
individuals, most often organized into political parties.
Those political entities end up evolving only around
projects of pure and simple predation on our meagre
national income. As these resources dwindle, the more
fiercely the battles rage among actors who seek to take
advantage of the rare sources of financing, which are
the ministries, independent funds, State enterprises
and projects financed by donors.

While it is true that such political struggles over
various sources of State income exist everywhere, we
must point out that they have become exacerbated in
my country by the following factors: the collapse of an
entire system regulating access to State institutions; the
total or partial loss of legal and regulatory mechanisms
that regulate access to institutional posts; the total or
partial absence of rules protecting different professions
within State institutions; the loss of the tradition of
merit-based promotion, and the collapse of the principle
of organization according to which each post must
correspond to a well-defined task.

The context of such structural State failure is
exacerbated by a Constitution that is not harmonious
or sufficiently clear, which makes political governance
even more difficult. The Constitution, which should
be nothing more than a basic law of provisory political
compromise and which was drafted for that purpose
at a specific time more than 30 years ago, remains
unchanged in its most important aspects, including the
distribution of powers between the two heads of the
executive branch, namely, the Prime Minister and the
President of the Republic.
One of the consequences of the failure of the
national project of the post-independence period, with
its range of individual and collective disappointments,
was the withdrawal of different social and ethnic
groups. That has only reinforced the idea that it is
everyone for themselves in the management of the State
of Guinea-Bissau. As a result, crises arise one after
another and resemble each other. That is why the State
must be rebuilt through reform of the defence, security
and justice sectors and the whole range of institutions
allowing a return to regulation, which would facilitate
competition and make it harder to wage war. It would
also stimulate further growth through investment,
creating more income to distribute and therefore fewer
political parties trying to prey on public funds.

Once that vision shared by the Government and
the international community has been consolidated,
we could negotiate the restructuring of our cooperation
and the coordination of aid. All cooperation agencies
in the country would be reconfigured with a View to
supporting the country in its reforms once they have
been prescribed and perhaps even the subject of a
round table.

Such an approach could be launched immediately
after the legislative elections and allow us to respond
appropriately to the current and legitimate questions
that are being posed. For example, is the presence of
UNIOGBIS still useful in Guinea-Bissau after more
than 20 years? What about the presence of the ECOWAS
mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB)? In our opinion,
it is necessary to strengthen the international presence
while reshaping it in response to the needs of the reform
and rebuilding of the State. We believe that cooperation
between the United Nations and the Government
following the legislative elections should be based on the
principle of strengthening the Government's capacity
to carry out reform. With regard to the presence of
ECOMIB, it would be desirable for it to be able to carry
out on the ground the additional mission of supporting
us more closely in the reform process in general and in
particular in the defence and security sectors.

If all the measures that I have just cited are to
succeed, Guineans must come to an agreement among
themselves before the elections. It is in that spirit that
I proposed to the political parties represented in our
Parliament the adoption of a stability pact, the draft
of which is still the subject of discussions, which I
personally led on 20 August. Those consultations will
be broadened to take into account the point of view and
contribution ofcivil society and all those who are willing
to participate in improving its content and promoting
its adoption. We are convinced that the stability pact,
once adopted with the shared support and commitment
of all, will contribute greatly to lifting spirits and to
forging a feeling of national unity of action at all levels
in the judicious, effective and responsible management
of the destiny of our people.

The free, transparent and credible elections sought
by all can happen in Guinea-Bissau only if we ensure
in advance the involvement of all, without exception, in
choosing the method and specific technical conditions
that will allow them to take place. A reliable electoral
census, undertaken in full transparency, under the
conditions stipulated by the electoral law and without
eliciting suspicions of manipulation or fraud, is a sine
qua non condition for success. That is the bet that
we have made, and it is certainly the path that the
Government as a whole has chosen to follow. That is
why I took the time to recall the negotiation among the
political parties regarding a well-defined process that
has proved to be the best suited to the electoral census.

The organization of elections at the national level
is never an easy task, even for the richest countries,
where the democratic system is firmly and sufficiently
anchored in their values. In the case of our country,
Guinea-Bissau, I must say that the difficulties that we
face are still numerous, but they are not insurmountable.
Certain aspects related to the agreed choice that we
have made with regard to the electoral census and to
the printing of voting cards are described in the report
under consideration. In that regard, I would like to
remove all ambiguity and to affirm that we are sparing
no effort to ensure the holding of legislative elections
in our country on the scheduled date of 18 November.

That said, I again call on the international
community to keep its promises and, above all,
to honour its pledges because at the moment the
international community is not contributing a penny to
preparing and, ultimately, to holding the census that is
due to start. Currently, only the Government, with its
meagre resources, is dealing with that very burdensome
task for the State budget. That is the mandate that I
have received, and it is a responsibility that I, as Prime
Minister, intend to fully assume, with the support of all
members of the Government.

Given the delivery schedules for the biometric
registration kits that we ordered from abroad, and which
we paid for through our own funds on deposit with the
United Nations Development Programme, and in order
to be able to meet, as far as possible, all the stages ofthe
electoral process, we appealed to brotherly and friendly
countries, such as Timor-Leste, Nigeria, Mali, Angola
and Cabo Verde, to provide us on a temporary basis
with some of the equipment for voter registration at
their disposal, which will allow us, with the goodwill of
all political actors of our country, to initiate operations
in the coming days and to anticipate the identification
and full registration of voters throughout the national
territory. Allow me to express our deep gratitude to all
those countries for their great support and solidarity.
Ultimately, we will make use of the kits provided
by Timor-Leste and Nigeria to address the electoral
census arrangement, which we have negotiated with the
political parties.

Our Government has made an exceptional effort to
contribute to the financing of the legislative elections,
the organization of which requires considerable funds
that, unfortunately, we alone are not able to ensure.
There is currently a significant financial gap that needs
to be urgently filled. That is why we have sought the
help of our development partners and the international
community in general. In that regard, I take this
opportunity to very warmly thank all countries and
institutions, including the ECOWAS Commission and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union in
particular, which have been willing to help to ensure
the availability of the necessary funds in the form of
pledges that have yet to be disbursed to us. I would
also like to express our gratitude to the Government of
Portugal, which, as in previous elections, has provided
us with a significant amount of materials.

Admittedly, the organization of the legislative
elections in Guinea-Bissau on 18 November is not
an end in itself. However, it is clearly a decisive step
towards restoring political stability in our country,
consolidating the gains of democracy and strengthening
the rule of law. Over the past two decades, we have
faced difficulties of all kinds. However, we hope that
a national surge will emerge. I am convinced that a
better awareness of the real issues - in particular, the
ongoing pursuit of the improved social well-being of
our people - is possible in our country. We have every
reason to assert that our people - the people of Guinea
Bissau, who are a peaceful, hospitable and noble
people - are ready to demonstrate once again their
civic and political maturity and their commitment to
further working, alongside other peoples of the world,
to build a more just, peaceful, secure and prosperous
world for all.

At the beginning of my remarks, I said that two
decades ago - to be more precise, in June 1998, the
date of the outbreak of an armed conflict that proved
to be devastating and whose consequences we still
suffer today - the situation in Guinea-Bissau has
been on the agenda of the Security Council. Was it
not the Secretary-General of that time - the sorely-
missed Kofi Annan, an illustrious son of Ghana, his
native country, and of Africa, where he was raised, a
citizen emeritus committed to the world, and to whose
memory and unforgettable work I respectfully pay
tribute - who recommended to the Security Council
the establishment of an effective political structure in
Guinea-Bissau in 1999?

Twenty years later, where are we? The question
indeed deserves to be asked and calls for reflection.
In that regard, I am pleased that the Secretary-General
has indicated in his report that he intends to make
recommendations to the Security Council on a new
configuration ofUNIOGBIS, which no doubt will better
meet our common desire to achieve greater efficiency
and further results, including by rationalizing resources
and focusing on targeted actions that can have an
impact immediately, or at least in the short term. I am
thinking in particular but not only about strengthening
the rule of law, protecting fundamental freedoms,
matters related to the existence and functioning of
an accessible, effective and fair justice system, the
overarching issue of gender, the increased participation
of women in society in general, and in particular their
rightful place in all political and economic areas, and
the effective exercise of power, as noted by Ms. Tavares
Pinto in her most edifying briefing. We are, in any case,
ready to participate actively in such consideration.

The crisis situation in Guinea-Bissau is not
inevitable. We have known periods of great stability,
during which most of our efforts were focused on
the problems of development and creating better
living conditions for our people. Our country has
many strengths for building a better future for its
population and for providing genuine opportunities
for the education and flourishing of its young people
in particular.

The citizens of Guinea-Bissau, our countrymen, are
not bellicose people. On the contrary, we are a united
and peaceful people. In the recent past, our soldiers
have participated, honourably in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Guinea-Bissau served on the
Security Council in 1996 and 1997 and assumed the
presidency 22 years ago this month. At that time - that
is to say, at a time when our country recorded notable
economic growth and showed promising development
indices - no one would have imagined that, two
decades later, we would be here to consider how to
unite our energies and resources in order to rebuild a
State that many years squandered in political conflict
have weakened to the point of failure. As we have seen
elsewhere, especially in Africa, that is no easy task,
but for our part we are firmly resolved to succeed in
turning the situation around so that our country can
assume its rightful place among the community of
nations. It is that rightful place - that of a dignified
and respectable country conscious of its national and
international obligations - that we wish to rediscover
and restore within the international community.

I conclude by vigorously reaffirming that
the situation prevailing in Guinea-Bissau is not
irredeemable; it is within our power to change course.
Not only do we have the ability, but we, the citizens
of Guinea-Bissau, ultimately bear the responsibility
to do so. Such is the new path we wish to blaze - a
course that will allow us to renew the institutions of our
Republic, crucially through the transparent holding of
free and credible legislative elections on 18 November.
This path towards a stable Guinea-Bissau will allow us
to build peace, democracy, social justice and respect
for human rights, and thereby a hopeful and prosperous
future for our country and its population.

