The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for
their especially insightful briefings. For my part, I would
like to come back to the three points of consensus that
bring us together - first, the fight against terrorism;
secondly, the need to protect civilians; and, thirdly, the
implementation of a political solution.

First, our common priority is to continue to pool
our efforts against terrorism in Syria and ensure
respect for the front lines with a view to achieving a
national ceasefire.

The territorial defeat of Da'esh in Syria, announced
on 23 March, marks, after the retaking of Raqqa
and the fall of the caliphate in Iraq in late 2017, a
new and important stage in the combat against that
terrorist group. Once again, we would like to pay
tribute to the courage and determination of the Syrian
Democratic Forces.

Let us make no mistake. Just as it would be a
serious political mistake to think that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us, similarly it would be a serious
misapprehension to think that the fight against Da'esh
is over and that we can move on to other things.

This territorial victory should not make us forget
the scope ofthe challenges we are facing in our efforts to
prevent the resurgence of Da'esh in one form or another.
That terrorist group, which, although it has been driven
underground, continues to have considerable financial
reserves and remains a threat. It is therefore vital to
maintain a robust capacity for action against it and to
continue with our efforts to stabilize the entire region in
order to consolidate the conditions for a lasting victory.

In that regard, the announcement that an American
military contingent will remain in the north-eastern
part ofthe country is good news. The hold that the Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham terrorist group has on almost all of the
Idlib de-escalation zone also remains a serious source of
concern, as mentioned by several of my colleagues. We
must jointly reflect on the issue in order to respond to
the threat in a coordinated manner, while maintaining
the ceasefire agreement arrived at by Russia and Turkey
and endorsed by the Istanbul Summit. A new offensive
would have tragic human consequences and cause the
fighters involved to disperse, which would pose a threat
to the security of us all.

The recent resurgence of bombings by the regime
and its supporters in violation of these agreements is
in this regard very worrisome, and we call for them to
cease. In that same vein, France wishes to reiterate here
the importance of a nationwide ceasefire, in keeping
with resolution 2254 (2015). Any military action that
would call into question the current front lines would
imperil the peace process, destabilize Syria and the
region, and risk jeopardizing the gains made in the
fight against terrorism. The Syrian people would once
again be the primary Victims.

The second priority is a humanitarian one, as the
situation in Syria in this respect remains disastrous.
We once again call on all of the parties to honour their
commitments under international humanitarian law,
which, I would recall, is not negotiable. Here I am
referring to two absolute priorities: on the one hand,
the imperative need to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and, on the other,
the need to guarantee immediate, safe, comprehensive,
unimpeded and sustainable access to all of the Syrian
territory, in line with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and international humanitarian law.
To cite but a few examples, it is unacceptable for the
regime to continue to deliberately impede humanitarian
access to eastern Ghouta and the south-west so as to
punish the people of that area. Likewise, it is urgent
that a new assistance convoy be deployed to Rukban
camp; that is an immediate and vital priority.

We call on all influential actors to bring pressure
to bear on the regime to authorize such a convoy and
guarantee safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to
the areas it has retaken. It is vital also to ensure that
the return of those who were displaced from Rukban
takes place in line with international humanitarian law
and in close coordination with the United Nations. It is
also imperative to ramp up the humanitarian response
in the north-eastern part of the country so as to handle
the inflow of displaced persons. France is fully playing
its part in this effort and has released considerable
emergency funding in order to support the humanitarian
response in the region.

Support for the Syrian people and those countries
hosting refugees requires the continuing mobilization of
all actors. In that respect, the commitments undertaken
during the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region must be implemented
without delay. Nationally speaking, France has
announced a contribution of more than €1 billion for
the period 2019-2021.

In that context, the third central priority is a
political one. Only a political solution based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) can lead to the sustainable stability
of Syria and the region. We have underlined on several
occasions that the constitutional committee, provided
that agreement is reached on its composition and its
rules of procedure, could make a useful contribution to
the political process.

More generally speaking, the Special Envoy, Geir
Pedersen, has our full support in undertaking initiatives
on the implementation of all aspects of the road map.
This will include three elements: a nationwide ceasefire;
the implementation of confidence-building measures
conducive to the creation of the safe and neutral
environment required by the Geneva communique; and
the holding of free and transparent elections.

In that regard, the Special Envoy's resolve to work
on the issues of detained and disappeared persons
seems particularly relevant to us and requires our full
support. The United Nations is the only body that can
ensure that real strides are made in these priority areas.
Similarly, it is clear to all that only tangible advances
in the aforementioned areas will make it possible for

refugees to consider returning home. The political and
security situation is not yet conducive to the voluntary
return of displaced persons and refugees to Syria under
safe and dignified conditions, under the auspices of the
United Nations.

France is very concerned by reports of arbitrary
arrests of returning refugees by the Syrian security
services. In the areas retaken by the regime in particular,
such practices violate the relevant agreements.
We would point to the responsibility of Russia, as
guarantor of these agreements, to bring pressure to
bear on the regime to ensure that the provisions thereof
are respected.

Irreversible and credible advances towards a
political solution will be vital to the rebuilding of the
country, the normalization of relations with the regime
and the lifting of sanctions. It is essential and urgent
for the Syrian regime to commit itself in good faith to
that goal.

Beyond the very real differences that persist
among Council members, today's exchanges also show
that is a strong convergence of Views among us on the
three priorities of the combat against terrorism, the
humanitarian imperative and the quest for an inclusive
political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015).

On behalf of France, I wish to launch an urgent
appeal: let us switch off the automatic pilot and work
tirelessly together in order to build on this convergence
and move together towards peace. This is no longer
a mission impossible. Our conviction is that today,
possibly for the first time in eight years, we have a
narrow window of opportunity to put an end to the
Syrian conflict. So let us together take this opportunity,
despite the immense difficulties ahead; we do not have
a moment to lose.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

