Major General Pearce: It is with great pleasure
that I take this opportunity to address the Council on
the topic of cooperation with host States - one in
which I can offer a unique view of the long-standing
mission of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP).

Since its inception, UNFICYP has been mandated
by the Council to use its best efforts to prevent a
recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to contribute
to the maintenance and restoration of law and order and
return to normal conditions. For decades, the mission
has successfully carried out this mandate, with the
military component playing a crucial role in this regard,
namely, by maintaining a stable military environment
in and around the 180-kilometre buffer zone.

Our efforts to prevent and defuse tensions before
they escalate, as well as to liaise between the sides in
the absence of any direct contact, remain essential,
particularly given the uncertainty of the current period
and the prevailing political climate on the island. It
is through these efforts that UNFICYP contributes
to creating the conditions conducive to a successful
settlement process.

Turning to the topic at hand, cooperation with host
States, as Head of the military component of UNFICYP,
my cooperation in this context lies primarily with the
opposing forces, which overall, is constructive. Since

arriving in January, I have met with my counterparts
numerous times, in a spirit of professionalization,
collegiality and mutual respect. My engagement plan
puts a premium on a nuanced and regular interaction
that is underpinned by the principles of impartiality,
openness and transparency. Keeping the channels of
communication open, even in times of tension, is my
utmost priority.

Beyond my own personal engagement, the Force
maintains day-to-day contact with its counterparts
from the opposing forces on all levels to prevent the
escalation oftensions. Since the November 2017 strategic
review of UNFICYP, the mission has implemented a
more robust engagement and liaison effort, in close
coordination with our police and civilian components.
The guiding principles I mentioned a moment ago are
the basis of this interaction and applied at all levels, be
it at the level of general or that of private soldier.

Despite the generally positive relationships the
military component of UNFICYP has cultivated over
the years with the opposing forces, our cooperation is
not without its challenges. There is a trend of increased
violations of the military status quo along the ceasefire
lines and an apparent hardening of positions by the
opposing forces more broadly, potentially mirroring
the political situation on the island.

I should like to elaborate on specific areas
of concern.

First, UNFICYP's authority in the buffer zone is
challenged regularly. In its latest resolution relating
to UNFICYP (resolution 2453 (2019)), the Security
Council, in evoking UNFICYP's mandated authority
in the buffer zone, expresses serious concern at the
increased number of violations of the military status
quo along the ceasefire lines and calls on the sides and
all involved parties to respect UNFICYP's mandated
authority in the buffer zone. Nevertheless, I regret to
note that there has been no improvement on the ground
thus far.

Similarly, despite years of urging by the Security
Council, neither side has yet accepted the 2018
aide-memoire or its predecessor of 1989, which is a key
guiding document with respect to UNFICYP's rules
of the road in the buffer zone. Thus, with respect to
cooperation with the two sides in the area under my
remit, which is that of the military, there is significant
scope for improvement. In that regard, we would once
again ask for the Council's support - also in the spirit
of the Action for Peacekeeping - in urging the sides
to heed what has been a years' long call to work with
UNFICYP on the implementation of the aide-memoire,
as well as to respect our mandated authority in the
buffer zone overall.

With respect to the topic at hand, and in the Cyprus
context specifically, as Council members are aware,
UNFICYP has a status of forces agreement with the
Republic of Cyprus. At the same time, cooperation,
including on military and other operational matters,
is key also with the Turkish Cypriot community. We
continue to work closely with all the relevant actors to
ensure optimal cooperation.

In conclusion, the impartial execution of
UNFICYPs mandate is what allows me and the military
component to effectively maintain the military status
quo, prevent military-to-military tensions and ensure
calm and stability in and around the buffer zone.
Impartiality is a fundamental principle of United
Nations peacekeeping that, importantly, was reaffirmed
once again recently through the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping agenda.

