Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Mr. Verbeke, Mr. Arias and Burian for their respective
briefings on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). China wishes to express its
appreciation to the three ambassadors for their diligent
and effective work.

We have taken note with satisfaction of the steady
progress made by the 1267 Committee in areas of its
work, including in improving the integrity and
accuracy of the sanctions listing, the transparency of its

work and its website and strengthening its exchanges
and dialogue with Member States and the relevant
international organizations. At the same time, the
Committee has also made headway in improving the
quality of the sanctions list, thus strengthening the
effectiveness and fairness of the sanctions mechanism.

The 1267 Committee is a very effective sanctions
mechanism in the area of counter-terrorism. We
encourage Member States to provide further
information to the Committee in the area of listing
requests and in other related areas. We support
maintaining the authority and the position of the
Committee in the area of counter-terrorism. The
Committee still faces some important challenges on its
agenda, including considering the seventh report of the
Monitoring Group and discussing issues such as
non-compliance and de-listing. We hope that the
Committee will come to constructive conclusions
through those discussions, so as to further improve its
work.

Since its last briefing, the CTC is moving
actively ahead with its Preliminary Implementation
Assessments and has thus far concluded the
Assessment reports on a number of countries. China
hopes that the Committee can, by way of its
Preliminary Implementation Assessments, carry out as
far as possible effective dialogue with Member States
so as to promote a comprehensive and full
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005).

China is pleased to note that the CTC, thanks to
the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), has successfully
conducted the fifth special meeting with international
regional and subregional organizations and has made
progress on country visits and providing technical
assistance. China appreciates the efforts made by
CTED in holding a forum on technical assistance for
West Africa and opening a new website for technical
assistance. China welcomes CTED efforts to provide
and conduct further detailed analysis on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We believe
that all those activities will help CTC to formulate an
effective and practical programme of work. China
supports the extension of the mandate of CTED and
will take an active part in the discussion on the
relevant resolution. China congratulates Mr. Mike
Smith on his appointment as the new Executive
Director of CTED. We believe that, under his
leadership, CTED will continue to perform effective
work.

In the past six months, the 1540 Committee, with
the assistance of its experts and in accordance with its
programme of work, has made good progress in further
understanding the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in outreach, international assistance and
cooperation. It has played an active role in promoting
the full implementation of the resolution. For that,
China wishes to express its appreciation. China has
always supported strengthening the monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). China
attaches importance to the role of the Committee and
has always participated in a constructive manner in its
work. We are ready to continue to support and
coordinate with the work of the Committee so as to
forge a consensus on non-proliferation and to
make a contribution to promoting international
non-proliferation.

In the past few months, notwithstanding the
unremitting efforts of the international community in
the area of counter-terrorism, terrorist forces have still
carried out Violent activities throughout the world,
posing a serious threat to international peace and
security. Therefore, the United Nations and this
Council are still facing a long and arduous task in the
area of counter-terrorism.

China appreciates the active cooperation carried
out by the expert bodies of the three Committees in
handling the issue of the late submission of reports by
Member States. China supports the efforts of the three
Committees to continue to consolidate their efforts,
improve their effectiveness and further strengthen the
counter-terrorism mechanisms of the Security Council.
China hopes that the three Committees will pay more
attention to the needs of developing countries in the
area of counter-terrorism and listen to their opinions.
At the same time, the three Committees should, within
their respective mandates, actively implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy so
that the Security Council and General Assembly can
complement and coordinate their efforts in fighting
terrorism and make a greater contribution to the efforts
of the international community to fight terrorism.

