Mr. Delfim da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting my
delegation to the Security Council table and for giving
me the floor. I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate your country, Kuwait, on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We wish you success in your work.

I would like to thank Mr. Modibo Toure, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau, for his presentation today of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/110). I would also like
to thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira of Brazil once
again for his constructive statement on behalf of
peacebuilding and constitutional and democratic order
in Guinea-Bissau. And I would like to express our
gratitude to all the Ambassadors of States members of
the Security Council for their attention to my country,
Guinea-Bissau.

The political crisis in Guinea-Bissau did not begin
with the signing of the Conakry Agreement in October
2016, but much earlier. The Conakry Agreement
represents a step in the right direction for resolving
the crisis by consensus. In the past 15 months, the two
main parties - the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) and the Party for
Social Renewal (PRS) - have repeatedly and publicly
expressed their disagreement on a crucial point of the
Agreement, which is having consensus on choosing a
candidate for the post of Prime Minister. Ifa consensus
was reached, the agreed candidate would then be
appointed by the President of the Republic, in line with
the Constitution. The PAIGC states that there was such
a consensus in Conakry. The PRS, for its part, affirms
that there was not.

Fifteen months later, the lack of consensus has
prevented the appointment of a Prime Minister, which
must be consensus-based. How can the President
appoint a consensus Prime Minister without, at the very
least, the prior agreement of the two largest political
parties? In short, the crisis over the consensus is really
what has paralysed the Conakry Agreement and is
prolonging the stalemate in the 15-month political crisis
in Guinea-Bissau. The question is how to overcome the
crisis concerning the consensus. Some believe that the
imposition of sanctions will be conducive to it. We are
not sure of that. Sanctions are unlikely to defuse a crisis
and can even be counterproductive. It is important to
bear in mind that while it is easy to adopt sanctions, it is
much more difficult to impose a consensus. In any case,
continuing to seek a solution to the crisis is clearly the
most important thing that we must do.

We need a compromise solution, a credible name,
a person whose academic, political and professional
background can bring about such a compromise.
We need someone who, without being the favourite
candidate of the PAIGC or the PRS, has a background
that would enable him to bring the parties together and
thereby reach a compromise. The recent appointment
to the post of Prime Minister of a PAIGC leader,
the engineer Artur Silva, a former Minister of four
Government departments - Fisheries, Defence,
Education and Foreign Affairs - suggests that he is
the right person to help bring about such a compromise.
Moreover, after his appointment, Silva was re-elected to
the higher bodies of the PAIGC, its Central Committee
and Political Bureau - at the party's most recent
congress, which ended a few days ago, proving that he
has earned the political confidence of the party's most
important bodies.

Prime Minister Silva has already held working
meetings in Bissau, which I would say are encouraging,
with all the parties to the Conakry Agreement - the
Ambassadors of Nigeria, Senegal, China, the Gambia
and the representative of the Economic Community of
West African States in Guinea-Bissau. Finally, through
the appointment of a senior PAIGC leader, justice
can be done to the party that won the last legislative
elections. But above all, there will be no losers, since
the PRS will be guaranteed strong representation in a
Government of inclusion. This is not a zero-sum game.
Under this principle of compromise, which allows a
certain degree of flexibility regarding the principle of
consensus, there will undoubtedly be a winner - my
country, Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, I reiterate our thanks to the members
and want to assure the Council that Guinea-Bissau will
continue to count on their support in these difficult
times for the sake of civil peace, political stability
and solidarity.

