Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Ambassador Munoz for his exhaustive and
very informative briefing on the activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) over the past four months.

We also note that this meeting of the Security
Council is being held in the wake of the
commemoration of the third anniversary of the
horrendous and tragic attacks of 11 September 2001.

The blind, criminal violence of terrorism
continues to strike wherever it wishes. Terrorism has
struck Beslan, in Russia, where hundreds of children
and parents were killed; a diplomatic mission in
Jakarta; and many other places where humanitarian
workers are active, demonstrating unparalleled disdain
for human life and an unrestrained assault against the
essential principles on which today's international
society is based. We therefore welcome the activities of
the 1267 (1999) Committee, which has assumed its due
place among the instruments used in the fight against
international terrorism as a responsive political
monitoring body entrusted with managing the sanctions
adopted by the Security Council against persons and
entities associated with Al Qaeda and the Taliban, in
close cooperation with the Member States.

The complexity of the task has required us to
increase the human resources available to the
Committee by establishing a group of experts to
monitor the implementation of sanctions. We are
pleased to note that the Committee and the experts
group assisting it in its work have developed genuine
synergy enabling them to monitor the relevance and
efficacy of sanctions. In that regard, the results
obtained to date are praiseworthy.

If terrorism has been able to persist with the
virulence we have seen recently, it is because it has
continuously adapted itself in response to the measures
taken to counter it. We therefore welcome the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team's
stress on the varied ways in which the threat has
evolved and the shortcomings in the current
arrangements established to address it. The assessment
calls on us either to revise the sanctions regime or at
least to strengthen its global implementation. Clearly,
the enhancement of cooperation among States
Members of the United Nations is necessary to make
the Consolidated List of persons and entities associated
with Al Qaeda even more comprehensive and to
improve the functional utility of the information it
provides.

We fully agree that those listed must be the
subject of more consistent monitoring. Moreover, the
ongoing violence also leads us to believe that Al Qaeda
continues to find the means to finance attacks and to
recruit new members to undertake them. Thus, the
consideration of ways to adjust sanctions, which began
within the framework of the implementation of
resolution 1526 (2004), must be pursued. We look
forward to the Monitoring Team's next report and hope
that it will contain specific proposals for guiding the
Security Council's work.

We encourage the Team diligently to carry out the
measures it foresees to refine further the monitoring of
the implementation of sanctions. In that vein, we
welcome the actions being considered by the Team to
enhance the exchange of views and dialogue with
Member States on the problems they face in the
campaign against terrorism. The visits made or planned
to certain countries will contribute to that dialogue and
are an integral component of the Committee's quest for
effectiveness. Furthermore, we believe that cooperation
with the Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committee is essential and can greatly enhance the
1267 (1999) Committee's effectiveness by allowing it
fully to integrate the problems identified by both
Committees in the effort to improve coordination
within the international community's activities.
Without effective coordination, the Security Council
cannot ensure the consistency necessary to guarantee
its own efficacy.

Having said that, we believe that the relevant
services of Member States must be pooled in order to
facilitate the exchange of information between them in
real time. It is also necessary to promote the
establishment of conditions conducive to cooperation
and mutual legal assistance among Member States. In
our struggle, however, we must bear respect for
international norms and law in mind.

We agree with the Monitoring Team's analysis of
the reasons cited by Member States that have been
unable to provide reports to the Committee, in
particular given its stress on the fact that a country's
failure to report does not indicate a lack of
commitment or determination at the international level
to fight Al Qaeda and the Taliban. In that regard, my
delegation believes that we must find the means fully
to integrate those countries into the information
exchange arrangements, because the entire
international community would benefit by reducing the
vulnerability those countries experience as a result of
their marginalization in the anti-terrorism campaign.

