Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start
by thanking the presidency of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for having organized this important
briefing on the situation in the Lake Chad basin,
building on what the Security Council did last year.
I wish to express appreciation to Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed for her comprehensive
briefing and for her leadership and commitment in
addressing the multifaceted challenges facing the Lake
Chad basin in a comprehensive and holistic manner.
Let me also thank Mr. Mohammed Bila and Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan for their remarks.

I wish also to acknowledge the presence here
today of the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, our
colleague, whose country has been doing so much to
fight Boko Haram terrorism.

It has been a year since the Security Council's visit
to the Lake Chad basin and the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2349 (2017). We want to believe that the issue
of peace and security there, as well as the humanitarian
and socioeconomic problems facing the region, are now
attracting greater international attention. Momentum
appears to have been created, as the Deputy Secretary-
General said earlier.

We appreciate the progress made in the fight against
Boko Haram, which continues to pose a major threat to
peace and security in the region. In this regard, it is
important to recognize the efforts of the countries of the
region, through their participation in the Multinational
Joint Task Force. Unfortunately, the Joint Task Force is
not receiving the necessary international support it so
richly deserves. The withdrawal of the Chadian troops
from the Joint Task Force in the Niger and its impact
cannot be taken lightly. We note the decision taken at
the latest African Union Summit to request that the
African Union Commission work closely with partners
to continue mobilizing additional support for the Joint
Task Force on the basis of the need expressed by the
countries of the region. It is absolutely important that
the pledges already made by partners in support of the
Joint Force be fulfilled.

The cooperation and coordination of efforts
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
subregional organizations of the Economic Community
of West African States and the Economic Community
of Central African States is very critical in addressing
the challenges of the region. The visit by the African
Union Peace and Security Council to the Lake Chad
basin in July 2017 and the holding of the first regional
stabilization conference for the Lake Chad basin region
in November last year are encouraging developments
in that regard.

We believe that a security and military response, as
well as development interventions aimed at addressing
the root causes of conflict and tackling poverty by
overcoming the unemployment problem, must be
strengthened. In that connection, widespread food
insecurity, forced displacement, climate change and
chronic vulnerability and susceptibility to epidemics
that are affecting the people of the region cannot be
addressed without enhanced and sustained engagement
and support on the part of the international community.
Accordingly, we support the 2018 United Nations
humanitarian response plan for north-east Nigeria,
launched last month, which covers peacebuilding
and ensures efforts that contribute to longer-term
development measures.

The effects of climate change and its impact on
the Lake Chad basin, including the degradation of
ecosystems, pose serious challenges to the efforts
in addressing the root causes of the conflicts in the
basin. The populations in the area highly depend on
agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing, which are
tied to the life and very existence of the lake. That
climate change is wreaking havoc in many areas of
the world is increasingly becoming self-evident, but
nowhere is that so empirically more demonstrable than
in the Lake Chad basin. On top of that, the Boko Haram
threat continues unabated. Therefore, the consolidation
of peace and the progressive stabilization of the region
to allow economic activities in the joint border areas
of the countries are essential and need to be supported.
The enhanced and sustained support of the United
Nations system in a coherent and coordinated manner
will continue to be critical in assisting countries of the
region to overcome those challenges.

