Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Mr. President, let me also
say, as previous speakers have done, that I very much
appreciate the fact that you have organized this open
briefing. I hope that this practice will become common in

 

the future, as it is a very useful one for the work of the
Security Council and for the benefit of the membership at
large. I wish also to thank Mr. Miyet for his enlightening
briefing on the situation in Sierra Leone and to express my
gratitude to Ambassador Dalhgren for his leadership in
chairing the sanctions Committee on Sierra Leone and for
the very useful information he shared with us after his trip
to that country.

I do not wish to comment at length on the contents of
these reports. I am sure that we will have the opportunity
to discuss them next month. Of course, it is a very
discouraging picture, one which includes mutilations and
the use of children in armed conflict. I would also agree
with what Ambassador Dahlgren said to the authorities in
Sierra Leone in his national capacity about the death
penalty. I do not think that is the best way to promote
reconciliation.

I would like also to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay tribute once again to Ambassador Dahlgren for the way
he conducted the work of the Committee. I think it is an
appropriate time to do so, because Sweden's term in the
Security Council is coming to a close. Through him, I wish
also to pay tribute to the chairmen of the other sanctions
Committees who are leaving the Council at the end of
December, especially for the leadership they collectively
exercised in pushing us - the other chairmen of sanctions
Committees who are staying on the Council for another
year - to present a paper on sanctions.

I think what Ambassador Dahlgren said today
illustrates very clearly the need for an in-depth discussion
on sanctions, and I think we owe a debt of gratitude to the
five permanent representatives, including Ambassador
Dahlgren, who were very active in that field.

I believe also that sooner rather than later we should
have an open discussion in this Chamber on the question of
sanctions. I think it was very clear from what Ambassador
Dahlgren said not only in relation to Sierra Leone but also
in his allusions to other situations - and I interpreted one
of them as referring to Angola - that a discussion of
sanctions as an instrument of the Security Council is very
important. Normally when these questions are raised, there
is always some preoccupation or concern that a discussion
on sanctions would be only an opportunity to attack
sanctions regimes. I do not think that is so. Of course, one
may have doubts about some sanctions regimes or about the
humanitarian consequences in some cases, and it is
legitimate that a discussion on that should also take place,
as it did in the General Assembly.

But I believe that the most important aspect is that
sanctions often are an instrument of peace if they are well
implemented. If we look into the situation of some other
countries in the reports that we have had in the press, not
only about the sale of diamonds but also about the
purchase of armaments and so on, we can see the
importance of the use of this instrument as probably very
often the only way to maintain peace in a given country
or a given situation.

I wish therefore once again to commend your
initiative, Mr. President, of keeping up this practice of
holding open briefings, and to express my gratitude to all
the chairmen of sanctions committees, who are now, let
us say, represented by Ambassador Dahlgren, and to
thank him for the presentation he has just made.

