Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to express my admiration and gratitude to
our speakers, who are all extraordinary and tireless
peacemakers. The briefings delivered by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon and
Ms. Mary Robinson are particularly inspiring to all of
us, as they reflect their exemplary commitment. With
several days left before I leave New York in order to
take on new responsibilities in Paris, it is a great honour
for me to broach, in their presence, one of the major
questions that has mobilized all of us during the five
years that I have had the privilege to spend in this
role. The question is: How can the United Nations
better prevent conflict? I warmly thank the Kuwaiti
presidency for convening this meeting on such an
important subject, and I welcome the presence of the
Kuwaiti Minister for Foreign Affairs.

I would like to begin by commending the Secretary-
General for giving top priority to conflict prevention.
France fully supports his vision, according to which
we need to do more to head off conflict. We welcome
the Secretary-General's reforms, which should enable
the entire United Nations system to be more effective
in preventing crises. I am thinking in particular of the
strengthening of United Nations mediation capacities,
for example through the creation of the High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation. I also note that members
of the Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers are
being deployed increasingly on the ground, sometimes
at very short notice. Their activities, often discreet,
is immensely valuable. I would also like to highlight
the indispensable work carried out by the Office of
Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide.

We can see that the new impetus spurred by
the Secretary-General is starting to bear fruit. For
example, in Madagascar last year, the mediation
conducted by Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on Madagascar, in close
coordination with the African Union and the Southern
African Development Community, made it possible
to avert a political crisis that could have had tragic
consequences. In that case, the unfailing commitment
of the United Nations ensured that all international
actors spoke with one voice, which was decisive. The
elections were a success and helped to consolidate
the Malagasy democracy after the upheavals that had
shaken the political life of the country over the past
10 years.

I will give a second example. Early in the year,
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
and the African Union facilitated the negotiation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation,
thanks in particular to the strong and perfectly
coordinated commitment of Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Mr. Sma'il Chergui. In addition, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic played a valuable role in
the negotiation process and continues to play a key role
in supporting the implementation of the agreement in
the difficult context with which we are all familiar. In
that regard, I would like to welcome more generally
the contribution of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General who support the political processes
in Mali, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Middle East. Those who, in addition,
are responsible for a peacekeeping mission play a vital
role in promoting peace.

In addition, strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union contributes to
enhancing the effectiveness of our preventive diplomacy.
In Burkina Faso in 2015 and in the Gambia in 2016, the
coordinated and united action ofthe United Nations, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States was critical to success. As I have had the
opportunity to say on many occasions in this Chamber,
this partnership is of strategic importance to us, and
we are therefore determined to give it our full support.
Our mobilization concerning conflict prevention and

mediation must remain stronger than ever, because
today's needs are very great.

Turning to the Middle East, the dangerous
exacerbation of tensions in recent weeks in the Gulf
highlights the need to defuse any risk of escalation
through the gradual structuring of a regional dialogue.
The efforts of France tend to that end. The regional
dialogue must address all legitimate concerns that
threaten the peace and security of the region and
beyond. Dialogue is also necessary to promoting the
implementation ofpolitical solutions in the conflicts of
the region, under the auspices of the United Nations,
to which the Council must lend its unanimous support.
I emphasize the essential role that the countries of
the region play and must play in conflict prevention.
I particularly commend Kuwait's initiatives to build
bridges in the region and foster dialogue.

After years of bloody conflict in Syria, and on the
eve ofa new humanitarian catastrophe with the ongoing
Idlib offensive by the regime and its allies, there is an
urgent need for us together to implement resolution 2254
(2015) to achieve a national ceasefire and a political
solution in support of the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, also has our full support, with
particular regard to his work on the implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah agreements, among others. I also
wish to reiterate our support for Mr. Ghassan Salame',
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, with a view to reaching a ceasefire agreement in
Tripoli, prior to the resumption of discussions between
the parties.

The need is also very great in Africa. I will cite a few
brief examples. The situation in the Sudan is extremely
worrying. We are horrified by the brutal repression of
peaceful protesters, the perpetrators of which will be
brought to justice, and we call for the resumption of
dialogue between the Transitional Military Council
and the opposition. We welcome the resolute and clear
position of the African Union and hope that the United
Nations can fully support the mediation efforts of the
African Union.

In the light of the high priority we attach to the
situation in the Sahel, we are also of the view that
Burkina Faso must now enjoy increased attention in the
light of the challenges the country is currently facing.
France therefore fully supports the process initiated
by the Secretary-General to adjust the United Nations
presence on the ground. We hope that the United
Nations response will be ambitious and commensurate
with the expectations of the Burkina Faso authorities in
the areas of humanitarian assistance and development,
as well as in training security forces, respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and support
for the fight against terrorism.

With regard to Cameroon, we are very concerned
by the deterioration in the north-west and south-west of
the country. We must all join our voices to encourage
the authorities of Cameroon to launch an inclusive
political dialogue, establish detente measures and
deepen decentralization.

Finally, I would like to speak briefly on several
challenges and issues for preventive diplomacy and
mediation in the coming years.
The first challenge is the meaningful participation
of women in mediation processes. We absolutely need
more women mediators. In that regard, I welcome the
contribution of the FemWise-Africa network, which
makes it possible to deploy women mediators in the field.
Mediation must also fully involve women at all stages
of the process and at all levels. We know that peace
agreements reached with the meaningful participation
of women are stronger and more sustainable. Those
same agreements must include provisions on the
rights of women and children. And we are counting
on the guidelines being developed by the Office
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Children and Armed conflict, Virginia Gamba
dc Potgieter, to be able to learn all the lessons from
previous mediation processes on that matter.

The second challenge is that of post-conflict
peacebuilding. We should provide more support to
countries and societies emerging from conflict by
investing in reconciliation, transitional justice and
reconstruction in order to prevent them from relapsing
into crisis situations. The Peacebuilding Fund is an
essential tool in that regard, and as Council members
know, France fully supports it. Similarly, it is essential
to continue to focus on mechanisms that detect early
warning signs of potential deterioration and record
specific indicators in order to help prevent relapse.

The third challenge is the impact of climate change
on international security. That issue must become
a central element of the conflict prevention agenda.
France is firmly convinced of that point. The Security
Council, and more broadly the entire United Nations
system, must have a comprehensive overview of all
the dangers that the impact of climate change poses to
international security. In that regard, we recommend
that a report of the Secretary-General be drafted to
provide a regular assessment of those risks, as well
as recommendations for the development of tangible
actions to respond to and prevent conflicts related to
climate events.

