Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the United Kingdom's leadership on Somalia.
I welcome the presence of Deputy Prime Minister
Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan. We admire her singular
contribution and history. We are also grateful for the
Deputy Secretary-General's briefing. I will circulate a
slightly more detailed statement later today.

This is a pivotal time in Somalia's history - a
time of great hope and optimism, but also a time when
gains remain fragile. But there is a unique window
of opportunity that we must open further. The
opportunities are significant. Somalia's most
representative Government in 20 years is in place in
Mogadishu and has outlined strong plans on security,
justice and financial management that the international
community must remain committed to supporting.

The security gains made by the Somalia National
Security Forces, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and strategic partners have been impressive.
We would like to recognize the great sacrifices made by
AMISOM. contributors and the Somali security forces,
and we commend the leadership of the African Union
(AU).

The new United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) has a strong mandate to support
the Government to advance peace and reconciliation,
and to coordinate donor support. It responds to the
Government's call for "one door to knock on". Close
cooperation with the AU will be decisive, and we express
our strong support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kay.

Somalia's economy is picking up, investment is
beginning to flow, and the diaspora is returning. That is
a cause for optimism. But the challenges are immense,
and sustained international support is essential. On
the political front, Somalia is moving towards the goal
of holding national elections by 2016. That involves
building up State institutions, often where central
Government structures have not been relevant for a
generation; advancing reconciliation; developing a
federal system; and undertaking a constitutional review.
UNSOM. must respond flexibly to the Government's
needs for support in those areas.

We know that establishing a federal system will
not be easy. Relationships between Mogadishu and
local and regional administrations will be critical. We
welcome the reopening of dialogue between the Federal
Government and Somaliland.

Tensions in the Juba region are ofparticular concern,
and a solution is urgent to avoid the unravelling ofrecent
gains. We welcome the Government's commitment to
pursuing reconciliation and the role being played by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
urge UNSOM. to use its good offices in support of this.
The Council must pay close attention, and we would
welcome a dedicated briefing at some time on this
important subject.

More broadly, Somalia's relations with its
neighbours are vital, particularly given the intertwined
nature of their security challenges. We recognize the
role that those neighbours play in assisting refugees and
urge the continuation of the work under way by Kenya,
Somalia and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to develop a framework for
voluntary refugee returns.

The human rights situation remains of grave
concern. Levels of sexual and gender-based violence,
particularly in camps for internally displaced persons,
are alarming. There can be no impunity. The protection
of human rights is at the heart of efforts to build a new
Somalia, and we welcome the Government's intention
to adopt a human rights road map. We will be looking
to UNSOM. to take forward its strong mandate to assist
the Government's human rights capacity and to monitor
and report.

Turning to security, we all know that Al-Shabaab,
although diminished, remains a threat, as evidenced by
the recent attacks in Mogadishu, as well as its ability to
regain territory where a security vacuum emerges. It is
critical that we support the Government in delivering a
peace dividend in recovered areas.

AMISOM. is clearly overstretched. The Mission
is unable to continue the commendable progress it
has achieved in recovering territory with its current
resource levels. Its lack of enablers and resourcing
constraints threatens its long-term success. We
think the time has come for an in-depth analysis of
AMISOM's needs in relation to force numbers and
configuration, enablers and financing. We look forward
to the forthcoming joint review by the Department of
Peackeeping Operations and the AU. We urge close
cooperation between the United Nations and AU on
this exercise, in the spirit of the AMISOM. strategic
concept produced in 2011-2012, which was an excellent
example of the two organizations working together. It
will be important for countries that contribute troops to
AMISOM. be consulted closely.

Of course, the end goal is for Somalia to assume
responsibility for its own security. Rebuilding the
security services will be a long-term endeavour, but
work to consolidate the nucleus ofthose forces is urgent.
Compliance with reporting requirements for the partial
suspension of the arms embargo is also important, as
are long-term efforts to counter piracy.

In conclusion, we all have a stake in Somalia's
success. The conflict has had significant, broader
implications for terrorism, refugees and piracy.
Like others, we pledge our support to the Federal
Government's efforts to ensure that the page is
turned, that gains are consolidated, and that Somalia
continues down its new path towards peace, stability
and prosperity.

