Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of the European Union.

We would like thank Special Representative
de Mistura, for his work. We listened with interest to
his briefing. Under his leadership, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
made a fresh start and has contributed to a constructive
dialogue between the Government and the international
community. We support the priorities that it has
developed in its three-plus-one approach, which is in
line with the mandate bestowed by resolution 1917
(2010). The refocusing of his work on political good
offices, the preparation of the elections, support for the
reconciliation process and regional cooperation should
be continued, while maintaining UNAMA's
commitment to coordinating international assistance by
working to that end with the Afghan Government and
the special representative of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). In a word, we give our fullest
support to the work of the Special Representative.

Here, I would also of course like to pay tribute to
the men and women of UNAMA, who assist the
Afghan people in difficult conditions, as we know.
Their safety must be a priority. To that tribute I would
like to add a word of remembrance for the sacrifice of
our soldiers, who contribute to the same goal.

This meeting of the Security Council takes on
particular significance in the light of the holding of the
Peace Jirga in May, the preparations for the upcoming
Kabul Conference and the prospect of legislative
elections in September. It also takes place at a time
when major counterinsurgency operations are taking
place in the field.

The Security Council visit was an opportunity to
reiterate the commitment of the international
community to Afghans in their fight to establish the
rule of law, ensure economic development and combat
terrorism. The visit also made it possible to better see
the main challenges in stabilizing the country. It
strengthened our belief that success in Afghanistan
depends on a political strategy that incorporates the
civil and security spheres.

The military aspect is related to the efforts
currently being made by ISAF, whether on the ground
or to train the Afghan army and police. The offensive
under way was necessary. It must make our enemies
understand that negotiation is the only solution.
However, the security aspect is also political.

The Afghan Government's policy of national
reconciliation and integration is a positive element.
That policy should clearly be led by the Afghans, but
the United Nations must remain vigilant with respect to
the conditions established by the Afghan authorities
themselves and sanctioned by the Security Council,
namely, the renunciation of violence, the breaking of
links with Al-Qaida and international terrorism, respect
for the constitution and the protection of human rights
and women's rights.

However, if necessary, the role of the United
Nations should be more than that of an arbiter. We trust
the Special Representative to help, if necessary, to
launch negotiations. Today, we must build policy.
There will be no reintegration without reconciliation.
There will be no reconciliation without political
agreement. And it is that political agreement that we
must aim for.

With regard to this meeting, we have noted the
call by the J irga and the authorities for a new review of
the list held to date by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We support
updating the list so as to strengthen the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime. To that end, we count on the
cooperation of the Afghan authorities to provide us
with information on the people whose removal from
the list is requested.

Reconciliation, reintegration and political
agreement will only be a reality if they are grounded in
improved governance and the fight against corruption
in order to meet the expectations of the population,
who only too often support the insurgents because they
are disappointed by their own Administration.

There is still a long way to go, but we welcomed
as very positive the reform programme presented by
President Karzai in his inaugural speech. His
commitments should now be made more specific in
anticipation of the Kabul Conference, and then
implemented without delay. Lastly, we attach great
importance to the organization of the legislative
elections in September. There too, we trust that our
Special Representative will help us avoid another
failure like the presidential elections.

The Afghan crisis - I am not the first to say it -
cannot be approached independently of the situation in
the region, in particular in Pakistan. The United
Nations is well placed to bring together all regional
actors around the common objective of stabilizing the
region. We therefore follow with great interest the
Special Representative's Silk Road initiative.
In conclusion, I would like to recall a crucial
point. The transition we want to set in motion in
Afghanistan will not signal withdrawal by the
international community, much less abandonment. In
any case, as the President of the French Republic has
recalled on many occasions, France will remain
committed for as long as necessary and as long as the
Afghans wish.

