Mr. Valle (Brazil): I am honoured to convey to you,
Sir, the Brazilian delegation's sincere appreciation for
your presence among us today. As you are well aware,
my authorities hold you in the highest esteem and are
particularly pleased to be able to coordinate closely with
 

Canada during this year of 1999, in which we coincide in
the Security Council. Your commitment to multilateralism
and your personal role in promoting respect for, and the
development of, international humanitarian law are
especially worthy of recognition in the context of today's
exchange of ideas. The leadership displayed by Canada, and
by you personally, in developing a strategy to move the
international community towards a global ban on anti-
personnel landmines deserves to be highlighted and should
serve as an inspiration for our continuing endeavours in the
Security Council and other appropriate forums to deal with
the exceedingly high levels of civilian death and injury in
many contemporary conflicts.

Let me proceed by expressing our gratitude to the
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund, Ms. Carol Bellamy, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the
important contribution they have made to our debate.

Our discussion today can be seen as part of an
ongoing exercise in the Security Council aimed at
articulating a coherent agenda for dealing with conflict
situations that will not only help stem violence and
minimize the suffering of civilians but also promote durable
and sustainable solutions to the conflicts themselves.

We consider these discussions useful and necessary.
But as we heighten our awareness of the scope of the
violations of humanitarian law that occur even as we meet
today, we believe that we must be careful to maintain a
balanced perspective, both as regards the analysis of the
challenges we face and as relates to the options for dealing
with such challenges. An increasing amount of published
material, from a variety of sources, dealing with the
interlinkages between humanitarian and security issues can
help us to keep such a balanced perspective.

According to a recently published article by Professor
Jarat Chopra, of Brown University, while at the beginning
of the twentieth century 85 to 90 per cent of war deaths
were soldiers, as the century comes to a close 75 per cent,
on average, are civilians. These alarming figures indicate
that we are indeed facing a serious phenomenon on a wide
scale. The same article points out that of the 22 million
people who have perished in armed conflicts since 1945,
about one quarter died in the nineties. While this is an
unquestionably high proportion, it would be improper to
gloss over the fact that in absolute terms more civilians
perished during previous and deadlier decades, or to forget
that the targeting of civilians for extermination on an
ethnic, religious or political basis is not an invention of
the nineties. Unfortunately, serious humanitarian abuses
have taken place throughout the century, and we should
be wary of hasty judgements that might entail historical
distortions.

It has frequently been said in recent years that ethnic
or internal conflicts are likely to be more savage because
they are often fought by irregular armies. My delegation
has previously commentedon the fact that internal
conflicts are not necessarily more frequent today than in
the past, and some of the most serious threats to peace we
currently face are clearly of an inter-State character.

A different but related point is made in a recent
study entitled The Myth of Global Chaos, where we are
reminded, on the one hand, that ethnic wars are often
fought by regular armies and, on the other, that regular
armies are quite capable of vicious massacres.

Today, numerous conflicts are referred to as
"humanitarian disasters" or "catastrophes". But, as was
pointed out by the head of the ICRC's media services in
a conference published by the Red Cross Review, in
reality this kind of labelling runs the risk of steering the
international response towards purely humanitarian action
in cases where what is required is political initiative.
According to the same source, far too many disasters with
political causes, and for which there can be only political
solutions, are labelled today "humanitarian crises".

The impact of humanitarianism on North-South
relations is also of relevance in our attempts to keep a
balanced perspective on the issues before us. It is
increasingly felt that a strategic vision for integrating
humanitarian relief, politics and economic and social
development is essential if we are to promote truly
durable solutions to many of today's crises. As the
Norwegian Minister for Development Cooperation and
Human Rights, Hilde Johnson, has asserted,

"spending a few dollars on development today may
save us millions in humanitarian assistance in the
future".

In addition, my delegation has often made the point
that we should differentiate between collective
responsibility and collective security in the humanitarian
field. Concerns with ensuring that humanitarian relief be
safely provided should not automatically imply resort to
military options or Security Council involvement. All

 

peaceful and diplomatic efforts should be exhausted before
the military option is contemplated and, when it is, consent
and cooperation at the receiving end should be sought, a
point that Mr. Sommaruga emphasized earlier.

There are those who argue - like Antonio Donini, in
an article entitled "Asserting Humanitarianism in Peace
Maintenance" - that, from a humanitarian point of view,
the pertinence of military intervention is at best doubtful
and that the alibi of humanitarian action through military
intervention can lead to a militarization of North-South
relations which runs the risk of being interpreted as
disguised realpolitik.

On another level, let us not lose sight of the fact that
the use of indiscriminate weapons, such as landmines, is
one of the biggest causes of civilian suffering in conflict
situations. The banning of such weapons, and indeed of all
weapons of mass destruction, deserves the utmost priority
of the international community because of their impact on
civilians, among other reasons. In this context, it might be
appropriate to recall that the contrast between the inordinate
amount of resources invested in the production of such
weapons in the face of dwindling resources for economic
development is a source of perplexity.

At the same time, it is worth recalling - as stressed
by the Secretary-General in his report on Africa - that
stopping the flow of arms to areas of chronic instability is
an essential ingredient of any strategy for lowering the
levels of brutality against civilians and humanitarian
workers.

There are several points that can be made in this
connection. On the one hand, the Security Council should
not hesitate to impose arms embargoes against States or
parties whose actions threaten regional or international
peace. Arms embargoes, as opposed to more comprehensive
sanctions, cannot be said to provoke any legitimate
humanitarian or third party side-effects. Such measures can
only attain their objectives, however, if effectively
monitored. Unfortunately, we must recognize that, more
often than not, the flow of arms and ammunition to
sanctioned States or parties is continuing in defiance of
Security Council resolutions.

It is possible to contend that the high levels of civilian
death, from Bosnia to Liberia, need not be seen as
inevitable by-products of so-called internal conflicts of the
modern age. Rather, these can be viewed as resulting from
the inadequate or non-existent control of the flow of
weapons, both internationally and domestically. An article
published in the latest issue of the Red Cross Review
argues in favour of establishing the principle that those
who supply arms in situations where rampant violations
of international humanitarian law can be expected share
the responsibility for the use of such weapons and,
ultimately, for those violations. The same argument can
be made even more forcefully with respect to those who
violate multilaterally negotiated and Security Council-
mandated arms embargoes. At the very least, we should
concur with the Secretary-General when he states in his
report on Africa that arms exporting countries have a
responsibility to exercise restraint, especially with respect
to the export of weapons into zones of conflict or tension.

Before I conclude, let me stress the importance of
working towards a consensus in the United Nations that
will integrate, in a balanced way, the endeavours of the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly, as well as those of the specialized
agencies and other international actors in an effort to fine-
tune a doctrinal framework capable of ensuring greater
respect for humanitarian law, on the one hand, but also of
looking beyond humanitarian relief into the spheres of
institutional, economic and social development. We fear
that, unless we keep in mind the need to take into account
the spheres that lie beyond humanitarian relief, and unless
we do this with political and even cultural sensitivity, the
aim of reducing the levels of violence against civilians
and humanitarian workers will remain elusive.

I would like to end by recalling that a focused report
by the Secretary-General on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations, in
document S/1998/883 of 22 September 1998, addressed
several of the issues that we continue to grapple with in
a clear and straightforward manner. As we are about to
request an additional report, we would like to suggest that
the framework provided in the 22 September report be
borne in mind and that the new report concentrate on
areas not covered therein.

