Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/266). I would
also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing to the
Council on recent developments in Iraq. I also wish to
thank the Permanent Representative of the United
States, Ambassador Khalilzad, for his briefing on the
activities of the multinational forces in Iraq. We
welcome the presence of our brother Mr. Hamid Al
Bayati, Permanent Representative of Iraq.

During our consideration of this item on
21 January (see S/PV.5823), hopes arose that the
security situation would improve in the light of figures
from the fourth quarter of 2007. According to the
report before the Council at that meeting (S/2008/19),
the number of violent incidents had fallen from 200 a
day in July and August 2007 to approximately 90 in
September and October. Unfortunately, the report
before us today reflects a renewed upsurge of violent
incidents, which average around 130 per day
countrywide, and that figure does not take into account
the most recent events. We hope that this situation is
merely temporary.

Libya supports all efforts intended to bring an
end to violence in Iraq, whether by rebuilding Iraq's
armed forces or its other security and police forces or
by the demilitarization of the militias, ensuring that
only the Government engages in such operations to
restore security and law and order. However, that can
occur only if all factions and religious sects in Iraq
truly believe that the door is open to equal participation
in power and wealth-sharing. Fortunately, that is what
the Government of Iraq is currently seeking to
promote. We invite all political parties to genuinely
participate in efforts to achieve national reconciliation
and to foster dialogue and a spirit of accord.

That being said, however, we feel that real
progress has been made on all fronts and we hope that
such progress will continue. We also welcome
improved economic figures, particularly last year's
growth rate, and the expected upward trend this year.

My delegation is of the view that improved
relations between Iraq and neighbouring countries,
particularly Arab countries, are central to guaranteeing

Iraq's stability. We particularly encourage Iraq's
endeavours in conjunction with its neighbours, and we
welcome the statements emanating from the recent
conference in Kuwait regarding the importance of
respecting the national unity, full sovereignty,
territorial integrity and Arab and Islamic identity of
Iraq, as well as of respecting Iraq's internationally
recognized borders, together with a commitment
comprehensively to respect the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq and the
right of the Iraqi people freely to decide their political
future and to administer their national wealth and
resources and financial affairs as they see fit.

We welcome the political efforts made by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and the expansion of its activities through the
provincial liaison offices. We also welcome UNAMI's
role in providing assistance, particularly to the
Independent High Electoral Commission and the
Constitution Review Committee, and to the Iraqi
parliament as it enacts important legislation aimed at
enhancing the security and political situation, the
provincial Powers Law and the Law on Governorates.

We urge UNAMI, whose activities we highly
commend, to undertake further action on the
humanitarian front. Indeed, the reports of
governmental and non-governmental organizations
reveal that the situation is worrisome, particularly with
regard to Iraqi refugees in neighbouring countries, as is
the situation of internally displaced persons, millions
of whom are living in deplorable conditions.
February's report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and reports from
non-governmental organizations all describe the
magnitude of suffering and highlight the need to reach
the target subscription of $265 million, only a small
portion of which has been obtained. Even if the total
amount were to be obtained, it would still be
insufficient to meet the needs of all IDPs and refugees
and to remedy the problems of the countries hosting
them, Syria and Jordan in particular. Of course, it is
Iraq's responsibility to cater to the needs of its own
IDPs and refugees, but the international community
also has a duty to help alleviate their suffering.

Another important humanitarian issue that is not
addressed in the report concerns the legal and
humanitarian situation of Iraqi detainees. We are under
the impression that their number is steadily increasing.
Some reports show that the number of detainees has
now exceeded 51,000. We call on all concerned parties
to remember that detainees also have legal rights that
must be respected.

Lastly, I should like briefly to raise two other
issues. The first relates to the request for supplies
under the oil-for-food programme that ended on
31 December 2007. The legal and financial
governmental entities of Iraq can meet the country's
needs only if the legal documents are provided.

Secondly, the compensation committee is looking
into Iraq's participation in activities to ensure that it
can protect Iraq's legal and sovereign interests. It is
doing so not in order to help Iraq shirk its
responsibilities, but to encourage direct coordination
between Iraq and its neighbours to find solutions
acceptable to all parties that will alleviate material and
other pressures.

We all know that Iraq is facing many challenges,
but its history has always demonstrated the Iraqi
people's ability to meet all challenges and overcome all
difficulties with the utmost resilience and resolve.

