Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
representative of Singapore has warned us: Sir Jeremy
Greenstock will bend today under the weight of the
congratulations extended to him. Allow me at the
outset to express our admiration to Sir Jeremy for the
tactful and effective way in which he has conducted the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
created by resolution 1373 (2001) over the past nine
months. His very detailed, updated and enriching
information on the Committee's activity over the past
90 days show, without a doubt, the commitment and
determination of the Committee to strengthen the
capacity of States to combat terrorism.

In fact, the global nature of terrorism and its clear
ties with trans-border crime necessarily require a
concerted response on the part of the international
community. We believe this is essential. In order to
effectively combat this phenomenon, all States Without
exception must adopt specific measures and must
cooperate frankly and constructively to meet this
challenge, which is the very denial of the right to life.
Today, beyond condemning terrorism, action is
needed- individual and collective action by States
against terrorism.

Beyond the indignation and reprobation
expressed at the highest Government level in the wake
of the sad events of 11 September 2001, Cameroon,
whose legal framework already had a counter-terrorism
strategy and provisions to prevent and punish terrorist
acts, immediately, at all levels of Government, set
about drafting specific legislation integrating the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). On
this point, I welcome the cooperation we received
within the Committee, as well as the prospects of
assistance, the form of which has become ever clearer.
Here, we welcome Norway's commitment to the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in this regard.

We urge all States, as well as international,
regional and subregional organizations whose activities
could be related to counter-terrorism to cooperate fully
with the resolution 1373 (2001) Committee to enable
the Committee better to carry out its immense task, the
scope and importance of which are growing every day.
In fact, in its nine months of existence, the Committee
has already considered 127 of the 160 national reports
that States have submitted to it, an average of 14
reports per month. That is considerable work, and an
unprecedented event in the history of our Organization.

In our view, particular attention should be given
to the content of the letters addressed to States
following consideration of their national reports
because of the importance of the supplementary
questions in those letters, which should enable the
States concerned more precisely and effectively to
target areas where additional legislative, regulatory or
administrative efforts need to be made to prevent and
suppress terrorism.

It is from this vantage point that we would call
upon the 29 States that have not yet submitted their
reports in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution
1373 (2001), to take measures to rapidly overcome the
difficulties they are facing and cooperate with the
Committee. Only then will we be able perhaps to
celebrate the first anniversary of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee with the adoption of a common platform of
recommendations on the prevention and suppression of
this scourge that continues to haunt us.

We are convinced that the dialogue envisaged by
the Committee with the 29 States is correct, because it
will preserve the transparency and cooperation that
have always guided its work. This should be
acknowledged and encouraged, and we invite Member
States to respond favourably to the appeal made to
them.

We also appreciate the dialogue that has been set
up between the Committee and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as international
organizations such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the International Maritime Organization,
the International Criminal Police Organization and
many others. This initiative too must be pursued,
because it will enable us further to define and reduce
the scope of activities related to terrorism.

Cameroon fully endorses the Committee's new
work programme for the fourth quarter, from 26 June
to 23 September 2002, as well as the present structure
of the Committee and its working methods, as outlined
by Sir Jeremy Greenstock. The Committee should take
advantage of the next three-month period to begin an
active phase of progressive assessment, involving the
formulation of specific recommendations based on the
information provided by each State. It is clear that, at
this stage of its work, the Committee may still need
additional information from some States. This defining
stage requires more transparency and specificity on the
part of the Committee.

We feel that the regular briefings provided by the
Chairman of the Committee are an ideal way to
reassure the Member States about working methods,
but I am already convinced that there will be broad and
useful participation of Member States in the next three
months, reflecting the considerable impact made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Moreover, we are pleased to note that the
question of assistance continues to be of primary
concern to the Committee. Undeniably, States are
eagerly awaiting a complete and more understandable
format for the provision of assistance. We feel that the
Committee could speed up the gradual implementation
of the directory of assistance in order to provide many
States with sufficient information on the nature of the
assistance proposed by bilateral and multilateral
donors, and in particular on how to gain access to that
assistance.

We feel it is important for each subcommittee,
when meeting with delegations to consider their
national reports, to systematically provide detailed and
updated information about assistance.

Finally, my delegation would like to congratulate
the Secretariat, the experts and the subcommittees, as
well as the colleagues of Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for
the quality of their assistance to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

All these efforts would be in vain if together we
did not clearly express our unshakable determination to
cooperate in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).
Only international, regional and subregional
cooperation will enable us effectively to combat this
scourge. Regional and subregional organizations must
become the true agents in the fight against terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee must be able to
count on them anytime, anywhere.

