Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their informative briefings. I welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to our meeting today. Two months ago, Mr. Martin Griffiths informed the Security Council that Yemen was experiencing extremely difficult times (see S/PV.8753). It is regrettable that the picture today is in no way brighter. We are deeply concerned about the military escalation in different parts of Yemen and the announcement on 25 August by the Southern Transitional Council on suspending its participation in the ongoing consultations to implement the Riyadh agreement. The political process in Yemen is again at risk of returning to a stalemate. We are also deeply concerned about the evidence shown in a report of the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen (A/HRC/45/6), commissioned by the Human Rights Council, that Yemeni teenagers have been recruited and exploited for violence purposes, some of whom have even been sexually abused in the past few years. All those behind those immoral and unacceptable acts must be brought to justice. The economic crisis, the prolonged conflict, floods, food insecurity, desert locusts, the fragile health-care system and the coronavirus disease pandemic have deepened the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. In addition, there is no progress on the funding for aid programmes in Yemen. The United Nations aid programmes for Yemen are expected to be further scaled back, or even closed, in the coming months if the situation remains unresolved. Moreover, humanitarian assistance work could be disrupted due to the recent closure of Sana'a International Airport in Yemen by the Houthis. The airport represents very important access for the World Health Organization, UNICEF and other organizations to provide relief goods and vital medical supplies to Yemen during the coronavirus disease pandemic. The slow progress on the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue again remains troubling. The United Nations technical team has not been allowed to access the tanker. It is urgent to take immediate action on the ageing tanker without further delay. In that regard, I would like to make the following points. First, we urge all the parties concerned in Yemen to stop the fighting and resume talks so that negotiations on a nationwide ceasefire can restart. We also support the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in working together with the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to ensure that the peace process will not be derailed. Secondly, we emphasize the need to provide safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance work. We call on the Houthis to reopen Sana'a International Airport so that United Nations aid supplies can be brought to Yemen in a timely manner. We also call for further efforts by the international community, the United Nations and donors to find a way to fulfil their commitments to Yemen. In that vein, I would like to mention that, a few days ago, two 6-year-old boys, Ayaan Moosa and Mikaeel Ishaaq from east London, set up a lemonade stand to raise money for the people of Yemen. We believe that the Yemeni people, as well as we ourselves, are very grateful for the good deeds of those two brave British boys. We believe that that small act can set an example for us and bring more hope to the Yemeni people. Thirdly, it is urgent to address the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We urge the Houthis to facilitate the necessary procedures so that the United Nations technical team can carry out its tasks on the tanker. The life of Yemenis and others in the Gulf region are being threatened every passing day. We need to act now if we are to prevent a catastrophe in the region. Fourthly, it is important for all parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement with United Nations mediation. The meaningful participation of women in the political process should also be ensured and further promoted. Last but not least, we commend Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the United Nations team for their tireless work and support their peace proposals for Yemen.
