Mrs. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, may I first of all congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. At the
same time, may I express our appreciation to France
for the work accomplished in the presidency in
January. I am also grateful for the timely convening of
this important meeting. We express our appreciation to
Secretary of State Colin Powell on his initiative. At the
same time, I want to reiterate to the Secretary of State
the condolences of the Chilean Government on the
tragic accident of the space shuttle Columbia.

First of all, I want to express our concern at the
grave information that we have just received. It points
to a pattern of defiance and resistance on the part of
Iraq with regard to fulfilling the demand contained in
resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991 - that is, its
unconditional, immediate and verifiable disarmament.
After more than 12 years of resolutions by this Council
reiterating that demand, resolution 1441 (2002) gave
Iraq, in terms that allow no double interpretation, a
final opportunity to fulfil its disarmament obligations.
We cannot, therefore, fail to express our dismay at the
fact that the Iraqi regime - which has dragged its
people into two bloody wars and has already
impassively sat by while its people have suffered from
prolonged sanctions - is now exposing those people to
the risk of new and greater suffering.

My Government reiterates its conviction, as a
fundamental point, that the Security Council's
resolutions must be complied with fully. Attempts at
partial compliance with the demands of an unequivocal
text, at following a piecemeal approach in cooperating
with the inspection process, at negotiating every piece
of information as though this were a voluntary
concession, or, worse yet, at attempting to watch over,
deceive or thwart the process - all such attempts are
violations of the resolution and open challenges to the
international community.

It is our understanding that such an attitude
derives from the totalitarian nature of an oppressive
regime that has subjugated its people for decades and
unjustly deprived them of access to opportunities
appropriate to their proven wisdom and cultural
richness. This is why, in his report on 27 January,
Mr. Hans Blix affirmed that "Iraq appears not to have
come to a genuine acceptance - not even today" of
disarmament (S/PV.4692, p. 3).

My country has expressed the need to continue
with the inspection process so that the inspections can,
with the sense of urgency required under resolution
1441 (2002), arrive at conclusions that allow the
Council to adopt appropriate measures at the proper
time, in accordance with that urgency. Furthermore, we
have stated that the inspections can impose their logic
of peace only if a high degree of pressure is kept on the
Iraqi regime regarding the consequences that it might
suffer because of an attitude of sustained non-
compliance with Council resolutions.

We believe that it is up to the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
in accordance with the provisions of operative
paragraph 11 of resolution 1441 (2002),

"to report immediately to the Council any
interference by Iraq with inspection activities, as
well as any failure by Iraq to comply with its
disarmament obligations, including its obligations
regarding inspections under this resolution".

This Council's decision-making capacity will
gain if the inspections immediately focus on the main
unresolved disarmament issues. In this regard, it is
indispensable to present Iraq with demands for action
and information, demands that do not allow any delay
or distortion whatsoever. That can define the course of
the inspections and their viability.

In this regard, the accusations levelled a few
moments ago by United States Secretary of State Colin
Powell require urgent, precise clarification by Iraq. It is
Chile's understanding that the Security Council, in
exercising its responsibilities with regard to collective
security, must use and promote the mechanisms of
cooperation and multilateral consultation. For this
reason, we support maintaining multilateral control of
this crisis in the framework of the principles and
purposes of the United Nations Charter, international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The adoption of resolution 1441 (2002)
demonstrated the unity of which this body is capable.
Therefore, we see the need to persevere in the effort to
build a common position, which, in our opinion, would
be the measure of the international community's
success in achieving the objective of the disarmament
of Iraq.

We are entering a crucial stage in a situation that
involves many fears for the region and the stability of
the world. As a peace-loving country, we must express
our concern at the consequences of ending the
diplomatic channels - consequences for the world, for
the region and, in particular, for the security of the
Iraqi civilian population, who have suffered so long
from the effect of sanctions with a high human cost.

We cannot fail to reiterate that, as history often
teaches us, more than the leaders, whose actions give
rise to war, it is their peoples who suffer the direct
consequences. If there is no radical change in Iraq's
cooperation, this Council must use every means
available in order to preserve the governing principles
of international law.

Chile once again appeals to Iraq to consider its
responsibility with regard to the main objective of this
Organization and of those who make up this Council:
the preservation of peace and international security.

