We regret that once again we have to come to the conclusion that no significant steps have been taken to implement resolution 2334 (2016). Resolution 2334 (2016) is clear: Israeli settlement policy constitutes a flagrant violation of international law. Israel must therefore immediately and completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We remain deeply concerned about new settlement announcements, especially with regards to Jerusalem. If put into practice, these would cut the territorial and geographic contiguity of a future Palestinian state and would undermine the status of Jerusalem as the shared capital. Furthermore, we remain deeply concerned about announcements regarding the annexation of the West Bank or parts thereof and moves in that direction. Let me reiterate that Belgium will not recognize any changes to the 1967 borders, including with regards to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties. According to the latest figures of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 21 donor-funded structures have been demolished or seized in 2020. We once again call on Israel to cease these activities and to compensate for the damages. The publication of the database of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on businesses with a connection to the settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territories will hopefully create more transparency. The past reporting period has seen flares of violence. We condemn all acts of violence against civilians and reiterate the importance of respecting international humanitarian law, including its principles of distinction and proportionality. Unilateral actions and declarations need to make room for a renewed commitment to the two-state solution and the internationally agreed parameters. It is important that the international community helps create the conditions for a resumption of meaningful and direct negotiations leading to a durable solution, in line with international law, guaranteeing equal rights, both for Palestinians and Israelis alike. Belgium, as a member of the European Union, will spare no efforts in this regard. Let me, in conclusion, briefly turn to the most recent developments regarding the recent COVID-19 outbreak which risks further exacerbating an already dire situation, both in the West Bank and in Gaza, where the health sector alread y faces an enormous pressure. We welcome the coordination and cooperation between both sides in order to tackle this pandemic as well as the efforts deployed by the United Nations. Humanitarian access remains crucial and steps have been taken in order to facilitate the entry of critical supplies and equipment into Gaza, as well as to allow for the access and movement for medical personnel. We hope further efforts can be made in this regard. We remain deeply concerned about the financial implications: Belgium for its part contributes to the local response through its financial contributions to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs country-based pooled fund, theInternational Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
