Mr. Marzooq (Iraq): (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate the People's Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your organization of the Council's work, and to
express our gratitude to Bolivia for its leadership of the
Council last month. I would also like to welcome the
briefing by Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and to thank
him and his team for their efforts in both Baghdad and
New York.

On 10 July, from the heart of Mosul, the second-
largest city in Iraq, Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi
announced that Iraq's heroic armed forces had achieved
a historic Victory, ending the situation of illusion and
extremism in the city. With enormous sacrifices,
our brave forces have regained the city of Mosul and
the Al-Hadba minaret, which the Takfiri terrorists
demolished at the approach of the Iraqi forces. Today,
I can only congratulate our armed forces and our brave
people who have made sacrifices. I also congratulate
all honourable citizens of the civilized world, who have
supported Iraq, and its forces, in its fight against the
terrorist gangs of Da'esh.

Iraq appreciates the role played by the international
coalition, which offered aerial support and cooperated
with the Iraqi air forces, in the battle to liberate Mosul.
I should also like to thank and express gratitude to the
States of the international coalition, as well as all other
nations that have supported the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, offered assistance in the
areas of military logistics and advice, and humanitarian
assistance in order to gain victory against the terrorist
gangs of Da'esh.

The Iraqi Government gave priority to the
liberation of people before land, and thus to the safety
and protection of civilians. The Council is also aware
of the role of the supreme religious authority in Iraq,
which produced a legal opinion, a fatwa, calling for
jihad against Da'esh and giving great momentum to
the fight against the gangs of Da'esh and the fight to
preserve the territory of Iraq.

Official entities in the liberated areas of Iraq are
working to return life to a state of normalcy and to begin
offering services, thus paving the way for displaced
persons, of whom there are approximately three
million, to return and resume their normal life. Iraq is
therefore in dire need of the support of the international
community to face the challenges imposed by this
post-Da'esh phase in Iraq, achieve stability, rebuild
destroyed infrastructure, and remove the mines and the
ordinances planted by the terrorist gangs of Da'esh in
the cities over which we have regained control. That
is based on a comprehensive plan for reconstruction
and domestic governance, which requires financial as
well as technical support, and consultation with our
international partners.

Iraq would also like to salute the humanitarian
efforts of our sister nation, Kuwait, particularly its relief
initiative aimed at alleviating the suffering of displaced
Iraqis. We also highly appreciate the efforts of friendly
nations, of the European Union, and of the States
members of the international coalition for the support
and humanitarian assistance they have provided and for
their readiness to support Iraq in achieving stability
and reconstruction.

I would also like to reiterate the critical and vital
role that UNAMI can perform under its mandate, and the
role of the United Nations country team in addressing
humanitarian, social and economic challenges, as
well as those in the fields of health and construction,
assisting in the return of security, stability and essential
services, allowing displaced persons to return to their
homes, providing them with job opportunities, and
allowing them to participate in the reconstruction of
what the extremists have destroyed.

Iraq is a unified and independent federal State that
enjoys complete sovereignty, based on a democratic
federal Constitution that was adopted by all sectors
of Iraqi society in 2005 through a popular, democratic
and transparent referendum. It is based on full respect
for and equality of rights and duties among all
components of Iraqi society and affirms the values of
civic engagement, political participation and effective
political representation for all. The constitutional and
legal rights of all are guaranteed, in particular with
regard to the areas of politics, economics, society,
culture and language. Few diverse nations can make
the same claim.

Iraq affirms once again the importance of
implementing the provisions of resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). To strengthen
the rule of law and to prevent terrorists in Iraq from
enjoying impunity, Iraq is currently considering the
various alternatives in the global campaign to bring
justice to Da'esh. Included is a draft resolution that
we are considering with our partners regarding the
collection of evidence pertaining to crimes committed
by the Da'esh gangs in Iraq. We are also undertaking
efforts to strengthen our sovereignty, to preserve
the jurisdiction of our legal system and also to build
capacities in that regard.

We once again reiterate that Council members
must demand that Turkey withdraw its forces from
Iraqi territory and that it respect the principle of good
neighbourliness with Iraq in order to preserve and
maintain international and regional peace and security.

The Iraqi Government is continuously working to
strengthen its relations with Arab and neighbouring
countries, in particular Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan,
Turkey and Iran, in addition to continued relations with
the Syrian Government.

To strengthen our brotherly relations with the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Iraqi Cabinet has
established an Iraqi-Saudi coordination council. The
two countries have agreed to elevate bilateral relations
to the required strategic level; to open new horizons of
cooperation in various areas, including the political field,
security, economics, development, trade, investment,
tourism and culture; to invigorate the partnership
between the private sector in both countries, in addition
to combating terrorism and extremism in their various
forms, eliminating the strongholds of terrorism, drying
up its sources and eliminating its financing, while
respecting the various relevant conventions.

To strengthen reconciliation, we are now hosting
preparation meetings for the Mecca conference. Iraq
remains committed legally and morally to locating the
Kuwaiti missing persons, as well as the Kuwaiti archives
and relevant documents. Iraqi ministries continue to
work hard to document and scrutinize the information
from witnesses, and continue to carry out field visits
and excavations in different locations in order to find
the remains of missing persons and Kuwaiti prisoners
of war.
I should like to welcome the Council's response to
the Iraqi Government's request to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for
one year based on resolution 1770 (2007), in letter and
in spirit.

In conclusion, we express once again our gratitude
for the work and efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, and his team in
providing advice to the Iraqi Government in connection
with its various activities, with a view to preserving the
unity of Iraq, its territorial integrity and its stability
in order that it may be free of terrorism. May Iraq live
in safety, unity, strength, prosperity and stability in its
democratic political system, and glory be to the martyrs
who gave their lives to combat terrorism on behalf of all
of humankind.

