Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Mr. President, to commend the manner in which you
are conducting the work of the Council for this month.
We also wish to commend Ambassador Mikhail Wehbe
of Syria for the competent manner in which he
accomplished his task during the previous month.

The Security Council meets once again to
consider developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which have deteriorated to such a point that
the Council is called upon to take the necessary
measures in conformity with the Charter to guarantee
peace and security, which have never been violated to
such an extent as in the Palestinian territories today.

It was our hope that this Chamber would have
been adequately equipped so that each and all could
follow the heartbreaking and sad images that we have
followed on television over the past two days. It was
our hope that instead of listening to these statements,
we would watch pictures that would expose the nature
of the war crimes that Israel, the occupying Power, is
committing with impunity, at the beginning of the
twenty-first century. Indeed, calling what happened in
Gaza a war crime is the least that any conscientious
human being would do, for any dictionaries or lexicons
would fail to have words that would reflect the horror
of the actions of Israel, the occupying Power, and its
barbarous bombardment that targeted and killed the
most vulnerable groups among civilians: infants, young
children and their mothers.

The entire world condemned this heinous crime.
This is a sincere reflection of the international
community, whose patience is running thin faced with
the contempt on the part of Israel, the occupying
Power, for international law and international norms.
However, we believe that such collective
condemnation, despite its importance, must be coupled
with effective actions that would deter Israeli
aggression and preserve the security of innocent
civilians and their basic rights as stipulated in all
relevant conventions.

What we witnessed today - Israeli contempt for
international law and disregard for the lives of innocent
civilians, including women and children - is indeed
unprecedented in history. It is an exceptional case that
causes us to wonder. It is our belief that the sense of
protection and immunity that the Government of Israel
feels, despite all its activities, only makes it more
brazen in challenging the international community and
in committing more such acts. It is time that a
courageous and bold initiative be taken to put an end to
this unjustified protection of Israel and to hold Israel
accountable to all international laws.

My delegation urges Council members to respond
constructively, in accordance with international law,
norms and practices. We call on it to assume its
responsibilities as stipulated in the Charter and to take
the necessary measures to promote justice and hold the
aggressor accountable.

