Mr. de Vengoechea (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, let me thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', and
Mr. Skender Hyseni for their statements.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his briefing. We would like to commend
the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their
excellent work. It is thanks to them that, after the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), there has been
relative peace and stability in the region.

As stated in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/692), current realities in Kosovo make
it impossible for UNMIK to discharge most of its
mandate. Panama therefore supports and continues to
support the reconfiguration of the Mission. Panama is
in favour of the deployment of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to take
charge, under the legal authority of UNMIK, of United
Nations responsibilities in Kosovo.

We are doing so in keeping with our position that
regional organizations should play a priority role in
resolving the problems in their own regions. The
actions of the Secretary-General and the European
Union (EU) are particularly appropriate, given that the
Council cannot achieve a consensus on the matter and
that resolution 1244 (1999) has no set time frame.

Nevertheless, since this is an undesired situation,
although the best we can achieve, the international
community must do everything in its power to ensure
that Serbia is part of the solution to the Kosovo issue.
That is why we commend the Secretary-General having
instructed his Special Representative to engage in
negotiations with Belgrade on matters of such
importance to Serbians and Kosovars in order to have
the cooperation of both with regard to the
reconfiguration of UNMIK and the deployment of
EULEX.

We are gratified by the outcome of the
discussions between the United Nations and Belgrade,
since Belgrade's endorsement is indispensable to the
success of any international initiative in Kosovo. That
is why we commend the presidential statement that has
recently been circulated concerning the report of the
Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that we
have no doubt that the future of Serbia and Kosovo lie
in European integration. That is why we urge leaders in
Serbia and Kosovo to leave behind the nationalist
rhetoric of the past that has caused so much suffering
to their peoples. Let them, instead, turn their eyes to a
European future, where both peoples can resolve their
differences, where national borders and belonging to
one group or another will be less important and where
a spirit of cooperation and social and economic
development will prevail.

