Mr. Maurer: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to address the Council during this crucial
discussion.

As President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), I represent 13,000 individuals,
many of whom are working in volatile and dangerous
environments. Their safety is a constant concern. As a
leader of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, I am particularly aware of the terrible risks
that hundreds of thousands of volunteers take to help
people in need. Sadly, violence and threats of violence
against humanitarian workers know no borders, colours
or religion. They are wildly indiscriminate and affect
us all, regardless of whether we work for the United
Nations, the Red Cross or a local non-governmental
organization.

Humanitarian work is by definition dependent on
those who do it: no workers, no aid. The equation is
simple, but that simplicity conceals the most complex
and difficult task facing humanitarian organizations
working in violence-prone environments today. That
task is to reach the people in need while guaranteeing
the safety of the personnel of those organizations.
No effective action is possible without allowing
humanitarian personnel to go about their work and
actively ensuring their safety.

Working in armed conflict environments has
always been dangerous, and always will be. Today,
however, some of the inherent dangers are being
exacerbated by the sheer number of high-risk combat
zones in which organizations like ours are active.
There have been dramatic changes, such as the security
constraints under which humanitarian workers have to
operate. While conflicts may not necessarily be more
violent than in the past, workers are more exposed. The
fragmentation of armed groups - many of which have
unclear command structures 4 the easy availability of
small arms, the intertwining of a variety of motives and
the outsourcing of security tasks to private military and
security companies are all realities that have changed
the environment in which we operate.

The resurgence of religious fundamentalism and
the spreading of terror and violence, fuelled or aided by
new and far-reaching social media, have brought new
figures to the fore, and they are redrafting the rules to
fit their shifting agendas.

As aresult ofsuch changes, what we euphemistically
call security incidents have been multiplying. Because
of the risks involved, the number of organizations able,
allowed or willing to work in conflict environments
has shrunk dramatically over the past decade. That
means that calls for humanitarian action are ever less
likely to be answered. The negative perception that
some individuals and groups have of humanitarian
action - and the deliberate attacks against humanitarian
workers that result - is a problem that the international
community must address head-on. Solutions do indeed
exist. Let me mention a few of the elementary points
that must be accepted and acted on if humanitarian
workers are to carry out their duties effectively and in
safety.

First and foremost, it is important to remind
ourselves that protecting humanitarian workers in
armed-conflict environments is an obligation under
international humanitarian law. States and non-State
actors must respect and protect humanitarian personnel,
as well as objects used exclusively for humanitarian
operations. That obligation, applicable in both
international and non-international armed conflict,
is absolute. Not only is this the unavoidable duty of
the actual parties to the conflict, but all States have a
collective responsibility to uphold that rule, as they do
to ensure respect for humanitarian law as a whole.

Secondly, the blurring of the line between military,
political and humanitarian activities poses a real threat
to humanitarian action and humanitarian workers.
With their determination to work in close proximity
to the people they are striving to help, humanitarian
workers depend on being - and on being perceived
to be - neutral and impartial. Any attempt to exploit
humanitarian aid, or to mix together humanitarian
goals and political agendas, automatically increases the
risk of being perceived with hostility and of creating
dangers for humanitarian personnel on the ground.

Looking at the majority of the crises today, what is
missing is strong political will to protect humanitarian
workers and to respect the principles according to
which they operate, thus ensuring a separate scope
for humanitarian action. That is imperative, whatever
parallel efforts are under way to find political solutions
to a conflict. Humanitarian action must not serve as
a fig leaf for political inaction. That is a burden that
humanitarian workers cannot be expected to shoulder.

My third point is that security is intimately
linked to acceptance. Without those two things,
humanitarian workers find it extremely difficult to
safely reach people in need and provide impartial aid
and protection. Acceptance depends on the ability
of humanitarian organizations to engage with local
communities and others. That means speaking with
armed non-State actors about humanitarian law and
principles and obtaining unambiguous and adequate
security guarantees. Through extensive networking at
all levels and through constant dialogue with all parties
concerned, the International Committee of the Red
Cross aims to ensure a safer working environment for
its staff. That is our main strategy. We call it a threat-
reduction strategy, and we implement it by dealing
with local contacts who control the level of threat to
which our operations are exposed. Those entities
must understand our objectives and the exclusively
humanitarian purpose of our actions.
At a more basic level, it is important to mention
that security management requires humanitarian
organizations to adopt professional standards and
training in this area. Different organizations use
different models. Some, such as those of the United
Nations system, adopt a more centralized approach in
which headquarters plays a significant role. Others,
such as the ICRC, follow a more decentralized approach
in which decision-making is mainly delegated to the
field. No matter the model applied, what counts is a
willingness to seek the best combination for improving
the safety of humanitarian workers.

I would like to mention here the Health Care in
Danger initiative led by the ICRC over the past two and
a half years. It has generated compelling information
on the threats facing health-care workers, many of
whom are humanitarian volunteers and staff. After
studying some of the riskiest situations - such as
crossing checkpoints, emergency evacuations and the
deployment of troops next to health facilities - we have
made recommendations to armed entities, lawmakers,
health authorities, ambulance providers and many
more. The ICRC and the World Health Organization
will co-organize an event on health care and violence
during the General Assembly session this fall, and
we hope that many States, including the members of
the Security Council, will be present to discuss this
important subject.

Another ICRC initiative I would briefly like to
mention is what we call the Safer Access Framework.
This framework involved broad consultations with
over 50 National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
on how best to identify and meet the challenges they
face in ensuring operational access and acceptance at
all times. The aim of this initiative is to increase the
ability of National Societies to deliver assistance while
at the same time reducing the risks facing staff and
volunteers.

Recent attacks on humanitarian organizations
by both non-State entities and Government forces
demonstrate that aid organizations are not always
targeted because of faulty perceptions of their roles
and responsibilities; sometimes such targeting is part
of a carefully plotted political and military strategy.
Those attacks are deliberate, and the perpetrators
will not be deterred by well-crafted explanations of
humanitarian mandates or by security procedures.
For an organization like the ICRC, finding a way to
respond to such manifestations of hostility can be an
insurmountable challenge, for they threaten its very
operational model and its ability to reach communities.
The States and other parties to conflict must rally in
great numbers to put an end to those practices.

The current political environment has sore
need of impartial organizations that conduct strictly
humanitarian activities. Members of the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement are committed
to standing by people in need during armed conflict
and other situations of violence. We are determined to
live up to the following principle: the only side taken
by the Red Cross and Red Crescent is the side of the
Victims.

Protecting the lives of humanitarian workers is
not the responsibility of any specific country; it is
the responsibility of all nations and communities,
stemming from a truly universal value. It deserves the
full attention that it is receiving in the Security Council
today.

