Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on steering the work
of the Security Council this month and for convening
today's meeting.

I would also like to congratulate the members of
the Security Council on their vote of confidence in
Colombia and in its efforts to build peace, through
their unanimous adoption of resolution 2381 (2017),
authorizing the United Nations Mission in Colombia
to monitor and verify the temporary national bilateral
ceasefire with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional, for
a period of 101 days.

Iwould also like to thank the members ofthe Security
Council for the statement adopted on their behalf, as it
recognizes the historic progress that we have made. It
is a tribute not only to the Government of Colombia,
the parties, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the
Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional, but to the Colombian
people, who acknowledge that they wish to rewrite the
pages of history. We would like to, and we can, reverse
the course of history as you, Sir, have just stated.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
its invaluable efforts as penholder of resolution 2381
(2017). Its ongoing support was key to the Council's
agility. It helped us to provide a very swift response
to the needs expressed by the parties - through the
Government and the Catholic Church, which we
thank - by tabling today's resolution in a time frame
that shows that the Security Council has flexible
mechanisms through which the specific duties of a
second special political mission could be assigned.
That mission began on 26 September. We believe that
the ceasefire was a historic undertaking for the Ejercito
de Liberacion Nacional, a guerilla organization, which
has never in its 53 years - as it is older than the FARC-
EP - signed a bilateral ceasefire. We believe that this
bodes well for the future.

In conclusion, I would like to make two points.

First, I would like to highlight the teamwork
undertaken with Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and the Department
of Political Affairs, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, which made a
significant contribution to the process. He is now tasked
with maintaining a gender perspective in the forces
and the group of observers assisting us, and the vision
for the region. The way in which the region united to
support the two missions was remarkable. The region
also stands with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional to
foster dialogue in Havana and Quito, and by providing
support with troops, civilian observers and unarmed
soldiers. It will also be providing civilian observers for
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

Secondly, on behalf of the Government and people
of Colombia, I would like to thank the parties involved

in this endeavour and for the vote of confidence in us,
which we hope to repay through a successful conclusion

ofthe peace process and the 101-day bilateral ceasefire.

The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.
