Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): At the outset, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Mozambique, I would like to congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the first month of its current term as a non-permanent member of the Council. We also welcome the other new non-permanent members of the Council, namely, Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and Grenadines and Tunisia, and wish them success in their endeavours to represent all of us in this very important organ of the United Nations. Allow me to extend greetings from His Excellency Jose Pacheco, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Mozambique, who asked me to convey this message of gratitude to the Deputy Prime Minister of Viet Nam for the kind invitation to attend this important and timely gathering marking the seventy- fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. Regrettably, previous commitments related to the recent elections in Mozambique prevented him from attending this important meeting. Mozambique wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8699 Resumption 1). We gather here at a time of great anxiety, when menacing clouds of conflict and insecurity threaten to engulf several regions of the world in a never-ending spiral of instability, as recent events in different parts of the world attest. As Secretary-General Antonio Guterres recently stated with his usual frankness "[w] e are living in dangerous times. ... And this turbulence is escalating." Indeed, as the logic of peace and mutual respect is being drowned out by the rhetoric of war and confrontation, the international community and particularly the Security Council, the central organ responsible under the Charter for upholding international peace and security, is called upon to assert its role in pursuit of the noble goal of peace and stability across the globe. In the same vein, it is incumbent on the rest of the membership to remember the role of the Charter in guaranteeing international peace and security, as clearly outlined in its Preamble: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". Whatever differences may perhaps exist in assessing the track record of the United Nations in upholding the ideals and principles of the Charter, it is undoubtedly true that, over the past seven decades, the Organization has developed as an essential platform for the promotion of global governance, in which States can debate, shape, articulate and develop international law and norms in areas such as human rights, international trade, the sea, space, cyberspace and combating terrorism and violent extremism. While the spotlight is invariably and appropriately shined on the mandate of the Security Council in matters of international peace and security, the Government of Mozambique welcomes the increasing attention that the nexus between security and development is receiving from national, regional, international and transnational actors. As the Secretary-General repeatedly stresses, development and security are inextricably linked. In that regard, Mozambique welcomes the work undertaken to enhance conflict prevention, as well as that of the Peacebuilding Commission to help the sustainable recovery of nations emerging from conflict. We call for the allocation of adequate resources to that body in order to better address the broader demands of providing sustainable human security, which, by emphasizing the principles of freedom from want and freedom from fear, constitutes an integral dimension of international peace and security. The Sustainable Development Goals are intrinsically linked to human security. They can be achieved only if the right conditions for international peace and security exist, under which broader political freedoms and stability, as well as economic prosperity, thrive and existential challenges to humankind, such as climate change, can collectively be addressed. Since the Charter was adopted, we have witnessed the growing emergence of new forms of threats and conflicts, such as intra-State conflicts, insecurity, terrorism and violent extremism. Naturally, those challenges require the Security Council to reform its composition and working methods and readjust its approach in the light of the current reality of the world of the twenty-first century. In conclusion, I would like to call upon to the international community to seize the momentum of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter to rise up to the ambition of those men and women who more than seven decades ago in the city of San Francisco achieved the far-reaching vision that set up the foundations for this important institution. That vision has indeed stood the test of time. It has enabled humankind to avert many catastrophes and continues to give a sense of purpose to the lofty ideals of a peaceful world, as encapsulated in the opening preamble of the Charter, which continues to represent our collective will to seek multilateral solutions to the multifaceted challenges that humankind has encountered over the past 75 years.
