Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to warmly welcome
Mr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, and Mr. Makhdoom Shah Mehmood
Qureshi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan. I
welcome their participation in this debate on
Afghanistan, a friendly country whose situation we
hope will improve because the brotherly people of
Afghanistan deserve prosperity after having suffered
from war for so many years. I would also like to
emphasize to the Ministers the cordial and friendly
relations that exist between our friendly countries, as
well as our readiness to cooperate in the fight against
terrorism.

We thank the Secretary-General for the report
(S/2008/434) before us. We also wish to thank Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, and Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings, which we very
much appreciate.
My delegation welcomes the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy and the financial
pledges made at the Paris Conference, held on 12 June
2008. I stress that the implementation of the Strategy
requires the promotion of trust between Afghan
citizens, the Government of Afghanistan and the

international community. I should also like to
underscore the importance of respecting and protecting
the human rights of the Afghan people. It is also
necessary for Afghan forces and the International
Security Assistance Force to take every step necessary
to protect Afghan civilians as they carry out their
operations. Those accused of crimes must be provided
fair trials in accordance with international law,
international human rights law and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

One of my country's greatest concerns is the
ongoing deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan, which is referred to in paragraph 5 of the
report of the Secretary-General. The report points to
the increase in insurgent activity since the previous
reporting period, with such attacks having reached
their highest level in May. We are even more concerned
about the major increase is civilian casualties, which
illustrates the need; now more than ever, for national
reconciliation in Afghanistan in order to ensure a
secure and stable country in which people enjoy
prosperity and security. That is especially true given
that experience shows that there is a linkage between
security and reconstruction in Afghanistan: the better
the security, the more rebuilding projects are
implemented. The converse is also true. In that
connection, we would like to underscore the need to
adopt and implement the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy. In that task, there is a joint role
to be played by the international community, the
Afghan people and the Government of Afghanistan.

We agree with the point made in the report of the
Secretary-General that the elections to be held in 2009
and 2010 must be free and fair. In that regard, we
would like to underscore the role assumed by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support the election process and to make
it as credible as possible. We would also like to
emphasize the fact that the success of the elections
depends not only on the procedural aspects of their
conduct, but also on the participation of all Afghan
people. That leads me to emphasize once again the
importance of achieving national reconciliation in
Afghanistan in order to make the elections a success.
That requires the reform of the country's civilian,
military and administrative institutions so that they can
provide security in Afghanistan's provinces and
services to Afghan citizens. It will also require the
control of the warlords over those institutions to be
broken. We should also pay greater attention to the
priorities set out by the Secretary-General in paragraph
10 of his report.

My delegation fully understands the importance
of the role of Afghanistan's neighbours in restoring
stability to the country. We commend the efforts made
by those countries, especially in combating narcotics
smuggling.

We emphasize the importance of providing
UNAMA with the resources and expertise necessary
for it to carry out its expanded mandate under
resolution 1806 (2008). We hope that donor countries
will honour their pledges in that regard. We also
endorse the recommendation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that the
necessary resources be provided in order for UNAMA
to fulfil its responsibilities under the mandate entrusted
to it to bring prosperity to the brotherly people of
Afghanistan.

