Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): Allow us first of all to express our satisfaction
at seeing you, Mr. President, guiding our work and for
the opportunity to congratulate the Ambassador of China
for his outstanding guidance of the Council last month.

The French delegation supported the resolution that
has just been adopted, as it believes that the attitude of
the Iraqi authorities justified the Security Council's
reaction and its reaffirmation of the rights and obligations
of all. We would have preferred - as we said yesterday
and reiterate today - an immediate reaction from our
Council through a presidential statement. We regret that
this path could not be followed right away, for it was
justified by events.

The text that has just been adopted is consonant with
the demands of the situation and is in keeping with the
provisions already agreed upon and dictated by the
Security Council. Our hope today is that the Chairman of

 

the Special Commission, who is charged with ensuring the
full implementation of the provisions of resolution 687
(1991) and of the other relevant resolutions dealing with the
disarmament of Iraq, will pursue his dialogue with the Iraqi
authorities with the will to do everything possible to
reconcile the objectives of his mission, as expressed in the
relevant resolutions, with the necessary respect for the
sovereignty and political independence of Iraq, as also
expressed in the relevant resolutions. We take due note here
that Chairman Ekeus - for whom we are pleased to
reaffirm our support here - intends to be present on site
very soon.

A few weeks ago, the Council was gratified by the
signing of the memorandum of application of resolution 986
(1995). Beyond the possibilities that opened up for the
alleviation of the difficulties afflicting the Iraqi population,
we were all also pleased that the signing of the
memorandum was an indication of progress on the part of
Iraq and of the country's positive attitude in concluding
those negotiations. We believe that this element deserves
consideration by all, including by the Security Council and
therefore by the Special Commission. It is in Iraq's interest,
as we have often recalled, to allow the Special Commission
to complete its task as quickly as possible in order that the
Security Council, in its turn, can be in a position to
implement resolution 687 (1991) in its entirety, and in
particular operative paragraph 22. Any delay caused to the
Commission's action will be felt first and foremost by Iraq.

