Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for the outstanding
manner in which you have guided the work of the
Council during your presidency this month. We thank
you for your conduct in this regard.

I also wish to thank Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Sirkin
for their briefings to the Council this morning.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Since the beginning
of the escalation of hostilities in late April, hundreds
of civilians - many of whom are women and
children - have lost their lives and countless others
have suffered severe injuries that are, in many cases,
life-altering, leaving them permanently disabled. My
delegation is particularly concerned about the attacks
in north-west Syria in which civilians, particularly
women and children, were killed as a result of air
strikes on marketplaces and residential areas in several
towns. Those actions have had a particularly severe
impact on women and children, who make up 76 per
cent of the population.

South Africa is also concerned about the
widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure.
Since late April, at least 37 incidents involving health
facilities or personnel have been reported, killing and
injuring civilians and damaging or destroying vital
health facilities that are essential for the survival and
well-being of the people. It has been reported that
during the same period, 47 schools and several water
stations were damaged or destroyed by air strikes or
shelling, disrupting access to clean water and education
for hundreds of thousands of people. This is not to
mention the mental scars that children will carry with
them for decades as a result of the traumas they have
experienced. The continued displacement of a large
proportion of the population has also led to a number of
challenges, including the disruption or, indeed, absence
of education at all levels for hundreds of thousands of
children and limited access to health care and other
basic social services.

South Africa condemns the continued attacks on
humanitarian workers, who have put their lives at risk
to support and assist those who are in critical need of
basic services but are not spared from the continued
violence. South Africa urges all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is also important
that the signatories to the September 2018 ceasefire
memorandum adhere to its provisions.

South Africa reiterates that while we acknowledge
the threat of and violence committed by terrorist
groups, it is also necessary that no action taken to
counter terrorist activities be undertaken at the expense
of innocent civilian lives. Any such action should be
taken only within the parameters of international law.

Let me turn now to the situations in the Rukban and
Al-Hol camps. I would like to reiterate South Africa's
position that while we welcome reports that more than

17,000 people have left Rukban, there are those who do
not have the resources to leave. It is essential that those
who remain in Rukban be provided with the assistance
they require, and we call on the relevant parties to grant
the required approvals for the delivery of additional
aid to the camp. The situation in Al-Hol remains of
concern, especially as the rising temperatures in the
region create additional challenges. We welcome the
work of the numerous humanitarian agencies that
provide food, water, sanitation and hygiene services, as
well as education and health services, to the camp.

In conclusion, South Africa believes that the only
sustainable solution to the Syrian question remains the
achievement of a political solution through an inclusive
Syrian-led dialogue. We support the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
to facilitate these inclusive negotiations. In this regard,
we look forward to Mr. Pedersen's upcoming report on
his recent engagements.

