Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico is grateful to Poland for convening
this open debate on a topic that continues to urgently
require our attention.

Mexico associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

We have an opportunity today to reflect on the
progress that we have made and the challenges we
continue to face 10 years after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009), which Mexico advocated as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict during its most recent term as an elected
member of the Security Council. Resolution 1882
(2009) was a fundamental step forward in this area in
providing the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General with new tools to attribute responsibility to
parties to a conflict for rape and other forms of sexual
violence, as well as the killing and maiming ofchildren.

It is unacceptable that such violations of
international humanitarian law continue to occur, and
all the more so - as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/509) indicates 4 that they have reached
historic levels since the establishment ofthe monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children. We deplore the fact that boys and girls are
being used as sex slaves and human shields. However, it
is encouraging that this past year approximately 13,600
children benefited from release and reintegration.
That was largely the result of the effective work of
Ms. Virginia Gamba, who has also placed special
emphasis on the urgent need to fund sustainable and
comprehensive reintegration programmes.

For a child, being recruited or involved in an armed
group will always lead to psychosocial trauma. Let
there be no doubt about it: above all, such children
are victims and deserve proper care. Mexico therefore
categorically rejects policies that tend to re-victimize
such children and propagate harmful stereotypes. We
cannot afford losing entire generations of children who
otherwise could be agents of sustainable peace. It is up
to us to ensure that those who took up arms in the past
will build lasting peace and prevent the repetition of
those tragedies in the future.

Fortunately, no Member State affected by this
scourge has to face it alone. We can count on a strong
international framework, based on the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, also known as the Paris Principles,
in complementarity with the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers and the Geneva Conventions,
which remain legally and practically binding.

The work of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on grave violations against children is
essential to verifying that such a legal framework is
effectively implemented on the ground. We highlight
efforts to document statistics related to the release,
recruitment and reintegration of children, while we
recognize that improvement is needed in the areas of
training, collecting data and statistics.

For Mexico, putting human beings, especially
children, at the centre of its policies is imperative, which
means listening to the needs and aspirations of young
people, who share one demand 4 education. The right
to education continues to be one of the first casualties
of armed conflict. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
must redouble their efforts to ensure that education is
used as a tool for both prevention and reintegration.

The children and armed conflict agenda, which
has evolved thanks to the joint work of the General
Assembly and the Council, demonstrates that
multilateralism can be achieved when the political
will to address multidimensional threats is present.
Mexico is proud to have contributed and to continue
to contribute proactively to the development of this
agenda to the benefit of children.

