Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
quarterly report and for his efficient and dedicated
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

The Security Council has been seized of an
unprecedented report from the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). The report (S/2011/695, annex), which was published on 8 November, has only
deepened France's concern about the Iranian nuclear
programme. It contains a remarkably detailed summary
of all of the information made available to the Agency
over the past decade on the possible military aspect of
the Iranian nuclear programme.

As the Agency has noted, its information derives
from many sources, including more than 10 of its
member States and information provided by Iran itself.
The IAEA notes its serious concern and details Iranian
activities that are "specific to nuclear weapons"
(5/2011/695, annex, para. 44). Those activities cover
all areas necessary for nuclear-weapon production,
including the production of fissile material, work on
uranium metal components, explosives, hydrodynamic
experiments, modelling and calculations, neutron
triggers, preparations for nuclear testing and
integration into a ballistic missile.

Those activities occurred before the end of 2003
under the framework of a structured programme.
However, the Agency emphasizes that some of those
activities may still be ongoing. The Agency also recalls
that Iran has never really cooperated in responding to
its concerns and that, in 2008, it broke off all dialogue
with the Agency on that issue.

Other Iranian announcements reported by the
IAEA have only worsened our concerns: the
announcement, in June, of the threefold increase in
enrichment capacity to 20 per cent and the installation,
in August, of the first centrifuge in the Qom plant -
an instillation now intended to produce enriched
uranium at the level of 20 per cent U-235, rather than
the 3.5 per cent Iran announced in 2009. In October,
there was a transfer of the first fissile material at that

same Qom facility - an installation that, I would
recall, was built in secret and includes bunkers adapted
for military use. It is a plant that could easily and
swiftly be reconfigured to produce uranium at a rate
higher than 20 per cent. In that context, we are also
concerned by the Agency's reports that several
kilograms of natural uranium metal have inexplicably
disappeared.

All of those activities, together with Iran's
intensive pursuit of a ballistic programme, paint an
overall picture that leaves very little doubt as to its
intentions. As emphasized by Mr. Alain Juppe, Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs, all of that
information shows that Iran has sought, and is very
likely pursuing its efforts, to develop a nuclear weapon
under the guise of a supposedly peaceful civilian
nuclear programme. The IAEA member States, the
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and, beyond that, the entire
international community must take action in response
to the seriousness of the facts reported by the Agency.

In Vienna, on 18 November, the IAEA Board of
Governors adopted, with an unprecedented majority, a
resolution (GOV/2011/69) expressing its deep and
increasing concern and urging Iran to shed light, as
soon as possible, on all of its activities relative to a
military programme by cooperating unreservedly with
the IAEA. The Board requested the Director General of
the Agency to report on the implementation of that
resolution at its next meeting, in March 2012.

In that context, I welcome the fact that all
members of the Council who are also present in Vienna
voted in favour of the Board of Governors' resolution.
Once again, that action shows that the international
community is united and determined not to tolerate
abuse of the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
as recognized under the NPT.

Moreover, we must continue to rigorously
implement the sanctions adopted by the Security
Council. In doing so we must first issue a firm
response to the numerous reported violations. We must
also enhance the implementation of sanctions when
necessary, pursuant to the mandate given by the
Council.
The Panel of Experts has issued several
recommendations. The Committee must follow up on
them and, in particular, designate the individuals and
entities involved in any violations. Once again, we ask

that the final report of the Panel be published in
accordance with the ongoing practice of Sanctions
Committees. Should Iran persist in its refusal to
comply with its international obligations and to
cooperate seriously, we are prepared, together with all
countries that agree to do so, to adopt sanctions of an
unprecedented scope.

The Iranian regime is locking itself into a
dangerous spiral from which there is no way out - one
of isolation, of repression and of violating international
law. Apart from nuclear issues, the several serious
events that have occurred in recent weeks, which have
been denounced by the international community, only
heighten our concerns. In particular, I am thinking of
the Iranian plot to carry out an attack on United States
soil, revealed in October, and the unacceptable attack
on 29 November against the British Embassy in
Tehran, in violation of the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations.

The seriousness of the situation and the Iranian
regime's deaf ear to the many negotiation offers made
by the E3+3 obliges the international community to
show unprecedented resolve and to mobilize as never
before. Faced with that challenge, we have no choice
but to remain united and firm. We urge Iran to heed the
message of the IAEA and the international community
and to at last concretely demonstrate its willingness to
sincerely negotiate and as quickly as possible clarify
all issues raised by the IAEA.

