Ms. DiCarlo: Nearly three years ago, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2231 (2015)
to endorse the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear issue. The Secretary-
General and the international community welcomed the
Plan as a major achievement in nuclear non-proliferation.

Since implementation day, 16 January 2016, the
International Atomic Energy Agency has reported
11 times to the Security Council that Iran has been
implementing its nuclear-related commitments under
the JCPOA. Notwithstanding the continued adherence
of Iran to its nuclear-related commitments, the
agreement is unfortunately at a crossroads.

On 8 May, the United States of America announced
its withdrawal from the agreement. The Secretary-
General deeply regrets this setback to the JCPOA and
believes that issues not directly related to the Plan
should be addressed without prejudice to preserving the
agreement and its accomplishments. At the same time,
the Secretary-General calls on Iran to consider carefully
the concerns expressed by Member States about Iranian
activities that are allegedly contrary to the restrictive
measures contained in annex B to the resolution.

I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the fifth report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2018/602). As guided by the Security Council,
and consistent with our last four reports, the one before
members today focuses on annex B to the resolution.

First, on the implementation of the nuclear-
related provisions, I am pleased to report that the
procurement channel continues to function effectively.
Thirteen additional nuclear-related proposals have
been submitted to the Security Council for approval,
bringing the total number of proposals to 37 since
implementation day. However, in this reporting period,
the Secretariat received information from two Member
States on the supply, sale, transfer or export to Iran of
dual-use items that may have been undertaken contrary
to the resolution. The Secretariat has contacted the
relevant Member States, which have informed us that
they have initiated internal reviews. Iran, in its response
to the Secretariat stressed that it is the "responsibility
of the exporting State to seek approval through the
procurement channel", and encouraged more outreach
activities to address the lack of awareness among some
Member States. The Secretary-General will report back
on this issue to the Council in due course.

Secondly, in terms of ballistic missile-related
provisions, the report reflects information provided
by Israel and Iran to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council on two ballistic missile launches by
Iran in January, as well as our findings on the ballistic
missiles launched by the Houthis into Saudi territory.
Since our last report (S/2017/1030), Saudi authorities
have brought to the attention of the Secretariat nine
additional launches of ballistic missiles by the Houthis,
which in their assessment were Iranian Qiam-l missiles.
The Secretariat was invited to examine the debris
of three of those additional missiles. We provided
preliminary observations, in our last report, from our
examination of the debris of the missiles launched into
Saudi Arabia on 22 July and 4 November 2017.

Based on the information and material analysed, the
Secretariat assesses that the debris of the five missiles
launched at Yanbu' and Riyadh since July 2017 share
key design features with the Iranian Qiam-l ballistic
missile. It is also our assessment that some component
parts of the debris were manufactured in Iran. We could
confirm that subcomponents of the guidance system
in these missiles were produced between 2002 and
2010. We note that the production-date range of these
subcomponents is incompatible with Scud missiles
known to be in Yemeni stockpiles prior to the outbreak
of the current conflict in early 2015. However, we are
at present unable to determine whether such missiles,
or parts thereof, or related technology, may have been
transferred from Iran after 16 January 2016, the date
when annex B provisions came into effect.

The report also reflects information received from
Israel regarding the possible presence of an Iranian
drone in Syria, which was reportedly downed after
entering Israeli airspace on 10 February. The Secretariat
did not have the opportunity to examine its debris, but
images provided by Israeli authorities show that its
wing configuration appears to be consistent with that of
an Iranian drone unveiled in October 2016. The report
further notes that, according to Iranian media outlets,
several Iranian drones have been deployed in Syria.
The Secretariat has no information as to the owner and
operator of those drones.

Thirdly, as detailed in the report, the Secretariat
examined arms and related material that was seized in
Bahrain after 16 January 2016, and obtained additional
information on the unmanned surface vessel, laden
with explosives, that was recovered by the United Arab
Emirates. In both cases, the Secretariat is confident
that some of the arms and related material it examined
were manufactured in Iran. However, we are unable
to confirm whether those items were transferred from
Iran after 16 January 2016.

The report also notes the 21 May statement of the
political leader of Hamas in the Gaza Strip that Iran
has provided the Al-Qassam Brigades and other armed
groups in Gaza with money, military equipment and
expertise. That statement suggests that transfers of
arms and related material from Iran may have been
undertaken contrary to the provisions of annex B.

Fourthly, the report highlights the participation of
Iran's Defence Industries Organization for the third
year in a row in an arms and defence exhibition in
Iraq. It provides information on the foreign activities of
Khatam al-Anbiya Construction Headquarters in Syria.
Since both entities are on the 2231 list their funds, other
financial assets and economic resources on the Iraqi
and the Syrian territories should have been frozen.

The report also provides information on additional
travel by Major General Qasem Soleimani. The
Secretary-General has reiterated his call upon all
Member States in the region to take the steps necessary
to fully implement their obligations in relation to
resolution 2231 (2015).

In closing, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of Ambassador Van Oosterom of
the Netherlands in his role as Facilitator for the
implementation of the resolution. I also thank the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of
the Joint Commission for our excellent cooperation. I
would like to assure them and the Security Council of
our fullest support for the continued implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

