Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Peacekeeping is a
shared responsibility, and all stakeholders therefore
have to learn to cooperate with one another in a spirit
of partnership. Since nearly 50 per cent of all United
Nations peacekeeping operations have been conducted
in Africa, we welcome the opportunity you have
provided, Mr. President, to share our views on an
important issue.

Africa has been transforming rapidly. The maturing
of the African subregional and regional groupings,
especially the African Union (AU), as reflected in
their undertaking of peacekeeping initiatives dealing
with conflicts in Africa, the institutionalization of the
coordination between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, and the emergence of
several African countries as major troop-contributors,
are all reflective of the changes under way. Underpinning
all those changes is the collective beliefthat the AU and
other regional organizations and national Governments
in Africa are best placed to provide solutions to the
challenges facing their region. The AU's Agenda
2063 sets out Africa's long-term collective vision for
its future. We feel that it is the responsibility of the
international community, and in our collective interest,
to assist Africa in meeting its commonly agreed-on
goals. It is from that perspective that we would like to
make a few suggestions for strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa.
First, peacekeeping mandates are multidimensional.
However, we must resist the temptation to add
disproportionate mandate components, and we must aim
at prioritizing mandates, which will help in ensuring the
judicious allocation of the meagre resources available
for implementing the mandates.

Secondly, peacekeeping missions in Africa operate
in vast environments. As I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the peacekeepers from Tanzania and
Malawi who paid the ultimate sacrifice last week while
serving the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), I would like to draw the Council's
attention to what peacekeepers are facing while
deployed in MONUSCO. To give an example, one of
the sensitive areas of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - the Central Sector, which covers more than
500,000 square kilometres and contains more than
11 million people - is being looked after by four
battalions of United Nations peacekeeping operations
totalling about 3,000 troops. Those 3,000 or so troops
are responsible for that entire area of operations. That
amounts to one soldier per 158 square kilometres. If, in
such a scenario, we task the troops deployed to enforce
the protection of civilians without even providing
enabling air assets for rapid reinforcement operations,
it is obvious that the size and scale of United Nations
deployments are insufficient for the tasks entrusted to
them. The strategy of peacekeepers being required to
do more with less is setting us all up for a tragedy.

Thirdly, predictable and sustainable financing,
which follows on from the second issue, is a
prerequisite for all peacekeeping operations to succeed.
We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
that African peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Security Council should also be considered for
assessed contributions.

Fourthly, we see that troop-contributing countries
increasingly devise deployment arrangements with the
highest number of caveats when deploying in Africa.
That results in an unfair distribution of work among
the various troops on the ground, thereby affecting the
performance of missions. It is time that we do away
with such practices.

Fifthly, Africa collectively contributes the largest
number of personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. If we include peacekeeping operations that
are not United Nations operations, the numbers will
be even higher. There is obviously much to share and
learn with our African partners. It is time to look at
how we at the United Nations can support that through
mechanisms of soft coordination.

India's partnership with Africa is based on building
instruments of empowerment that would enable the
continent to find solutions to its problems. We urge the
United Nations to also look at longer-term efforts for
expanding African capacities and enhancing collective
cooperation. India is ready to walk along that path of
political and diplomatic engagement in partnering
African States and entities, in line with their own
articulation ofthe needs and requirements ofa continent
in the throes of change.

