Mr. Atkin (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Council on the
situation in the Sudan. It is my honour to speak on
behalf of New Zealand and my own country, Australia.

The Governments of New Zealand and Australia
continue to be gravely concerned about the ongoing
conflicts in the Sudan and the deteriorating
humanitarian and human rights conditions in Darfur.
We welcome this special meeting of the Security
Council in Nairobi, and we urge the Council to take
every possible step to resolve the conflicts in the
Sudan, which have had such terrible effects on people
throughout the country.
With respect to the north-south conflict, we
commend the Security Council for its efforts to support
the urgent conclusion of a comprehensive peace
agreement. After 21 years of civil war, the current
negotiations offer a real opportunity for a
comprehensive political solution to the problems in the
Sudan. The devastating conflict in Darfur is glaring
evidence of the risks of continued instability, and there
is no time to waste. We are heartened by the signature
this morning of the memorandum of understanding to
conclude a final settlement by the end of this year, and
we urge the Council to maintain pressure on all parties
at this critical stage.

Our countries are deeply concerned at reports that
the situation in Darfur is deteriorating yet further. We
are appalled by reports of horrific atrocities committed
against the civilian population of Darfur in recent
months. Let me be clear that we look to all parties to
the conflict to immediately prevent further attacks on
civilians.

We welcome the agreement on humanitarian and
security protocols reached among the Government of
the Sudan, the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army and the Justice and Equality Movement, and we
call on the parties to implement their commitments
without delay. The parties must be under no illusion
about the seriousness with which the international
community sees the situation in Darfur, and they must
respond quickly and meaningfully.

Our countries are making a contribution to
international efforts to resolve the crisis in the Sudan
through the provision of substantial funding for United
Nations operations, support for the African Union's
mission and humanitarian assistance to the victims of
the conflict. We applaud the African Union for its
proactive role in resolving the crisis in Darfur, and we
welcome the decision to expand the African Union's
monitoring mission to Darfur. The international
community must make every effort to ensure the
success of the African Union mission to Darfur. Our
Governments offer their full support to that mission.

The Governments of New Zealand and Australia
will continue to support efforts to find a lasting
solution to the multiple crises in the Sudan. Only
sustained, coordinated international action will bring
those conflicts to an end.

