Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me first to express my delegation's
gratitude to Mr. Perricos for his final briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
its predecessor, the United Nations Special
Commission, and their many years of work in Iraq. We
take note of Mr. Zlauvinen's briefing on the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
regarding Iraq's nuclear programme. We have heard the
statements made by the representatives of the United
Kingdom and the United States reflecting their
countries' interpretation of the question of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction. We are grateful to the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, Mr. Al Bayati, for
setting out Baghdad's position on Iraq's future
activities in the area of non-proliferation and
disarmament.

The Russian delegation believes that the model
for terminating the mandate of the Commission, as
outlined in draft resolution S/2007/390, submitted by
the United Kingdom and the United States, deviates
from our understanding of that question. The flaw in
the process as outlined is that it does not provide for
UNMOVIC certification regarding the closing of the
Iraq disarmament file. Unresolved questions remain
relating to the unclear fate of Iraqi military
installations monitored by the Commission and
remaining stocks of chemical and biological weapons
and dual-use items. It is being suggested that we
should forget about the residue of uncertainty
regarding the fate of dozens of Iraqi missiles which
United Nations inspectors, since early 1993, have been
unable to destroy.

The resolution just adopted by the Council
provides no clear answers regarding the presence in
Iraq of weapons of mass destruction as of March 2003.
In that respect, Russia has frequently proposed to the
sponsors that they submit to the Security Council those
elements of the Duelfer report of the Iraq Survey
Group that relate to UNMOVIC's mandate with regard
to certification of the international process. The
sponsors, however, preferred not to do that.

For the purpose of ensuring stability in the
region, it was our belief that in the process of working
on the draft resolution it was important to clarify
outstanding questions relating, in particular, to the
creation of a national export control mechanism;
involving Iraq in multilateral agreements on the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; and
clarifying the fate of its remnants of certain weapons
and means of production not destroyed by United
Nations inspectors prior to 2003. Thanks to our efforts,
some of those points are reflected in the resolution just
adopted, but unfortunately not to the proper degree.

Taking into account the entire range of issues, we
abstained in the vote.

