Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The resolution the Security Council has just
adopted includes a necessary and justified measure: the
lifting of the embargo on arms and related materiel that had
been imposed on the Government of Rwanda. Members
will recall that by its resolution 918 (1994) the Council
imposed the embargo on the former Government of
Rwanda in circumstances completely different from those
of today.

Internally and externally, the situation has changed,
and the serious security concerns are no longer aroused
from within, but rather from outside Rwanda. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his valuable report
(S/1995/678), which points to important progress in a
number of areas; to an appreciable improvement in the
security situation in Rwanda and in relations between the
Government and the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR); to the Government's adoption of
measures to encourage the voluntary return of refugees,
including an invitation that was extended to representatives
of the refugees to visit Rwanda; to the intensification of
bilateral contacts in the region; and to a gradual shift in the
focus of the international community, from emergency
assistance to the phase of rehabilitation and reconstruction.

The report of the Secretary-General also notes the
tension and lack of security in areas neighbouring Rwanda,
which are exacerbated by reports of infiltration and
sabotage by armed elements, and by accusations that
members of the forces of the former Government and
militias have been engaging in military training and have
received arms from abroad.

In these circumstances, the Security Council has a
responsibility with respect to the external security of
Rwanda, a Member State bearing the burden of the arms
embargo. Because of this responsibility; because we
consider that the embargo must be viewed as an
exceptional measure and in a restricted context; because,
as we said earlier, the present situation in Rwanda is
totally different from that which earlier prompted the
imposition of the embargo; because Rwanda should be
enabled to guarantee the security of its inhabitants and to
exercise its right of self-defence: for those reasons the
Argentine Republic supported the lifting of the embargo
on arms and related materiel with respect to the
Government of Rwanda, and the retention of the embargo
with respect to those in the States neighbouring Rwanda
if such sale or supply is for the purpose of the use of the
arms within Rwanda.

To be sure, we are fully aware of the problems
Rwanda faces because of the absence of an effective
justice system and the abuses and arbitrary arrests and
detentions arising from the remaining limitations and from
the inhuman conditions in its prisons. We also recognize
the particularly tense and volatile situation in the Great
Lakes region, and we note with concern that no less than
a quarter of Rwanda's population lives in refugee camps
in neighbouring countries.

Owing to this special situation, which involves not
only Rwanda, we support the temporary implementation
of a system of notification and the marking and
registering of arms entering Rwanda; this will serve to
win the confidence of the refugees and dispel all doubts
about Rwanda's true intentions with respect to arms.

We believe that the implementation of this special
monitoring regime might have been enough to lift the
arms embargo, without the need to call for a new decision
by the Council.

We wish to take this opportunity to urge the
countries of the region, many of which are subject to
many difficult problems because of the massive presence
of refugees in their territories, to join forces in order to
resolve together the region's critical security and stability
situation. In that respect, we encourage swift responses to
the requests in paragraphs 2, 4 and 5 of the resolution.

We acknowledge the achievements of the
Government of Rwanda in its efforts to redress a situation
that was until very recently tragic and in its population's
recovery of its normal rhythm of life. None the less,

 

much remains to be done, and in that respect we urge the
Government of Rwanda to redouble its efforts to promote
dialogue between all its political sectors and to guarantee
respect for human rights and the security of its entire
populace. This effort is essential.

The promotion of the voluntary return of refugees
must also continue to be a priority, since without the
integration of all Rwandans and respect for their diversity
there will be no lasting stability.

The tragedy experienced by the people of Rwanda
barely a year ago has extremely complex social,
psychological, political and economic dimensions. We know
it is no easy task to redress quickly a situation like this one,
and this is the challenge facing the Government of Rwanda.
In the performance of that task, we trust that the
international community will continue to contribute, and
indeed will increase its contribution, to the effort for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Rwanda.

