Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you
on Pakistan's initiative to organize this open debate
and to thank you for the lucid non-paper you have
circulated among all delegations.

We are making this brief statement for two
reasons: first, because Guatemala was the beneficiary
of a small peace operation, authorized by the Security
Council in its resolution 1094 (1997), within the
framework of a broader mission authorized by the
General Assembly to verify compliance with the peace
agreements signed in December 1996; and secondly,
because we agree with you, Sir, that the work of United
Nations peacekeeping operations is at a crossroads and
that it behoves us all to meet the challenge.

The challenge, Sir, is clearly described in your
non-paper. Given the rapid increase in the number, size
and complexity of the peacekeeping forces required in
various countries and regions, the question arises of
whether the Organization has the management
capacity, the financial resources, the availability of
troops and the political will necessary to ensure that
supply matches demand. Growing awareness of the
risks that peace operations entail for the safety and
security of the personnel assigned to them further
complicates matters.

In response to this challenge, there are only two
possible alternatives. One is to adjust demand to
supply, employing a sort of triage that deals only with
the most salient cases; the other is to adjust supply to
demand, thereby compelling the United Nations to
address all the situations for which its participation is
needed. We wish to express our decided preference for
the latter alternative, which is in keeping with the
Organization's lofty aims under the Charter but which
has the drawback that it imposes grave responsibilities
on all Member States - and, of course, on the
Secretariat.
Perhaps it is easy for a country of small size and
low income, such as Guatemala, to take that position.
But it would not be entirely fair to say that: if the
United Nation were to undertake all the operations that
are anticipated, our financial contribution to their
expenses would reach an amount not far below that of
our contribution to the regular budget, which would
involve sums that would by no means be insignificant
for my Government. But, we would shoulder the
burden, in the full conviction that our contribution
would strengthen world peace, which, in the long run,
would benefit us all. It is in that spirit that on 12
November 2003 we signed a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations relating to the
provision of standby peacekeeping forces.

We believe that we know far more now than we
did a few years ago about how best to meet the
challenge. We have available valuable assets which are
the fruit of lessons learned from the many complex
operations carried out over the past 15 years. We also
have the guidelines contained in the 2000 Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) and the concrete steps taken to
implement many of its recommendations, chiefly by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Interesting functional associations have also been
established between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly the African Union; we
welcome these.

No doubt, much remains to be done. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations must continue
to develop its capacity to respond effectively and
swiftly to sudden increases in needs and must adopt a
new management culture. Above all, however, we must
impress on public opinion in our respective countries
the need for the supply of peace operations to keep
pace with demand. In the long run, the investment will
be a highly profitable one, because it is obvious that
maintaining and building peace and preventing conflict
are generally less costly than war. It may thus be that
the crucial element in our efforts to strengthen the role
of the United Nations in peacekeeping operations is
convincing the Governments of Member States to
provide their unstinting support to such operations.

