I would like to echo others in conveying our condolences to the victims of yesterday's attack in Afrin. We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and updates on the humanitarian situation in Syria. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has certainly added another layer of complexity to our common goal of alleviating the suffering of the Syrian people. My delegation believes that the focus of today's video-teleconference should be on how to enhance the efforts to ensure that humanitarian assistance is properly distributed to people in need, including in the context of measures to suppress the spread of COVID-19. Accordingly, Indonesia wishes to highlight three points that are crucial in making sure that those humanitarian operations are implemented effectively. First, all parties without exception must implement and respect an immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. We are delighted that the Russia-Turkey ceasefire agreement in the north-west is holding and appreciate the commitment from all key parties in that regard. However, a period of calm is not needed only in the north-west. A complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire is crucial and, as Special Envoy Pedersen has stated, is needed more than ever to enable an all-out effort to halt COVID-19 in Syria. Secondly, all United Nations humanitarian operations and their implementing partners must be granted enhanced and sustained humanitarian access to all requested areas and populations in need. Safe, immediate access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance was already urgently needed before COVID-19 in order to save lives in Syria. Given the high risk currently posed by the pandemic, nobody can deny that access is one of the priorities to secure and deliver emergency supplies. Besides shelter, food, water and sanitation, it is also crucial to provide more testing kits, personal protective equipment and other key supplies. As stated in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/327), it is imperative that humanitarian access to all parts of Syria be continued and authorized with various operating modalities. That includes scaling up cross-line and cross-border access. We call for enhanced cooperation and effective coordination between the United Nations and the Government of Syria, including other key parties, in order to better facilitate access for humanitarian responses in the country. Thirdly, as many have stated, Syrians are acutely vulnerable to COVID-19; therefore, enhancing laboratory and case investigation capacity in Syria is a priority. As reported by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, the number of cases is still low. However, the risk of an outbreak and its devastating impact on the Syrian people is very alarming. We appreciate the Syrian Government and the United Nations ongoing prevention and health preparedness plan designed to minimize the spread of the virus and urge for continued partnership between the parties. Lastly, we note the summary of the board of inquiry report and stress the importance of preventing the same incidents from reoccurring in future. Indonesia urges all parties to the conflict to cease all attacks and uphold their obligations under international law and international humanitarian law. We appeal to all the parties to the conflict to assist the Syrian people, with the support of the international community, in showing mercy and compassion during this holy month of Ramadan.
