Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
is very grateful for the opportunity to address the
Council on the theme "Silencing the Guns in Africa:
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations". In that regard, we welcome resolution
2457 (2019), adopted this morning, which my delegation
co-sponsored. We are equally grateful for the quality of
the insights provided in the presentations made by the
briefers this morning.

(spoke in French)

Djibouti associates itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Benin and Lebanon, on behalf
of the Group of African States and the Group of Arab
States, respectively.

The greatest threat today to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union's Agenda 2063 is undoubtedly conflict
and violence. The persistence ofmany hotbeds oftension
around the world continues to increase the death toll.
Addressing the specific challenges of each will require
the sustained attention of the international community.
Indeed, according to some sources, some 30 million
light weapons are in circulation in sub-Saharan Africa
and, every year, that arsenal increases by eight to ten
million weapons.

Unfortunately, those weapons are readily available;
they trigger and perpetuate violent conflicts in the
continent. It goes without saying that they constitute
a threat to international peace and security. That is
why we welcome the fact that the Council has agreed
to organize, under your presidency, a thematic meeting
devoted to analysing the challenges and identifying
sustainable solutions.

The United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, chaired by France in June 2018, in which my
delegation participated, enabled us to make progress in
certain areas. The fourth Conference of States Parties
to the Arms Trade Treaty, which took place in Japan in
August, reiterated the need for material, technical and
financial support for developing countries.

Despite those tools, Djibouti is greatly concerned
about the spread of terrorism and international organized
crime, which complicate already fragile situations and
require different responses than those proposed by
conventional peace operations. That is why partnerships
in regional and subregional cooperation are so essential
if we hope to curb the cross-border movement of
illicit weapons. We welcomed the Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020 initiative, adopted by African Heads
of State at the thirty-second ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union commemorating the
fiftieth anniversary of the African Union, the noble
goal of which is to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

(spoke in English)

In response to your request to make specific
contributions today, Mr. President, Djibouti would like
to humbly make the three following observations.

First, we need to invest more in prevention
and mediation. It requires special skills honed by
experience. That is why Djibouti welcomes the creation
of a platform for experience-sharing and learning
among the members of the roster of mediators of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union members of the Panel of the Wise
and members of the Pan-African Network of the Wise
from regional economic communities and mechanisms.
We take this opportunity to commend those
involved in the elaboration of the strategic guidelines
on mediation. Djibouti also applauds the Secretary-
General's establishment of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation and urges the Council to lend it
full support. States and international organizations
called upon to mediate international disputes should
be encouraged to seek the active involvement and
assistance of the Secretary-General and the High-
level Board.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, we need inclusive approaches to promote
peace, while considering all the relevant stakeholders at
all levels of society, including women, young people and
traditional leaders, as well as faith-based organizations.
To that end, there is an urgent need to mainstream the
work of the African Union, including through the Panel
of the Wise, the Pan-African Network of the Wise and
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation in promoting peace, security and
stability on the continent.

Thirdly, there is no longer any doubt that the
harmful consequences of the actions of groups
motivated by extremist ideologies are in no way limited
to national or regional spaces, but that they transcend
borders and affect the whole world. The goal of radical
extremists is to create what some writers have termed a
panic civilization, in which every terrorist act not only
destroys the lives ofinnocent civilians but also leads to
a vast number ofliving but terrified hostages. Their goal
is known and our determination must be unyielding.

In concert with the efforts of organizations, such
as IGAD and the African Union, to prevent and combat
violent extremism, the States of the region have quickly
realized the importance of initiating consultations to
develop a strategy to counter the ideas and narratives
disseminated by extremist movements. With that
perspective, we decided by mutual agreement to
establish a regional centre dedicated to preventing and
combating violent extremism in Djibouti.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, Djibouti welcomes the recent
positive developments in the Horn of Africa, in
particular the historic rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. For peace to be comprehensive, thorough
and sustainable, we emphasize the fact that it is urgent
to resolve the 11-year-long border dispute and other
related issues with the sisterly country of Eritrea.
To that end, Djibouti reaffirms its commitment to
negotiating in good faith with Eritrea through bilateral
engagement, mediation or binding international
arbitration. We should endeavour to maintain the
positive momentum and not allow the conflict to fester.
Djibouti underscores the importance of the continued
oversight role of the Security Council, as stipulated in
paragraph 57 of resolution 2444 (2018), until a full and
final agreement is reached between the parties.

