Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
For many, the Middle East conflict has been an integral
part of the cultural baggage of today's society. Over time,
we have come to associate this region with hatred and
violence and to believe that little can be done to avoid
this.

Nonetheless, events have proven those who think
this way to be wrong and that, with political will and a
sense of history, one could move towards initial solutions
that would pave the way to a new era. This has been the
inspiration of leaders of great moral stature, committed to
their peoples and guided by bold politics.

Over the past few years, the world has watched as
vital steps have been taken towards the establishment of
lasting peace and security for all in the Middle East
region. The Madrid Conference and the Oslo accords,
which were unthinkable just a few years ago, have shown
us that nothing is impossible. Rarely have international
agreements given rise to such hope and relief in the
international community. Once again, the Govemment of
Chile pays tribute to all those who made the start of this
peace process possible, and in particular Yitzhak Rabin
Fifty-second year 5 March 199?

and Yassar Arafat, who were honoured with the Nobel
Peace Prize for their contributions.

This has not been an easy process, however. Many
obstacles have emerged along the way and many more will
certainly surface. But that is not what is of concern to us;
it is not the most difficult aspect of the issue. History
shows that complex processes have always been rife with
great difficulties. Nonetheless, from the barbaric acts of
terrorism of last April, the closing of the borders and the
bombardment of Lebanon, to the latest elections in Israel
and the subsequent events with which we are all familiar,
it would appear that the spirit of Oslo is gradually losing
ground. This, in our opinion, is the most serious difficulty.

In September, the Security Council met on an
emergency basis to address the consequences of the
opening of the mosque tunnel, which left more than 70
dead and hundreds wounded. At that time, Chile called for
openness and a halt to the use of the tunnel. At the same
time, compliance with the agreements was becoming more
difficult, as was the continuation of the peace process,
particularly regarding Hebron. Fortunately, in the end and
at great cost, an understanding was reached that should now
be fully implemented. As a result of the latest decisions
taken by the Israeli Government regarding East Jerusalem,
the Security Council is once again forced to take up the
question of the occupied territories at today's meeting.

Jerusalem, as other speakers have said, is a holy city

' _ for several cultures and religions. It is not just any city.

This is a place that sparks great sensitivities and deep

emotions. A delicate and precarious balance exists that must

be not only maintained but strengthened until definitive

agreements are implemented. This is the policy which the

international community has considered most fair and

correct. In this context, Israel's annexation of East

Jerusalem has never been recognized by the international
community as a whole.

My country, as an integral part of this international
community, recognizes the status established under
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council as the only
valid statusfor the occupied territories, including Jerusalem.
This position has been reiterated over the years and recently
in this very room, by several Foreign Ministers, including
that of my own country, during the debate which took place
last September. We consider East Jerusalem to be an
occupied territory; consequently, we deeply deplore the
approval by the Government of Israel of a plan to build
6,500 housing units in the Jabal Abu Ghneim/Heir Homa
sector, in the south of East Jerusalem. We believe that this
decisionvis not only in breach of international law, as
reflected by this Council's resolutions, but that it also
seriously endangers the precarious stability of the region.

Indeed, the decision to proceed with these
settlements touches the most sensitive nerve of the
Palestinian people. These are disputed lands and this
decision creates the justified perception of a policy of fait
accompli aimed at maintaining total control over
Jerusalem. Furthermore, this settlement virtually cuts off
communications between Bethlehem and other
surrounding Palestinian settlements.

The last thing Chile wants is for the Security
Council to have to meet regularly on Middle East issues.
What we want are negotiations and direct agreements
between the parties that would make it unnecessary to
hold such meetings, time and time again in the future.

For this reason, we appeal for calm and for the
parties to refrain from any act of violence that might
make matters even worse. Naturally, we also make a
special appeal to Israel to reconsider its decision. We
believe that the parties should do everything possible to
advance» dialogue in a framework of respect for
agreements reached and for' the special sensitivities in
connection with Jerusalem.

The peace process, which has already come along
way, should not be halted. It is necessary to reverse the
measure that has given rise to this latest dispute, and
Chile is prepared to support a Security Council draft
resolution in that connection.

Above all, it is necessary to restore the high-minded
spirit and the conviction that only dialogue and
negotiation, not unilateral actions, provide long-term
security for all. We must continue forward with the
process of implementing the peace agreements and secure
compliance with the resolutions of the Council on this
matter.

In conclusion, there are already too many standing
in the shadows and trying to block peace for other,
central actors to lose the spirit that made the first
agreement possible and thus weaken the spirit of Oslo.
Now is a time when political courage will once again
show the quality of leaders. Now is a time to dare to
write history, not to allow oneself to be carried away by
extreme positions of groups that, though they are
influential, are a minority. Chile trusts that good
judgement and common sense will prevail.
Security Councrl 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

