Ms. Cliffe: I am delighted and honoured to be
here. I thank the Nigerian presidency for having asked
us to participate in this meeting.

As many members of the Council will know, the
World Development Report on Conflict, Security and
Development has been developed in very close
cooperation with the United Nations. We have had the
benefit of expert input papers from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme and other funds and
programmes, and the benefits of an exchange just last
month with the General Assembly on some of the
preliminary conclusions of the Report.

I am particularly delighted that the subject of this
debate is prevention, since this is likely to be one of
the key messages of the World Development Report
(WDR). Prevention is one of our central messages for
two particular reasons.

First, countries that we consider to be post-
conflict are experiencing more renewed insecurity that
before, so the dividing line that we perhaps have
between the idea of post-conflict and the idea of
prevention situations is much less clear than we
previously thought. That ranges from renewed civil
war - by this decade over 90 per cent of new civil
wars have occurred in countries that had already had
civil wars - through fighting after political
agreements. Up until the late 19905, for example, peace
settlements roughly did the job that we expect them to
do, in that they prevented fighting after the settlement.
Less than five per cent of global battle deaths in that
period occurred in countries with peace settlements in
place.
From the late 1990s onward, that picture changes
quite a lot. Now, one third of battle deaths globally are
taking place in countries that have political settlements
or peace settlements in place, including some of the
countries that the Honourable Minister referred to,
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the

Sudan.

Then there are high levels of crime and violence
occurring after post-conflict settlements. For example,
there is the situation in the Central American countries,
where Guatemala or El Salvador achieved very
successful peace settlements but now face rates of
crime and violence that are causing more deaths than
occurred during their civil wars. That issue has been of
particular concern in Latin America. Of course this
debate focuses on Africa, but I think we see some of
the same trends starting to occur in other regions.

For all these reasons, prevention - even in
situations where a successful post-conflict initial
settlement has been achieved - is a very key
challenge.

New research that we have conducted for the
WDR indicates that the common element in those risks
of recurring violence is weak national institutions,
whether they be in the political, security or
developmental areas.

Secondly, there is the challenge of preventing an
escalation of violence in countries that have not
previously had large-scale civil conflict. Here, the
international donor community at present provides
much less assistance to countries seeking to prevent
violence than we do collectively to countries that have
already had civil war.

If we look at West Africa, for example, we have
committed large amounts of funds - again,
collectively as donors - to Liberia, Sierra Leone or
Cote d'Ivoire. But when we come to the transition
arrangements that the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations have helped to facilitate in Guinea or Niger,
we find that far fewer funds are available to help those
Governments and those societies try to consolidate
attempts to prevent escalation of conflict.

We term those transitions "preventative
transitions". In one of our recent consultation
meetings, President Johnson-Sirleaf - who is on the
Advisory Council for the World Development report -

underlined that, as she put it, "You guys give
everything to us after we have had a civil war, but
nothing to us when we are trying to prevent a civil
war." So that contrast will be one of the issues that we
underline.

I thought I would conclude by raising some
practical points or questions that are very much still in
our minds as we go into the last third of this process
that we have been conducting.

The first is the question raised as to whether we
should provide more support for mediation. Certainly -
as both the Deputy Secretary-General and the Minister
raised - the cost of a civil war that actually breaks out
is, as we know, enormous; it runs into the tens of
billions of dollars, on average. Countries take, on
average, 14 years to recover from civil wars to
anything like their earlier stage. Mediation efforts tend
to cost in the hundreds of thousands of dollars - a
much, much lower cost.

The second question is whether we should look at
longer periods of facilitation after peace agreements.
That was raised to us in our consultations. It is not
within the area that the World Bank supports, but it
was raised as a general point about the international
architecture, that mediators tend to leave immediately
after peace agreements are signed. In fact, countries
face predictable risks for longer periods after that,
often with very much less international facilitation. I
think in that sense the peacebuilding architecture and
the efforts made under the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund are also important.

The third question is whether we should look at
more financial support for Governments working
towards peaceful, preventative transitions. That is
exactly the question of countries that are currently in
the situation of Guinea or Niger, for example.

Fourth, is there an opportunity for a new
partnership between the United Nations, the African
Union and other regional organizations and the more
developmental or economic institutions such as the
international financial institutions? I think the question
to ask ourselves here is whether there is more that we
could do to try to provide the kind of economic
development activities that can help stabilize countries
entering a fragile, preventative transition.
I think there are also questions about whether
there is potential to link up the more specialized,

technical areas of the economic area agencies over
issues such as natural resources management or
wealth-sharing, which can be important issues in this
kind of situation.

Lastly, I would like to underline - as the
Minister and the Deputy Secretary-General also said -
that prevention is not an issue only for individual
nation-States. We have done quite a lot of new research
on the way in which violence is clustering along
insecure border areas and how violent movements are
mobile in areas like Central Africa or the Sahel. It is
very difficult for any single nation-State to take the
actions, even with international support, that would be
successful in truly resolving this sort of problem in the
long term. Another question that we have here, as we
finalize our own process, is whether we should be
looking at more structural prevention at a
multi-country or regional level, which includes
supporting initiatives such as the African Union's
border programme to bring stability and development
instruments into those most fragile areas.

I will conclude here, and I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to contribute to this
debate.

