The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Viet Nam.

I wish to join other Council members in thanking
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/454) and
Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing.

We would like to congratulate Nepal and its
people on the recent positive political developments
following the convening on 28 May of the Constituent
Assembly, especially the active engagement of major
Nepalese parties in political dialogues that resulted in
the Agreement reached on 25 June 2008 to take the
political process forward. In that connection, we call
on all parties concerned to make full use of this
momentum to advance the peace process in the
country, most immediately the presidential elections to
be held tomorrow.

Experience has shown that, besides threats to
social security as a legacy of war, countries emerging
from a prolonged civil conflict have to cope with
developmental challenges, damaged infrastructure and
weak institutional capacities. We share the common
understanding that there remain challenges to peace
and development in Nepal - for example, the building
of new governance institutions, not to mention the
recent rise in fuel prices, the food shortages and,
hence, the increasing poverty in the country.

Given those challenges and the multifaceted need
for Nepal to sustain its post-conflict endeavours, it is
necessary to take an integrated approach, which
requires not only political will and security measures,
but also social and economic development programmes
at all levels. The international community and donors
also have a very important role to play, in response to
the request of the Nepalese Government.

In that context, we welcome the efforts by the
United Nations country team to put in effect the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for Nepal
during the period 2008-2010, during the next phase of
which priority will be given to the successful
implementation of concrete development actions that
can bring about changes in the daily lives of the
Nepalese people.

We also would like to commend the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), its leader, Mr. Ian
Martin, and his staff for the work that it has done so far
within its mandate, especially the electoral monitoring
and technical assistance that it has provided to the
Election Commission, thus contributing significantly to
the success of Nepal's Constituent Assembly elections,
held in April.

In accordance with our position that, since
UNMIN was established at the request of the Nepalese
Government, any decision on its mandate should be
made with due consideration of Nepal's proposal, we
therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendation, based on the letter dated 8 July 2008
from the Nepalese Mission, to extend UNMIN's
mandate for six months as a special political Mission
focused on monitoring arms and armed personnel, in
order to complete the peace process in Nepal. We take
this opportunity to thank the United Kingdom mission
for preparing the draft resolution on UNMIN's
mandate, and we look forward to its timely adoption.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Viet Nam's
unswerving support for peace and development in
Nepal. We are strongly convinced that, with their
ownership and self-determination, the authorities and
the people of Nepal will continue to accomplish further
achievements in consolidating peace and promoting
socio-economic growth throughout the country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Nepal.

