Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Today's
vote is taking place a year and a half after the crisis with
Iraq began in summer 1998 with Baghdad's refusal to
cooperate with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM), and with the subsequent sudden departure of
UNSCOM. and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) without consultation with the Council, and the
ensuing events.

The draft resolution before us acknowledges the
difficulties encountered in the implementation of resolution
687 (1991): the disarmament demands could not be fully
met; the prospects of the early lifting of sanctions were no
longer credible; and UN SCOM. no longer offered all the
necessary guarantees.
Hence France's January 1999 observation that the
restoration of security and stability was the top priority:
the Security Council should look to the future in order to
prevent the arming of Iraq, and should to that end ensure
the long-term presence on the ground of professional
inspectors to help guarantee the security of all the States
of the region. In the shorter term, it was also necessary to
ensure that the sanctions targeted only prohibited weapons
and materiel, and that they stopped punishing the Iraqi
population, the humanitarian situation of which, as
everyone is aware, is deteriorating daily.

The Council heard that message, and early in 1999
agreed that the relationship between Iraq and the United
Nations needed to be set on a new footing. The
establishment of expert panels, on the apt initiative of
Canada, made it possible to begin a pragmatic and
impartial approach. I wish here to pay tribute to the
Chairman of the panels, Ambassador Celso Amorim,
whose recommendations made a considerable contribution
to the preparation of today's draft resolution. For our part,
we would have wished that those recommendations could
have been adopted in full and implemented by the
Secretary-General in April 1999.

The present text combines successive drafts of
various origins; through the work resumed in September
by a number of delegations, it has been considerably
modified.

The Council agreed unanimously to call on Iraq to
cooperate on the matter of Kuwaiti missing persons and
property. As a member of the Tripartite Commission,
France intends in this regard to fulfil its responsibility to
ensure that this matter is finally settled and to make it
possible to establish new relations between Iraq and
Kuwait.

Moreover, the draft resolution would immediately
make improvements to resolution 986 (1995). The
elimination of the oil ceiling is a good example of this.
We thank the United Kingdom for having in recent weeks
incorporated a number of French suggestions, which most
often drew on the conclusions of the Amorim panels.
These include notification to the Secretariat of contracts
involving items related to food, health, agriculture and
education; approval of contracts for petroleum-related
spare parts by independent experts; an increased quota for

 

such spare parts; and suspension of resolution 986 (1995)
when the sanctions themselves are suspended.

But two matters are regrettable: the refusal to break
the isolation of the Iraqi population and in that connection
to permit the resumption of civil aviation; and the lack of
a real exception to the sanctions for religious activities such
as the haj and the omra pilgrimages, because everything
remains in the hands of the sanctions Committee, which
itself is subject to a veto by any country.

The new United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) will be very different
from UN SCOM, and that is a good thing. The new
Commission will follow the principles of professionalism,
collegiality and universality. Those principles should
guarantee its independence from all Member States and
ensure that, like the IAEA and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, it enjoys the respect of
all, including Iraq. The Commission will have the same
powers and duties as its predecessor, including the duty to
abide by the Memorandum of Understanding of February
1998. But its behaviour, its methods, its organization and its
composition will have been reformed in depth.

The use of force to bring about the return of the
inspectors is neither desirable nor practicable, as shown by
the experience of December 1998. The draft resolution
therefore had to include a mechanism for realistic
incentives for the Iraqi authorities; this lies in the
suspension, then the lifting, of sanctions. The impact of
those sanctions, which have been of dubious effectiveness,
falls first on the people of Iraq. It is they who daily pay the
price for them. The Security Council, which has a choice
of means to impose its policies, cannot completely shirk its
responsibility in the face of what has been called a genuine
humanitarian disaster. Hence the fact that members of the
Council have finally agreed on the simple and realistic idea
that if cooperation with Iraq were to resume in a manner
that we all hope would be satisfactory, the sanctions would
be suspended. That means relief for the Iraqi people and an
incentive for the Iraqi authorities to cooperate.

This mechanism for suspension is linked, as France
had proposed, to solid guarantees. The suspension can be
extended only through another positive decision of the
Council, while arms continue to be prohibited, naturally,
and dual-use goods continue to be subject to advance
monitoring. If Iraq does not cooperate, the sanctions will
automatically be restored.

This draft resolution entails, however, one unknown
factor and, above all, one ambiguous element that should
have been resolved. The unknown factor stems from the
fact that the details for the financial mechanism have not
yet been specified. Iraq has been called upon to accept
the return of the inspectors without knowing what
arrangement will exist in the period after suspension. In
future work on the issue, therefore, we will insist that
monitoring be based on the reasonable proposals that our
country formulated in writing at the end of July of this
year. Resolution 986 (1995) must be suspended, and
different modalities must be worked out to allow for
freedom of trade and of civilian activity in conjunction
with the retention of prohibitions on arms and dual-use
goods.

But above all, and herein lies the ambiguity, the
criteria for the suspension and then the lifting of sanctions
gives rise to difficulties of interpretation. The analyses of
members of the Council diverge. Paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution means to us that once the work programme is
completed, then it will be possible not to suspend the
sanctions, but to lift them outright. Suspension, a partial
and interim measure, is in accordance with the spirit of
paragraph 21 of resolution 687 (1991) and must, as we
see it, come into play once progress is reported in the
implementation of the programme and not be held up
until the work programme is completed. Such progress, in
keeping with paragraph 34 of the draft resolution, must be
the criterion for cooperation; and cooperation, in keeping
with paragraph 33, is itself the criterion for suspension. A
different interpretation of the text makes any suspension
of the sanctions very uncertain. It is self-evident that one
can not make the suspension - a partial and interim
measure - contingent on conditions imposed for the
lifting of sanctions. The very essence of the Council's
proposal is here at issue.

It seems to us, then, that this text should have been
clarified, especially with respect to the criterion for
suspension; in this way it would have better reflected the
views of all the members of the Council. We praise the
efforts undertaken to this end over recent weeks,
especially by you, Mr. President, and by the United
Kingdom. We have done our part in this common
endeavour, proposing a number of formulations in the
hope of garnering a consensus. Why this insistence on
consensus? Because unanimity will be indispensable for
the effective implementation of this draft resolution.
Indeed, the Council will have to approve without a veto
the appointment of the new Chairman, approve without a
veto the organization of the Commission and approve

 

without a veto the list of the key tasks. If the interpretations
of the text diverge, how will the Chairman of the new
Commission be able to carry out his mandate, and how will
the Council, for its part, be able to reach a decision as to
when sanctions should be suspended?

One last, justified, attempt to secure agreement
therefore made sense. It would have sufficed to make some
modifications, to clarify the meaning of paragraph 7 and to
specify that progress is the criterion for cooperation.
Notwithstanding that last and, I repeat, justified effort, a
consensus was not achieved. The draft resolution therefore
remains imperfect. It falls short of the hopes we had in
January. That is why France will abstain. The text,
however, is also the only way open to us today, in the light
of the views expressed by the majority of the members of
the Council. That is why, our abstention notwithstanding,
we will plead for wisdom to prevail in the interpretation of
paragraphs 33 and 34 so that a reasonable financial
mechanism can be adopted, and so that everyone will act
realistically and in good faith in order to get the best out of
the resolution.

Therefore, we must even now start thinking about the
future, about what is to come after the resolution. The
Council is going to decide. We will have to convince Iraq
to abide by that decision and to muster its goodwill towards
that end. We will have to consider the roles that the
Member States, individually and collectively, as well as the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, will be able to
play in this regard. France, for its part, will spare no effort.
We hope that the much-desired resumption of dialogue
between the United Nations and Iraq will also make it
possible to dispel the uncertainties of the resolution. We
shall be vigilant in the interpretation and implementation of
this text.

If, as we hope, within the Council there emerges the
willingness to work towards consensus so as to clearly and
realistically apply the guidelines set forth in this draft
resolution, France will fully and unreservedly participate in
that undertaking.

