Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Needless to say,
South Africa shares the sentiments expressed by the
representatives of Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea
on the situation in Libya. In addition, I would like
to welcome and thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his
enlightening briefing, and I also thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Germany, Ambassador
Schulz, for his comprehensive update on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

At the outset, I wish to express my delegation's
concern with the continued air strikes and
indiscriminate artillery use in densely populated areas
in Libya, which has resulted in the loss of lives and
further exacerbated the already dire situation in the
affected areas. We therefore urge the parties to agree to
an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to end the
military confrontation.

Following the unfortunate attacks on the Tajoura
migration detention centre earlier this month, the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council called
for an independent investigation into the attacks, which
South Africa firmly supports. In that regard, we look
forward to the outcome of the investigation with a view
to bringing the perpetrators of those atrocious acts
to justice.

The worsening humanitarian situation remains
the central concern for South Africa. In that regard,
we urge the international community to continue to
contribute towards the United Nations humanitarian
response plan to assist those in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance.

South Africa wishes to express its concern that the
longer the crisis continues the greater the humanitarian
and development challenges that are faced by the Libyan
people and the region as a whole. Those consequences
include the proliferation of terrorist groups, which are
gaining ground, the illegal smuggling and use of arms,
trafficking and transnational organized crime.

On the political process, I extend my delegation's
gratitude to Special Representative Salame and express
full support for his continued efforts aimed at taking
forward the two-track mediation process in order to
engage with the stakeholders in Libya, as we were
informed would be the case in Mr. Salame's previous
briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.8530).
However, we deeply regret the political stalemate
highlighted in his briefing today. South Africa is of the
firm belief that the peaceful resolution of the conflict
should remain the Council's highest priority in terms
of the efforts it is undertaking in Libya. For close to
a decade now, we have been witnessing the effects of
armed conflict and military interventionist policies.
The Council should draw a lesson from this situation.
Military solutions might appear to have short-term
benefits, but they often do not lead to the long-lasting
peace that is needed.

It is of concern that both sides have not agreed
to resume the political process. It is South Africa's
belief that compromise from both sides is critical for
the de-escalation of tensions, to pave the way for the
political process to resume as soon as possible.

It will also be crucial for Libya to decide on a
new date for the national conference, as its indefinite
postponement does not inspire trust and confidence
in the process. In that regard, we urge the parties to
resume the political process and create an environment
conducive for the national conference to take place.
We wish to take this opportunity to remind the parties
that the national conference must be led by the Libyans
themselves, with the support of the United Nations, the
African Union, neighbouring countries and the broader
international community, which we believe will lead
Libya on a positive trajectory.

We would like to emphasize the central role of
the African Union, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, in working closely with
countries of the region to find a durable solution to the
political stalemate in Libya. In that context, we echo
the views of the African Union Peace and Security
Council at its 857th meeting, held this month, that all
partners involved in the political process of finding
a sustainable settlement to the crisis in Libya should
endeavour to complement the efforts of the AU.

With respect to sanctions, South Africa wishes to
reiterate its position on the importance of sanctions as a
useful tool for advancing a political process. Sanctions
are not an end in themselves and should not be politicized
in any way to advance a particular agenda. The renewal
of the Libya sanctions regime in June this year in
resolution 2473 (2019) demonstrates the Council's
recognition of the importance of the sanctions regime
and the positive impact it will have on the political
process in Libya. However, we are concerned about the
reports received from the Panel of Experts with respect
to the lack of effective implementation of the Libya
sanctions measures, which is indicative of the continued
involvement of external actors in Libya and will serve
only to prolong the armed conflict and hostilities. It is
imperative for Member States to meet their obligations
in that regard, especially those represented at this table.

We are also particularly concerned about the
continued violations of the arms embargo, which are
counterproductive to the political process and also
fuel the conflict in Libya. Accordingly, we urge the
perpetrators to refrain from such practices, which
continue to undermine any prospects for progress in
finding a solution to the conflict.

In conclusion, we wish to emphasize the importance
of both sides to the conflict committing to a ceasefire
and resuming the political process, which in our view
will pave the way for the national conference led by the
Libyans themselves. It is crucial for that process to be
inclusive of all members of society, including women
and youth, to ensure that no one is left behind in the
implementation of the collective decisions taken at the
national conference.

South Africa and the three African States members
of the Security Council will propose that the Libyan
crisis be discussed in October by both the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council during
the former's visit to Addis Ababa under the South
African presidency of the Council.

