Mrs. Samarasinghe (Sri Lanka): It is important to
recognize that social, economic and political conditions
at the community and national levels could have
profound and widely divergent effects on the world
stage, impacting international peace and security.

The recent attacks in Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday
demonstrate how effectively the global can be localized
and the local, globalized. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-inspired domestic terrorists responsible

for those attacks - some of them foreign-educated
and hailing from affluent, politically influential
families - were radicalized abroad and through

social media. For Sri Lanka, with its multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multi-religious composition, and
following a decade of peace during which we have
forged ahead towards reconciliation, transitional justice
and economic development, the Easter Sunday attacks
were particularly devastating.

In today's intensely globalized world, extremism is
digitized and those who have lost territory elsewhere
are seeking new pressure points to ignite. Conflict
and violence in one nation may tear apart societies in
other nations and create schisms in the rich mosaic of
our collective civilizations. It is therefore vital that the
international community join forces in renewing our
efforts in that regard and help to establish restorative
frameworks at the community and national levels,
leading to genuine reconciliation and sustained peace.
In doing so, it must be recognized that reconciliation
mechanisms and transitional justice initiatives cannot
be imposed on nations by external forces.

National reconciliation efforts must also be
based on meaningful public participation, including
that of Government, national legal professionals,
women, minorities, affected groups and civil society.
Without public awareness, consultations and education
campaigns, national reform efforts will remain
vulnerable and weak. In that regard, the United
Nations could play an important role in facilitating
these processes and assisting with capacity-building
and non-conditional funding through its peacebuilding
architecture in order to build community resilience at
the grass-roots level.

Having experienced for nearly 30 years a brutal
onslaught of terrorism, Sri Lanka is conscious of the
value of a nation built on the principles of democracy
and the rule of law. To that end, Sri Lanka has already
taken several steps to rebuild its democratic institutions
and create a framework for reconciliation, under which
the Office on Missing Persons and the Office for
Reparations have already been operationalized and the
Right to Information Act passed into law, as part of
those efforts to strengthen institutions and frameworks.
Furthermore, given Sri Lanka's multi-religious culture,
the country has sought to encourage interfaith dialogue
and harness religious leaders to act as early warning
systems so that the Government may be alerted to
radical behavioural patterns in a timely manner.

Above all, national ownership and leadership are
needed ifthe parties to a conflict and society as a whole
are to work towards reconciliation and sustained peace.

Finally, it is important to acknowledge the United
Nations field missions, which work closely with national
stakeholders and local communities, in accordance
with mission mandates. Their importance to the overall
United Nations peace and security architecture cannot
be overstated, especially at a time when the United
Nations and multilateralism in general are facing
multiple threats and challenges that are testing our
collective ability to respond. It is therefore important
that field missions enhance cooperation with host
Governments in order to cement national ownership.

