Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation for the briefing by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, on the tragic
humanitarian situation in Syria.

We commend and appreciate the efforts made by
the United Nations, under the leadership of the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and his
colleagues in the field, to supply food, fuel and potable
water to areas in need in Syria, as well as his efforts to
organize the evacuation of civilians. We also support
the humanitarian efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
United Nations agencies working on behalf of the
Syrian people. At the same time, we are of the View that
humanitarian assistance should not be politicized, as the
lives of hundreds of thousands of Syrians, especially
children, depend on the timely delivery of humanitarian
aid by parties engaged in the humanitarian sector. We
ask the guarantors of the ceasefire - Russia, Turkey
and Iran - to continue their important work towards
reconciling the conflicting parties. It is gratifying to
know that the number of settlements that have joined
the reconciliation process has increased to 1,500. We
welcome that process.

Kazakhstan believes that the war cannot be
considered over until the last mine is cleared.
We therefore support Russia's appeal to create an
international coalition to demine Syrian territory. My
delegation also considers that it would be expedient to
establish a fund to finance the specialized commercial
companies that would carry out such work. We
strongly condemn attacks on schools, hospitals and
other medical facilities, which only worsen an already
difficult humanitarian situation in the country. We
call on the parties to the Syrian conflict to comply
with international humanitarian law and refrain from
actions aimed at destroying civilian infrastructure,
water-supply facilities and medical and educational
institutions.

Kazakhstan wishes to draw the attention of the
Council to the trend of mass forced resettlement
of civilians, which often happens on a false basis of
compassion. Such practices can result in artificial
changes to the population's composition, aggravating
interreligious differences among citizens, and can
threaten Syria's territorial integrity, according to the
Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), which is the basis for the possibility of achieving
a political agreement as soon as possible.

Kazakhstan is concerned about the fate of detainees
being held in Syrian prisons. We call on the Syrian
Government to allow United Nations representatives to
investigate the allegations ofviolence against prisoners,
including those in the Saydnaya prison. We share the
view that there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict and that it will be essential to settle it through
political means in the spirit ofthe negotiating processes
in Geneva and Astana. We urge the parties to the
conflict and the guarantors to observe the provisions of
the 6 May memorandum on establishing de-escalation
zones in Syria. We believe that the memorandum can
help to advance a political settlement. While we have
been informed that the cessation of hostilities between
Government forces and the armed opposition groups
that have already joined the ceasefire regime is visible
within the boundaries of the de-escalation zones, no
initiative aimed at establishing peace in the conflict
zones can be successful or effective without the
Security Council's support.

In Syria, time is precious and counted in human
lives. Procrastination means death for countless
innocent citizens, particularly children. The Security
Council has a special duty to end the bloodshed there,
but for more than six years it has been unable to agree
on measures to contain this brutal civil war, which
has seriously affected not just the lives of millions of
peaceful Syrians but the entire region. We need unity to
achieve success, and we should strive for that.

