Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to take the floor on the occasion
of the adoption of resolution 2480 (2019), which is
extremely important for Mali. I warmly congratulate
the delegation of Kuwait, under the excellent leadership
of Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, on a successful
presidency of the Security Council.

Mali welcomes the unanimous adoption of this
extremely important resolution renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for an
additional year. I would like to commend the leadership
of the French delegation, penholder of the resolution, as
well as every member of the Council for their positive
contributions and their spirit of compromise, which led
to this result.

I would like to pay special tribute to Ambassador
Francois Delattre for his kindness, his leadership, his
heightened ability to listen and his willingness, as well
as his constant support for Mali and the countries of
the Sahel. He chose to devote his last appearance in
the Council to Mali. Mali is grateful for that, and I am
particularly so. We are very honoured to see him here
in the Council, and I wish him a good return to Paris
and every success at the Quai d'Orsay. He leaves behind
in New York only friends. I reiterate my invitation:
the Malian residence is always large enough to host a
true friend.

Mali understands the significance of the important
resolution that the Council has just unanimously
adopted. I know that, in addition to renewing the
mandate of MINUSMA for an additional year, the
Council also reaffirms the support and commitment of
the international community to Mali and its people in
order to help us to restore lasting peace and stability,
with full respect for the sovereignty, national unity,
territorial integrity and unitary and secular character
of the State of Mali.

Before going any further, I would therefore like
to convey to the members of the Council the warm
thanks of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
President of the Republic of Mali, the Government
and all the people of Mali for the extremely important
resolution that they have just adopted. I would like
to express my gratitude to our Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and to all the men and women of
MINUSMA, who, I know, work every day in extremely
difficult conditions to help the Malian people to bring
about peace.

I have taken due note of all the comments and
high expectations that Council members have just
expressed, and I promise to faithfully bring them to
the attention of my authorities. For our part, I would
first like to assure the Council that the Government,
under the authority and leadership of the President
of the Republic, will tirelessly continue to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process, in an inclusive
manner, in particular with the active participation
of the signatory movements. The Malian parties are
already working on a new road map, which includes
realistic and achievable tasks and timelines that are in
line with the benchmarks contained in the resolution
just adopted.

Turning to the situation in central Mali, Foreign
Minister Tie'bile' Drame' was here on 12 June
(see S/PV.8547). He informed the Council of the
developments in the situation in Mali and announced
a series of measures taken by the Government for
the long-term settlement of the critical situation in
the central region of Mali, including in particular the
political framework for crisis management in central
Mali, aimed at a holistic response combining the
political and the military and security approaches.

In addition to those measures, the President of the
Republic appointed Dioncounda Traore, former interim
President of Mali, as the High Representative of the
Centre, with a view towards unifying all measures
taken by the State to achieve a rapid and lasting return
to peace and stability in that part of our country.

In parallel with those measures, as part of the
efforts to find a comprehensive solution to the crisis in
Mali, the process of organizing the inclusive political
dialogue, called for by the Head of State, has entered
its operational phase, with the 26 June appointment
of eminent Malian persons who have been entrusted
with leading the national dialogue and the anticipated
political and institutional reforms to that end.

With regard to resolution 2480 (2019), which the
Council just adopted, the Government of Mali welcomes
the fact that the Security Council first, granted its
request that MINUSMA continue to accord strategic
priority to its mandate in support of the implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali, which emerged from the Algiers process; and,
secondly, MINUSMA's second strategic priority be
to support Mali and its armed and security forces,
with a view to ensuring the lasting stabilization of the
situation in the central regions of Mali. In that regard,
I welcome the establishment of the dedicated military
sector in central Mali a few days ago. With regard to
regional considerations, I welcome the decision to
extend the benefits of the technical agreement to all
deployment areas of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.

The mandate that the Council has just conferred
upon MINUSMA requires the provision of adequate
material, financial and human resources for its
implementation. I know that deliberations are under way
in the Fifth Committee today to mobilize the relevant
resources. I would like to make a political appeal. It is
one thing to confer the mandate upon MINUSMA, and
it is another to provide MINUSMA with the adequate
means to realize it. On behalf of the Government of
Mali, I therefore call for the provision of the resources
needed for MINUSMA to fulfil its mandate. In that
regard, we hope that the report of the Secretary-
General expected to be issued in six months' time will
help to raise the level of resources commensurate with
the mandate and challenges on the ground.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Mali, I once again pay tribute to the memory
of all civilian, military, foreign and Malian victims who
fell on the field of honour in Mali.

