Mr. Annabi: I think that the first question that was
also asked by other Council members related to the slow
disbursement of funds from the trust fund. I think that we
all agree that the disbursement is much slower than we
would all like it to be. The Special Representative has
himself voiced his frustration about this and even
mentioned to the press that he wished he had a magic wand
for turning donor pledges into instant public-works projects.
But you need partners, and these things we know take time.
You, Sir, mentioned the community-empowerment project
of the World Bank. The agreement for this project was only
signed at the end of February. So we hope that it will now
be implemented promptly. But all of these things we know
take time.

The other aspect that is important to keep in mind is
that - in View of the level and extent of destruction in the
country; in View of the fact that a great number, if not the
vast majority, of skilled workers left following the tragic
events of last year - rehabilitation, reconstruction and
capacity-building is going to be a rather difficult process,
certainly one that will be slower than we would all like it
to be.

Finally, the UNTAET trust fund is itself of course
dedicated to paying mainly - not only, but in large part -
for recurrent costs; in other words, for East Timorese civil
servants, who are now being recruited. As I mentioned, a
total of 2,500 of them are now working and being paid.
That number should grow to 7,000 in the course of this
year. And as the civil service grows, that will help to
accelerate the disbursement of funds in that regard.

I have also mentioned the start of Quick Impact
Projects. Again, partners are being identified to develop
additional Quick Impact Projects, and as those come on
line, I hope that the disbursement process will accelerate.
I must mention in this regard that the Controller has been
supportive in terms of facilitating the utilization of the
funds. As projects are identified and can be initiated, the
funds will be disbursed.

There were several questions regarding the return of
refugees. The rough estimate at this time is that there are
about 100,000 left. UNHCR is currently carrying out a
census, which is almost complete. I expect, from what my
UNHCR colleagues tell me, that the census will confirm
that about half of these 100,000 - namely about
50,000 - wish to return to East Timor.

UNHCR and UNTAET also believe that of course
there will have to be flexibility regarding these end-of-
March deadlines. There will have to be flexibility for
those who will need to go back to East Timor. The recent
flow has not been very strong because there are a number
of concerns which are still out there among those who
may wish to return. These include concerns about
possible pensions, which are being discussed by UNTAET
with the authorities in Jakarta, and perhaps potential
returnees have apprehensions as to how they might be
treated. I think that some of the cross-border visits that
have taken place will facilitate this process. But there will
also have to be flexibility, I think, regarding the
resettlement of those who do not wish to come back to
East Timor and will have to be resettled either in West
Timor or in other parts of Indonesia. The focus, we feel,
should of course be on giving an opportunity to all of
these people to determine freely where they want to go
and settle and rebuild their lives.

Questions have been raised regarding the
commitment of the Indonesian authorities to facilitating
the return of the refugees. I think it is very clear in
UNTAET's mind and in our mind that the Government of
President Wahid is genuine in its assurances and in its
desire to cooperate to resolve these problems. There are,
however, as I indicated, elements of the Indonesia armed
forces (TNI) on the ground who continue to stand in the
way of the implementation of these assurances and who
may have their own agenda or may be attempting to

 

embarrass or create difficulties for the President. But we
have no doubt that the President of Indonesia and the
Government of Indonesia are determined to cooperate in
resolving this problem. It is a question of translating these
commitments into action on the ground and convincing
those on the ground who are still opposed to the resolution
of this problem to cooperate or, somehow, having them
removed.

Did the returns accelerate? I think the answer is that
they have not accelerated recently. There is a continuing
trickle, but we have not seen any recent acceleration.

There was a question about the National Consultative
Council - whether it meets regularly and how it functions.
I think it has been a very useful mechanism for the Special
Representative, enabling him to consult the East
Timorese - not only the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT), which is itself an umbrella organization
and includes a number of different parties, but also some of
the pro-autonomy groups that have joined the National
Consultative Council.

The Council meets on a regular basis and it is
consulted systematically by the Special Representative on
all the regulations and all the important initiatives that
UNTAET takes. It is consulted on the recruitment of civil
servants. Mr. Vieira de Mello has rightly made it clear from
the outset that our mandate is to set up an interim
administration, but that this must be done for the Timorese
and in cooperation with them, since our mandate is to help
them prepare for and achieve independence. So the
mechanism of the National Consultative Council has been
extremely useful in maintaining close consultation and
cooperation with all the Timorese.

As I said, two of the three pro-autonomy groups have
joined the National Consultative Council. One of them still
has not. It has agreed to do so in principle, but that raises
some sensitive issues, which are still being discussed, as to
who the actual representatives might be.

What are the prospects for income generation and the
long-term development prospects for East Timor? I think
we have to admit that it is a little early in this exercise to
be able to make precise forecasts. It is going to be a slow
and difficult process - let us not hide from that reality.
The level of destruction has been such that reconstruction,
both physically and in terms of capacity-building and the
training of cadres and competent civil servants, will be a
long-term process. It is not something that UNTAET as
such has the resources or capacity to resolve. It requires the
long-term, continuing commitment of the international
community, which is, of course, investing a lot in
UNTAET, but which must sustain that investment to
enable East Timor to become independent and engage in
a self-sustaining development process in the long term.
On the issue of joint observation at the border, a
mechanism is, in fact, in place. I observed it myself,
when I was there at the end of last year. We have
military liaison officers who are located on the other side
of the border, in West Timor, with their counterparts from
the various TNI units, to facilitate liaison and cooperation
between them and UNTAET and to avoid incidents or
resolve incidents where they occur. There are, of course,
continuing meetings between the Force Commander and
his staff and General Syahnakri, who is the Indonesian
Major-General in charge of that area. The last such
meeting was held on 15 March, at which they discussed
the possible updating of the memorandum on border
cooperation arrangements to help resolve some of the
problems there.

As regards the future of the Armed Forces for the
National Liberation of East Timor (Falintil), this is again
a rather sensitive issue for the Timorese, and for the
Falintil members themselves, who have certain views
about what they believe they have done on behalf of East
Timor. Consultations have begun between the Special
Representative and the CNRT on this. As the Council
knows, their numbers are not all that big - there are
somewhere between 800 and 1,000 of them. Some of
them, we are quite sure, will want to return to civilian
life; others could possibly join the future police or
security forces. These are some of the issues that are
being discussed. We have all said that we hope that East
Timor will decide not to have an army, but, in addition to
a police force, it may need a gendarmerie-type security
force, or some other force of that kind, to ensure security
in the territory.

How can we convince the diaspora to return and join
the rehabilitation and reconstruction process in East
Timor? This is an issue that is also being discussed with
the East Timorese, to encourage them to return. This was
raised in Jakarta by the Special Representative, and he
has received assurances that some of the East Timorese
who have been studying at Indonesian universities would
be allowed or encouraged to come back if they so wished,
to join in the development process. I understand, too, that
the International Organization for Migration is
implementing a programme to encourage the return of
possibly up to 300 East Timorese from the diaspora, who

 

would take up professional positions in East Timor. Of
course, we must also remember that those who have been
living abroad may be living comfortably and may not be
entirely happy with the level of remuneration that can be
offered under present conditions in East Timor. This is
certainly an issue on which we should all try to move
forward.

What efforts can be made to create a private sector?
Again, I think this is something that will take time. It is
linked to the overall process of reconstruction, which, as I
said, is starting from a very low point, since just about
everything has been destroyed - it is amazing to see. This
will involve generating a capacity and the development of
private entrepreneurs. It, too, is something that will take
time and is linked to the overall reconstruction process.

What has the attitude of the East Timorese leadership
been? I think that I can say, on behalf of the Special
Representative, that he is very gratified by the cooperation
that has been extended by the East Timorese leadership. He
has made a point of working very closely with them, and
I think that the level of cooperation has been very good,
even if there is frustration, in the sense that they would like
the daily lives of their fellow citizens in East Timor to
improve more quickly than is actually possible. But I think
that generally the cooperation has been very good.

There are a few more questions to answer. Is the force
strength of UNTAET too strong? Does UNTAET have too
many troops? I do not think so at this point. As I said, we
have 7,300 troops deployed right now. In fact, UNTAET
would like to receive the additional assets that are missing,
especially in view of the concerns that have developed
recently in the light of some of the border
incidents. But I can assure members of the Council that
once UNTAET is fully deployed, and once the security
situation improves, the Secretary-General will not wait
very long before he comes back to the Council and
suggests a reduction in troop strength as soon as it is
doable or feasible from a security point of view.

On the round-table on national reconciliation, yes,
there was recently a meeting in Singapore that I think
made a good, but perhaps slow, beginning at national
reconciliation between various East Timorese groups. This
is an ongoing process that can also be encouraged by
some of the cross-border visits that are taking place.

Can we speed up the deployment of police? I think
it has picked up quite well recently. We will have close
to 1,000 by the end of this week, out of a total authorized
strength of 1,640. We have more offers than we actually
need. In other words, we have over 1,640 offers. We have
identified the second special police unit, so it is a
question of actually making the arrangements and getting
the signal from the countries concerned that these troops
have been trained and are ready to move and, of course,
ensuring that they can be accommodated properly when
they arrive and that they have the wherewithal to
function. But we expect that within the next two months
we will be fairly close to the full deployment of the
police component.

I think that just about covers it.

