Mr. Ritter added:

"We should reformulate that mandate to qualitative
disarmament. Does Iraq have chemical weapons
today? No. Does Iraq today have long-range ballistic
missiles today? No. Nuclear? No. Biological? No. Is
Iraq qualitatively disarmed? Yes."

That testimony by a senior UNSCOM. inspector who
undertook both inspection and espionage in Iraq, a person
fully knowledgeable about the ethos of former Iraqi
programmes, is sufficient to make clear to Security Council
members and the international community that what ought
to be looked into now is lifting the sanctions imposed on
Iraq, not to replace or suspend them with unjust conditions.
Sanctions kill 7,000 Iraqi children a month. Sanctions are
destroying the fabric of an entire society. The sanctions
and the organized destruction undertaken by the United
States and the United Kingdom against Iraqi civilian
establishments through continuing acts of aggression and
no-fly-zones and the environmental and health catastrophe
resulting from the use of depleted uranium against Iraq
during the Gulf War are all elements of the gravest crime
against mankind in the modern times. This crime must
cease immediately.

Let me take this opportunity to make an appeal to all
the countries of the world. Sanctions against Iraq were
imposed by members, in accordance with paragraph 1 of
Article 24 of the Charter, through which you authorized
the Security Council to act on your behalf. You have a
legal and moral duty to take this authority away from the
Security Council because it has used its authority to
perpetrate a crime of genocide. Whoever of you does so
will absolve himself of the responsibility of having a hand
in the genocide of an entire people. You will thus help in
maintaining the credibility of the United Nations in
accordance with the Charter. This may also help the
United States to become fully aware of its crimes, take
the correct road in international relations and respect the
United Nations Charter.

Nations and States throughout the world have begun
to heed our appeal, as reflected in a recent letter by
Russian parliamentarians addressed to the President of the
Security Council. Moreover, members of the European
Parliament have called for the immediate lifting of the
sanctions imposed against Iraq. I do not believe that
anyone in the world can today justify their immoral
silence in the face of this crime by claiming that they see
no evil or hear no evil.

That is our message to the Security Council, and we
hope and trust that the Council will respond to it.

