Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me begin by
welcoming His Excellency Prime Minister Jose
Ramos-Horta of Timor-Leste to the Chamber. His
statement provided us with an insightful account of the
situation in his country and of the wishes and
expectations of the Government and its people.

My delegation appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General and wishes to warmly congratulate
Mr. Atul Khare for his appointment as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to Timor-Leste
and head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We thank him for his
informative presentation.

As Timor-Leste's closest neighbour, Indonesia
continues to enjoy an excellent level of bilateral
relations with that country. We follow closely the
developments there and hold regular consultations with
our Timorese counterparts at various levels. These
include the meeting between President Xanana Gusmao
and President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in Jakarta
on 18 December 2006, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report.

We commend the efforts made by the leaders of
Timor-Leste in promoting political and communal
reconciliation with a view to addressing the underlying
causes of the political crisis of April and May last year.
It is our hope that political and other leaders of Timor-
Leste put their national interests first and engage in
good-faith dialogue, setting aside their differences and
promoting common goals in order to create favourable
conditions for the forthcoming presidential and
parliamentary elections.

We welcome the significant improvement of the
security situation in the country, as attested to in the
report before us, which observes that although the
overall security situation has tended to remain volatile,
there have been longer periods of calm and fewer
outbreaks of violence.

Indonesia continues to deepen and expand its
bilateral cooperation with Timor-Leste. In addition to
our bilateral joint commission meetings, which take
place on regular basis, Indonesia, together with
Australia and Timor-Leste, has also established a
regular trilateral ministerial meeting as an avenue
through which we can explore meaningful cooperation
in supporting development in Timor-Leste. The last
meeting was held in Dili on 4 September 2006, and we
agreed to embark on various undertakings.

In the regional context, it is worth noting that the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), at
its summit in Cebu last month, decided to include
Timor-Leste in the functional cooperation of ASEAN.
In a spirit of partnership, Indonesia has expressed its
readiness to assist. We are pleased to announce the
appointment of an experienced Indonesian ambassador
as senior adviser to facilitate Timor-Leste's
participation in ASEAN activities. Upon the invitation
of Timor-Leste, he will hold consultations with the
Government of Timor-Leste this month.

The process of nation-building and reconciliation
is a highly complex and sensitive matter. Therefore the
United Nations and the international community should
continue to play a constructive and nurturing role in
assisting Timor-Leste to navigate its way through this
important challenge. With particular reference to
UNMIT, my delegation is of the view that one of its
priorities should be to assist with and ensure the
credibility of the forthcoming elections in Timor-Leste.
The Mission should devote adequate resources to help
in every aspect of the preparation for and conduct of
the elections and to ensure they will take place in a
democratic and peaceful manner.

We agree that successful elections are only one
element of building a democratic State. In the context
of the complex and delicate situation in Timor-Leste,
the achievement of the forthcoming elections should go
far beyond the election of the President and members
of parliament; they should provide momentum for the
return of this new nation to the path of stability and
development. Durable peace and stability in Timor-
Leste will be achieved only when the country's
development challenges are addressed
comprehensively. It is the responsibility of the
international community to help ensure that this
opportunity does not slip by.
In this regard, we note with interest the
"compact" process between Timor-Leste and the
international community, which entails a reorientation
of the existing national development plan and external
financing, as required, to deal with the 2006 crisis in
the country and its causes. We support the integrated
approach that UNMIT has embarked upon, and its
collaboration and facilitation role with agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations towards
focusing on the compact priorities. We are confident of
the strong and dynamic leadership of the Secretary-
General's new Special Representative in conveying a
sense of vision and dynamism to all the stakeholders in
Timor-Leste and the international community.

Finally, we believe that the policy lines followed
by the Security Council in the past few years should
continue, namely to promote as much as possible the
self-reliance and ownership of the Government and
people of Timor-Leste and encourage broad-based
partnership with various actors for sustainable
development. It is in this regard that we support the
extension of UNMIT's mandate as recommended by
the Secretary-General. We also support the Timorese
Government's request that an additional formed police
unit be deployed to strengthen security for the critical
electoral process.

Indonesia, for its part, will continue to assist
Timor-Leste in addressing the challenges it is facing on
the basis of shared principles of peaceful co-existence
and forward-looking, reconciliatory and mutually
beneficial relations.

