Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank Peru for organizing today's open debate. I would
also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her timely briefing.

The situation in the Middle East remains grim for
the millions of people suffering in the aftermath of
conflicts, terrorist attacks and other acts of violence.
Despite numerous debates and calls for action, the
situation in the region remains tense, with a high
probability of escalation leading to renewed conflict
and unrest.

The lack of action by the international community
is epitomized by the seven-decade-old question of
Palestine - now one of the longest-standing issues
on the agenda of the Council. The peace initiatives
offered by various interlocutors have so far failed to
gain traction to instigate genuine dialogue between the
conflicting parties, which is all the more reason why we
must continue to strive for an international consensus
to resolve the issue.

The plight ofthe Palestinian people and their right to
self-determination will always remain an international
priority for the Maldives. Let me remind all Member

States that the Council has declared null and void,
through resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), Israel's
illegal occupation of Palestine, the annexation of
Jerusalem, the shifting of Israel's capital to Jerusalem
and the decision by any country to recognize Jerusalem
as Israel's capital.

Our position on the Israeli settlement policy and
related activities in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains clear and unchanged. We reaffirm resolution
2334 (2016). All settlement activity is illegal under
international law and erodes the viability of the
two-State solution and the prospects for achieving
lasting peace.

Allow me to reaffirm our unwavering support
for any resolution involving international consensus
on a two-State solution, with the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We urge the Security Council and the international
community to redouble their efforts to end the conflict
so that the people of Palestine can enjoy meaningful
and lasting peace and live in dignity.

The aftermath ofthe conflict in Syria has presented
Member States with new sets of challenges, as refugees
and foreign terrorist fighters continue to be held in
detention facilities. That is especially true for family
members, women and children left behind by foreign
terrorist fighters, with no international consensus or
framework to effectively deal with the situation. My
delegation calls on the Council and the United Nations
to facilitate and provide assistance to Member States
whereby they can repatriate, rehabilitate and reintegrate
those individuals back into society after a thorough
threat assessment. The Maldives looks forward to
dialogue with its partners in exchanging information
and views on what could be done and what measures
are most effective in the rehabilitation process.

We must be united in our efforts to avoid
the impending humanitarian crisis in Syria and
must undertake efforts to ensure that hundreds of
malnourished children and women do no perish in
those refugee camps.

Today, the humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains
one ofthe largest, with over 20 million people requiring
aid and tens of millions at risk of famine. The Maldives

is hopeful because of the remarks made by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen to the Council
last week (see S/PV.8578), expressing optimism that we
may be nearing the end of that war. Despite positive
steps forward, we recognize that the situation in Yemen
remains fragile, and we need to find a comprehensive
political solution, including the full implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement and its mandate.

My Government will remain committed to working
with the Council and supporting the Secretary-
General's efforts to find a lasting solution to the many
conflicts in the Middle East. It is our collective voice
and ability to act that will provide a safer world for all
of us and future generations.

