I wish to thank and congratulate the Estonian presidency for having convened this debate on the critical issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366) and take good note of the recommendations therein, and we avail ourselves of this opportunity to reiterate Angola's commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Geneva Conventions of international humanitarian law and the international human rights framework. Angola is of the view that prevention is the most effective tool for addressing potential conflict situations; that States bear the primary responsibility for the protection of their civilian population; and that the international community has a subsidiary but very important role to play in addressing the very serious problem of threats against civilians. As the world faces an unprecedented challenge in responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, those living in conflict-affected countries remain among the most vulnerable and at risk from the consequences of the disease. It is crucial that we discuss the impact as well as the repercussions on protection activities and humanitarian assistance of the public-health measures adopted subsequently to mitigate its propagation. While the COVID-19 pandemic revealed the fundamental fractures and societal deficits in many countries and significant resources are being diverted to respond to the health crisis, containment strategies have amplified the existing vulnerabilities of civilian populations caught up in conflict and humanitarian crises, and they have created new protection challenges for humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, while conflict actors have continued to engage in violent attacks against civilians and vulnerable groups. It is important that Governments and the international community, while absorbed by the health crisis, do not neglect protection activities and adjust their actions in the field in order to continue to fulfil critical functions, respond to emerging needs, support public-health efforts and discourage parties to conflict from pressing their advantage or seeking opportunities to perpetrate attacks or increase the violence and civilian suffering. The world continues to experience prolonged conflicts that lead to economic and humanitarian crises and require urgent long-term solutions. Furthermore, terrorism, violent extremism and proxy wars waged by outside Powers continue to pose an existential threat to civilians. We cannot allow armed conflicts to derail our common development agenda. It is urgent to promote conflict prevention and conflict resolution centred on dialogue, with the true aim of silencing weapons and creating conditions favourable to development. Unfortunately, despite the establishment of a robust normative framework by the Security Council, the United Nations and other international bodies, the protection of civilians and the strengthening of protection in peacekeeping missions have not been translated into significant improvements to the protection of civilians where conflicts are rampant. The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilian points to widespread civilian deaths and injuries and estimates that more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 2019 as a result of attacks in conflicts. With an increase in the number of civilians killed or injured by improvised explosive devices, ground engagements, air strikes or other tactics, children, women, older people, people with disabilities and humanitarian personnel continue to account for the vast majority of recorded victims. In that context, we remain particularly concerned about three critical issues: first, referring to humanitarian access, which remains a key challenge in many armed-conflict situations, with warring parties obstructing the delivery of assistance, as a tactic of war, putting additional strain on civilians; secondly, the brutalizing of civilians and the targeting of civilian infrastructure, in total disregard of international humanitarian law, and the lack of accountability enjoyed by most parties to armed conflict has become an endemic feature in ongoing conflicts, further aggravating the plight of civilian populations; and, thirdly, the fact that the widespread use of explosive devices is having a devastating humanitarian impact on civilians and civilian infrastructure. In this regard, Angola joins the Secretary-General's call for the wide ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and for States to endorse and implement the Safe Schools Declaration. This open debate is a clear sign that we are not doing enough to implement existing policy regarding the protection of civilians. As the Secretary-General correctly emphasizes in paragraph 50 of his report, the principal challenges regarding the effective protection of civilians remain respect for the law and accountability for serious violations, and our shared responsibility for preventing violations continues to be as essential as ever. We call on the Council and all international actors to move beyond rhetoric, demand respect for international humanitarian law and lead international efforts to end impunity by holding perpetrators to account and to facilitate the taking of decisions and actions that respond to the present global reality and challenges.
