Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is my first opportunity to address the Security Council
in an open meeting, I would like to underscore that
Japan is prepared to work with you, Mr. President, and
all the members of the Council to achieve international
peace and security. I would also like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the important office of
President of the Security Council in the first month of
its work this year. We thank you for convening today's
emergency meeting.

(spoke in English)

My sincere gratitude goes to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang
for shedding light on the grave situation in Syria.

The Syrian crisis, now entering its sixth year,
represents one of the worst humanitarian crises of our
generation. The numbers speak for themselves. Out of
a population of approximately 17 million, 12 million
Syrians - half of them children - require assistance.
However, for the 4.5 million who live in so-called
"hard-to-reach areas, assistance reaches them only
sporadically. Indeed, 400,000 individuals live under
siege and lack access to humanitarian aid. That is more
than 10 per cent of the population of your country,
Mr. President.

The town ofMadaya is but one example ofthe plight
faced by countless Syrians on a daily basis. Recent
images of United Nations convoys entering the town
provided momentary relief. I would like to reiterate
our utmost appreciation to the humanitarian aid staff,
whose courageous and invaluable efforts continue to
save lives. But how much longer must Syrians live at
the peril of aid-delivery approvals? The case of Madaya
and today's briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs remind us that the situation is
far from resolved.

In resolution 2254 (2015), adopted in December,
the Council expressed its strong support for a political
solution to the crisis. We look forward to the convening
of the first intra-Syrian dialogue on 25 January. Japan
will continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura and the United Nations-facilitated
political process towards a political transition based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) in its
entirety.

The dire humanitarian situation must be addressed
regardless of the political process. Why must Syrians
endure the same suffering only weeks after the adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015), which demanded that all
parties immediately comply with their obligations
under international law? Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon made it very clear yesterday at the General
Assembly that the use of food as a weapon of war is a
war crime and that all sides are committing atrocious
acts prohibited under international humanitarian law.

Let us not forget that the success of the political
process is contingent on the support of the Syrian
people. Let us not lose sight of the fact that the goal
of the political process and efforts undertaken in the
Council are to end the suffering of the Syrian people
on the ground.

The indiscriminate attacks against civilians and the
impediments against humanitarian access undermine
the mutual confidence necessary for a political
solution. While all actors are accountable for the
protection of civilians, the Government of Syria has the
primary responsibility of protecting its own citizens.
The protection of civilians is an obligation under
international humanitarian law. We call on all parties
to provide rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access, as called for in Council resolutions. In that
regard, we particularly call on States that constitute
the International Syria Support Group to use their
influence to that end.

The humanitarian situation in Syria also requires
the solidarity of the international community by way of
increased assistance. Since 2011, Japan has disbursed
more than $1.1 billion in humanitarian aid, including
food, sanitation and other assistance to Syrians and
neighbouring host countries. We are nonetheless
concerned that only 43 per cent of funding needs
were met in 2015. With our eyes set on the eventual
resolution of the crisis and the return of Syrians to
their homes, our assistance should not be limited to
immediate life-saving assistance, such as food and
medical supplies, but should also cover assistance such
as vocational training and educational aid to assist
Syrians on their paths towards self-reliance.

The coming London conference in February will
be a critical opportunity to demonstrate the resolve
and solidarity of the international community with
those suffering on the ground. We look forward to
participating at the conference, where Japan will
announce, pending approval of our Diet, a substantial
new assistance package. The package will include
immediate relief such as food and assistance in the
form of vocational training for Syrians. Our assistance
will also go to surrounding countries, such as Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey, Iraq and Egypt.

When United Nations convoys entered the besieged
town of Madaya this week, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affaris reported having
witnessed people who seemed to have lost hope that the
world cared about them. Madaya is a wake-up call about
the continued suffering of millions of people in Syria.
1 would like to thank France and the United Kingdom
for requesting today's emergency meeting, as well as
Spain and New Zealand for having been instrumental
in promoting critical Security Council resolutions on
this issue. We, the Council, must remain vigilant and
not condone the humanitarian violations forced upon
millions of Syrians.

