Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank the Government of Pakistan
for organizing today's open debate on a comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism and for the related concept
paper (S/2013/3, annex). I take this opportunity to
express Switzerland's sincere condolences and deepest
sympathy to Pakistan for the losses it suffered as a
result of the horrific terrorist attacks that took place in
Quetta and the Swat Valley on Thursday.

Switzerland condemns terrorism in all its forms and
rejects any association of terrorist acts with a particular
race, ethnicity, civilization, nationality or religion. The
manifestations of terrorism are manifold. Terrorists
arbitrarily kill or injure people and kidnap targeted
individuals for ransom. They destroy property and hurt
our economies. They seek to undermine the security of

aircraft, ships and nuclear facilities. The preparations
for terrorist acts, their financing and the recruitment of
their perpetrators take place both in the real world and
in cyberspace.

Switzerland fully subscribes to a comprehensive
approach when dealing with the various aspects of
terrorism. At the multilateral level, this approach is
best reflected in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which is the foundation of the
United Nations counter-terrorism programme. The
Strategy integrates four different pillars into one
common vision: the use of non-military tools, capacity-
building, law enforcement cooperation and addressing
the underlying societal and political conditions that
are conducive to the spread of terrorism. The Strategy
also asserts that counter-terrorism efforts must respect
human rights, due process and the rule of law. Success
in the fight against terrorism depends on the equal
implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy.

At the United Nations level, such a balanced
approach should be systematically reflected in the
resolutions adopted by its organs, in the composition
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) and in the subjects dealt with by its various
working groups. The appointment of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator remains a priority for
Switzerland.

A holistic approach to counter-terrorism is also
needed at the domestic level. In Switzerland, the
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs chairs the Interdepartmental Group
on Counter-Terrorism, in which over 30 agencies from
across the Swiss federal administration take part.
Since its adoption in 2006, Switzerland has actively
supported the integrated implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Together
with other countries, and in close cooperation with the
United Nations, in 2007 we launched the International
Process on Global Counter-Terrorism Cooperation.
The Process seeks better coordination of the national,
regional and global counter-terrorism efforts towards
the implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy.

Since the establishment of the Strategy, several
meetings have taken place at the global and regional
levels. Together with the CTITF, we are preparing
another global counter-terrorism coordinators meeting,
to be held in Geneva in June. By specifically focusing on
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and
on regional cooperation, we seek to better understand
the complex reasons that make people from different
regions of the world become terrorists in order to find
appropriate regional solutions to destroy the appeal of
terrorism at the local level.

For Switzerland, a global approach also means a
close and mutually beneficial relationship among States,
the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations and institutions, such as
the new Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.

However, we cannot content ourselves with
international efforts. With the threat of terrorism
becoming more widespread and networked, we
must better integrate civil society in our efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism. Non-governmental
organizations, academia, independent research centres,
religious organizations and other social networks play
an essential role in advancing global counter-terrorism
objectives, even without openly declaring it. That role
can also be assumed in terrorist kidnappings because, in
our view, paying a ransom is not an option. Civil society
actors have a constructive role to play in preventing and
countering kidnappings for ransom in order to rescue
hostages and to ensure their safe and sound release.
We are absolutely convinced that States will be able to
prevent terrorism only with the assistance of societies.

