The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/526, which contains a letter dated
22 July 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

At the outset, I will make an introductory statement
summarizing the work of the Council for this month.

Let me start by recalling that during Rwanda's
current term on the Council - during which my
country has twice presided over the Council, in April
2013 and in July 2014 - we decided to convene a wrap-
up session at the end ofboth presidencies. In April 2013,
the meeting was organized under the format ofa private
meeting, closed to the public and the media. But this
year, Rwanda decided to convene a wrap-up session
under the format ofa public briefing. The convening of
this meeting under this format is based on the need to
enhance transparency and to enable the larger public to
be well apprised of the Council's work.

We recall that under Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, it is the United Nations general
membership that represents the citizens of all our
countries and that confers on the Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. I state in the concept note circulated
earlier this month that this wrap-up session shall be an
opportunity for Council members to have an exchange
of views on the situations addressed by the Council
and on its methods of work during this month. It is also
useful in helping the United Nations membership and
the public to better understand the activities of and
dynamics in the Security Council.

However, as has been the practice since the
Pakistani presidency revived the tradition of wrap-up
sessions in January 2013, this meeting has not been
convened to give Council members an additional
opportunity to reiterate their well-known positions on
substantive items discussed during the month. Rather,
it shall be an opportunity for the Council to assess its
work through country-specific situations and thematic
issues considered during the month and to critically
examine its progress on those issues, its processes and
how it can increase its efficiency and effectiveness.

Turning to the activities of the Council during
July 2014, by the end of the month we will have
held 35 meetings overall, mainly related to conflict-
specific situations but also to thematic debates such as
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. Those
meetings included two open debates, which were the
quarterly open debate on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, held on Tuesday, 22 July, and the
open debate on regional partnerships in peacekeeping
and its evolution, held on Monday, 28 July.

With the meeting scheduled tomorrow, we will have
held 10 briefings, including emergency briefings on the
situations in Israel-Palestine and in eastern Ukraine, as
well as a briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding. That
latter briefing was followed by an informal interactive
dialogue among the members of the Security Council,
the chairs of various country configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the chair of the PBC
Working Group on Lessons Learned and the countries
on the PBC's agenda.

The Security Council also convened 15 consultations
and a meeting of the troop- and police-contributing
countries of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP).

During the month of July 2014, the Security
Council adopted unanimously five resolutions,
including resolution 2165 (2014) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria; resolution 2166 (2014) on the
downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17; resolution
2167 (2014) on regional partnerships in peacekeeping,
and resolutions 2168 (2014) and 2169 (2014), adopted
this morning, extending the mandates of UNFICYP
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
respectively.

Lastly, the Council adopted three presidential
statements, 16 press statements and three press
elements. It is worth noting that the number of press
statements adopted this month is the highest since
the introduction of the press statement as a tool of the
Council, in November 2000.

I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
