Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to start by thanking you, Mr. President, for the
dedication you have shown as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) and in ensuring that Michael Sharp's and
Zaida Catalan's important work continues. The Group
of Experts has done, and will continue to do, excellent
work, and I am honoured that we can demonstrate
this commitment - voice this commitment - in
the presence of Michael's and Zaida's families in the
Chamber this morning. We are humbled by the presence
here today of Mr. and Mrs. Sharp and Mrs. Maria
Moresby and Mrs. Elizabeth Moresby.

To Zaida's and Michael's families, I would like
to say that the Security Council sits on the front lines
of conflict resolution and that their children and their
sister gave their lives working to find peace and resolve
conflict. They pursued truth and justice, and we owe it
to them to also pursue truth and justice and investigate
their murders.

Michael and Zaida worked to shed light on the
horrific crimes plaguing the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We, in turn, must shine a light on their
murders and pursue a full understanding of the events
surrounding their deaths. The murder of United Nations
officials cannot end with an administrative inquiry into
their deaths. There needs to be a genuine investigation
that uncovers the facts surrounding this case.

We welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
pursue a follow-on mechanism to the Board of Inquiry
under his own authority, and we urge him to waste no
time in establishing the mechanism. There is no time for
delay. We must urgently continue our efforts to uncover
the truth surrounding Michael's and Zaida's deaths.

While Michael and Zaida are no longer with us, their
work through the Group of Experts must continue. As
highlighted by the Group of Experts, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to do
more to strengthen legitimate trade in natural resources
and to reduce illicit trafficking in those resources.
Illicit trafficking strengthens armed groups and corrupt
officials, and therefore perpetuates conflict. Regional
countries and organizations and all Member States
must work together to reduce such illicit trafficking.

While the investigations of the Group of Experts
have helped us to understand the nature and means of
illicit trafficking and the funding of armed groups, their
work needs to continue in parallel with the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo elections and a peaceful transition
of power in order to bring real peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Without a democratic transition,
we can expect continued cycles of widespread violence.
The Congolese people are upset with their Government
and are tired of waiting for the elections called for
by their Constitution. We call upon the authorities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to announce
the timeline for the overdue elections and to stick to
it. In the absence of an elections timeline, the United
States will pursue stronger sanctions in the Council,
and we will take measures to increase the pressure on
and hold accountable those who undermine peace and
stability or democratic institutions and processes in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo, or who are working
on behalf of or supporting already listed individuals.

Finally, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is responsible for providing security for its citizens,
who continue to suffer violent attacks and sexual and
gender-based violence, who are fleeing their homes in
the tens of thousands and who struggle to meet their
basic needs as they are deprived of their livelihoods and
resources. While many of the attacks are perpetrated by
armed groups, we are concerned that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to support and profit from those armed groups and to
commit human rights violations with impunity. Those
actions and the continued delay in elections call into
question the legitimacy of the current Government.

Our work is not yet done, just as the work of Michael
and Zaida and the Group of Experts is not yet done. We
must continue to find ways to seek peace and justice in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for Michael and
Zaida, just as Michael and Zaida attempted to do.

