Mr. McNee: I am pleased to have the opportunity
to brief the Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. While the past year has seen Sierra Leone
make considerable strides forward, significant
challenges remain. Ten years after the end of the civil
war and two years ahead of the third set of national
elections, Sierra Leone stands poised to consolidate
peace fully and embark on long-term economic
development. Doing so successfully will require
continued support.

The Peacebuilding Commission is currently
considering the progress that has been achieved in
consolidating peace in Sierra Leone and is charting its
future engagement. Indeed, the Sierra Leone
configuration will meet this afternoon to discuss these
issues and adopt an outcome document containing
conclusions and recommendations. This review process
has focused on the joint progress report on the Agenda
for Change prepared by the Government of Sierra
Leone in full collaboration with the United Nations,
international partners and civil society.

The report in our View is an impressive
achievement. Its preparation reflected strong national
ownership and included the participation of a wide
range of national stakeholders, including civil society.
Its findings are comprehensive, mapping progress
across the entire Agenda for Change and providing
important recommendations for future action. Given
that the review monitors progress on the basis of all
actors' contributions, it continues Sierra Leone's
exemplary record as a country where standards for aid
effectiveness, engagement in post-conflict States and
integrated service delivery are put into practice.

As decided last year, the Peacebuilding
Commission has focused its engagement on the major
threats to peace consolidation identified in the Agenda
for Change, specifically concerning good governance
and the rule of law, youth employment and drug
trafficking. There have been successes in each of those
areas. The Anti-Corruption Commission continues its
excellent work, now under the able leadership of a new
Commissioner. The establishment of the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation as an independent media
organization will help further democratization. The
6
Joint Drug Interdiction Task Force has been
transformed into the Transnational Crime Unit under
the West Africa Coast Initiative.

Sierra Leone has also made important changes to
its youth employment and empowerment strategy,
moving to better match skills-training and employment
programmes with market demand. The creation and
ongoing establishment of the National Youth
Commission represents another significant step
forward.

But to that list of successes one must add
emerging needs. Attention is rightly turning to
preparations for the 2012 elections, as Mr. Von der
Schulenburg just noted. Those elections represent one
of the significant remaining challenges before Sierra
Leone completes the process of consolidating peace
and embarks on longer-term development.

It is essential that political conditions be
established for free, fair and peaceful elections. That
will require continued progress on implementing the
agreements in the joint communique of April 2009,
further strengthening the Political Parties Registration
Commission and providing the National Electoral
Commission with the necessary support. Continuing to
build the capacity of the Sierra Leone police to serve as
a neutral and effective force for stability will also be
critical. Most important, it is imperative that the major
political parties engage in a manner that reinforces
peaceful democratic governance and mitigates
burgeoning regional tensions within the country.

The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), under the able
leadership of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, has already conducted a series of
activities intended to improve multiparty dialogue,
mediate wider political tensions and build capacity to
respond to incidents of public disorder. It is clear that
this particular aspect of UNIPSIL's mandate will be of
growing importance over the next year. Sierra Leone is
also increasingly taking advantage of its abundant
natural resources. The latent economic potential of the
mining sector in particular holds great promise for
generating growth, strengthening Sierra Leone's budget
and reducing dependency on aid.

Yet, as we have all seen in other contexts, natural
resources also bring risks. Resources must be managed
in a transparent manner that delivers the economic
benefits of a peace dividend to the population as a
l0-55258
whole. Sierra Leone's membership in the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberly
Process are important initiatives in that respect.

(spoke in French)

Let me conclude by turning to a crucial issue with
respect to peacebuilding. For the most part, Sierra
Leone has established the strategic and institutional
mechanisms needed to coordinate and implement
peacebuilding activities. In the Agenda for Change and
the United Nations Joint Vision, the country has two
comprehensive and integrated strategies. Yet the need
for resources remains significant.

The United Nations multi-donor trust fund
established to fund the Joint Vision and, in that regard,
to support the Agenda for Change, has to date received
only $10 million towards a multi-year target of $204
million. While the international community has been
quick to commend the particular model of integrated
peacebuilding developed in the country, it has been
slower to mobilize resources. Recognizing this need,
the Sierra Leone configuration has decided to develop
a resource mobilization plan to help meet current
funding targets, attract non-traditional donors and
explore alternate means of providing international
assistance.

Sierra Leone remains a multilateral success story
in peacebuilding, but the country is at a critical
juncture. A final investment in peace is necessary to
secure the gains that have been made since the end of
the civil war. The Peacebuilding Commission stands
ready to continue assisting Sierra Leone's efforts to
mitigate the major threats to peace. It also wants to
support the country in the preparations for the holding
of free, fair and peaceful elections in 2012. Lastly, the
Peacebuilding Commission is determined to assist the
country to build a durable and comprehensive peace to
the benefit of all Sierra Leoneans.

