The President: I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General, the Head of Government, Ministers and other representatives present in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores the importance of the subject matter under discussion. In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's provisionalrules of procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fyi, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor- Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Yemen to participate in this meeting. In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, to participate in this meeting. In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following to participate in the meeting: His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to draw the attention of Council members to document S/2020/1, which contains a letter dated 31 December 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the item under consideration. The Council has before it the text of a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance with the understanding reached among the members of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as a document of the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2020/1. I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres.
