The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

Like others, I should like to thank Mr. Roed-
Larsen for his briefing. Before I begin, I should like to
underline that the United Kingdom fully associates
itself with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union.

The United Kingdom unreservedly condemns the
recent escalation of violence and terrorism in Israel and
in the occupied territories. We support Israeli actions
within international law to act to prevent further
terrorist attacks and to protect the lives of its citizens,
and we understand the domestic pressure to do so. But
the British Foreign Secretary has clearly voiced our
fundamental disagreement with the Israeli security
cabinet's decision in principle to expel President Arafat
from the occupied territories. It would be wrong in
principle to force the elected leader of the Palestinians
to leave the Palestinian Authority area. But further, the
impact of such an action would be overwhelmingly
negative for the peace process - radicalizing
Palestinian society and leading to an upsurge in tension
and violence rather than the diminution that we all
desire - and it would leave Israel with no peace
process and no partner for peace.

The small minority who are not interested in
securing a peaceful settlement for Israelis and
Palestinians must not be allowed to dictate and block
the political process. That process should not be held
hostage to terrorists. Accordingly, the United Kingdom
calls on the parties to press forward with the
implementation of their commitments under the road
map. This is a vital juncture for Israel and for the
Palestinian Authority. Both now face a stark choice: to
return to the intense suffering of the past three years, or
to resume implementation of their obligations under the
road map. We strongly urge them not to allow the
rejectionists to succeed in destroying the political
process.
The Palestinian Authority has an opportunity -
and urgently needs - to form an effective and
empowered Government under its new Prime Minister.
It needs to reorganize its security forces under his
control, to take determined and visible action against
the terrorist groups and to take further necessary steps
to reform its institutions. It is long overdue that
responsibility should be exercised. We will continue to
offer British support to a Palestinian Government
committed to making progress on these issues. For its
part, Israel should immediately end targeted killings,
freeze all settlement activity and begin withdrawal of
the Israeli Defence Forces to the positions held prior to
September 2000.

In these difficult times, it is vital that the
international community unite in support of the cause
of peace. The United Kingdom remains firm in its
commitment to a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement based on the two-State solution put forward
in the Quartet road map. The action of the Quartet to
drive this process forward is critical and is now more
urgent than ever, so we welcome the decision of the
principals to meet in New York later this month. It is
up to the Quartet, together, to supervise the
implementation of its road map, following closely the
actions of the parties and acting when either party falls
behind on its commitments. The United Kingdom
reaffirms its willingness to contribute to Quartet
activities in whatever way we can.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are 26 speakers remaining on my list. I
propose that we continue this meeting after a suitable
break, if that is acceptable to colleagues. Secondly, the
Council has other business before it, including a
request for consultations on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I am grateful
to colleagues for the restraint that they showed in the
duration of their speeches this morning, but this
afternoon we do need to accommodate other business

and 26 speakers. So, with the concurrence of members We shall thus continue this afternoon at 3
of the Council, I suggest that there be a time limit of o'clock, and each speaker will be limited strictly to
three minutes per speaker for this afternoon's session. three minutes. Given that we are now well under way

There being no objection. it is so decided. that we begin promptly at 3 o'clock.

The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.

and that this meeting has its own momentum, I suggest
