Ms. Rice (United States ofAmerica): I, too, wish
to thank former Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
and Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for their
statements and the Senior Advisory Group that
Mr. Guehenno chaired for their excellent efforts. I am
grateful also to Ambassador Gasana for his statement
and for his very able leadership of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The United States welcomes this important and
timely report (S/2011/85) on civilian capacity in the

aftermath of conflict. We appreciate its level of
ambition, and we look forward to studying its
recommendations and working with colleagues on
ways to take the agenda forward together.

When new Governments emerge from the ashes
of devastating conflict, they face countless challenges.
These range from establishing critical State functions
and services to shepherding political transition and
building confidence among former adversaries to
laying the groundwork for economic recovery and
longer-term development.

Peace is always too long in coming after bloody
conflict, but even when we see it coming, we are often
not well prepared to offer the most timely and relevant
support. Countries seeking to rebuild cannot afford the
average six months or more it can take to identify and
deploy the expertise they need. When there is a
requirement for specialized capabilities, whether
judges or police trainers, legal and constitutional
experts, public administrators or economic advisers,
our instruments are often not well tailored to deliver.

As much as post-conflict countries may need
support from external partners, we are also very much
mindful of the reviews urging us not to overlook
capacity that may already be in place, even in the most
damaged areas. We need to ensure that international
efforts enhance capacities that already exist rather than
displace or replace them.

We appreciate the main themes of the review: the
call for much greater seriousness about national
ownership, the openness to wider and more diverse
partnerships, the importance of expertise relevant to
specific contexts and the need for management
practices that are responsive to fluid post-conflict
environments. We welcome the practical, concrete
recommendations. We see this exercise as an important
opportunity to draw together and to enhance some of
our existing efforts to strengthen peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and internal support to peace processes.
We fully support the review's emphasis on gender and
its ideas for recruiting and retaining more women
across the United Nations and the wider international
system.

At this stage we would welcome further
consideration of several issues.
First, as has been mentioned, we will soon be
formulating a mandate for a new mission in South
Sudan, and we see this as an opportunity, as has been
suggested, to advance some of the review's important
ideas in this context. We would welcome an
opportunity - as a Council and interactively with our
colleagues from the Secretariat - to explore how best
to do this.

Secondly, we need to ask ourselves what the
Secretariat can already do, now, to improve its ability
to identify and deploy relevant civilian expertise, and
how Member States can best support these efforts.

Thirdly, the review underscores the need for
closer cooperation between international financial
institutions and the political and security presences, as
we have just discussed - a point that was also
underscored by the 201] World Development Report on
conflict-affected and fragile States. What can we do
now to forge more productive partnerships with the
international financial institutions and donor entities?

In this Chamber we know all too well that it is
not enough for soldiers to keep the peace unless
parallel efforts are made to address the underlying
drivers of conflict and to build the foundation for a
lasting peace that will enable troops to return home.
This civilian capacity review report makes an
important contribution to helping us get this right.
There is much here to digest, assess and debate.

We appreciate Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra's appeal to prioritize, and we welcome her
leadership. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
ongoing commitment to this issue, and now our
work - that of the membership - begins. We have an
important new opportunity to make progress in our
collective efforts to support countries recovering from
war. Let us work together to seize it.

