We thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his informative presentation and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, for joining us today. It is an honour. Let me start by acknowledging the progress reported during this period under review despite the difficulties posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Likewise, I would like to highlight the efforts that have been made to mitigate the repercussions of the pandemic, while at the same time encouraging continued progress in the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace Agreement. We support the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his report dated 26 March 2020 (S/2020/239), which lists three priorities for the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement for this year. Regarding the priority related to the situation of social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants, we continue to be concerned about the violence that women leaders face in particular. In view of the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we encourage the Government of Colombia to redouble its efforts towards the implementation of the gender provisions contained in the peace agreement, as well as to ensure that women, mainly indigenous women, Afro-descendants and those in rural areas, are included in transitional justice and reconstruction measures, including the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and that the barriers that limit their inclusion in those processes are addressed. Likewise, we share the concern raised in the Secretary-General's report regarding the recent massacres perpetrated against youth and children. That level of violence coincides with a marked increase in the recruitment and use of children by armed groups, putting them in even greater danger. In areas such as Cali, Samaniego and Narifio, we are seeing a resurgence of the violence and massacres that we thought had been relegated to the past. That should definitely be a wake-up call. We trust that the Colombian Government will duly investigate those crimes and bring the perpetrators to justice. Many young people are advocating and fighting for peace in Colombia; therefore dialogues with Colombian youth must continue and their protection needs must be prioritized, as well as their civic space. In the priority area related to the long-term sustainability of the reintegration process, we understand that there is room to undertake actions that allow for more significant advances in the implementation of related programmes and in the road map for reintegration. In that regard, we would like to echo the Secretary-General's call to strengthen the presence of the Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General in regions where there are a high number of attacks against ex-combatants, and we encourage the National Commission on Security Guarantees to finalize its public policy with a view to its implementation in 2021. On the priority relative to support for conflict-affected communities, we believe that the victims must be at the centre of all peacebuilding efforts. The work of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition in that regard is vital, which is why we encourage the parties to continue to contribute to the quest for truth and the attribution of responsibilities. On another point, we take note of the intention expressed by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional to establish a bilateral ceasefire, and we stress that it is imperative to release all kidnapped persons and put an end to all illegal activities as a gesture of goodwill demonstrating its genuine desire for peace. Finally, we want to highlight the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for the dedication with which it is fulfilling its mandate. This being our last intervention in the Security Council on this issue, we would like to say that we are deeply proud of the fact that Colombia has become a source of inspiration and an important reference for peace not only for the region but also for the world. Colombia has our determined support inside and outside the Security Council.
