Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I want to greet you and your brotherly
country as you preside over the Council at this
dangerous juncture. We fully trust that, with your
wisdom and ability, you will lead our ship through the
storm to safe port.

We also wish to pay tribute to the Council
members who refused to go along with the logic of war
and who resisted every attempt to render war
legitimate. Those commendable efforts did not, of
course, prevent the outbreak of war, but they will
remain in the annals of history as proof of the primacy
of principle and the fact that the force of logic holds
sway over the logic of force.

My delegation reaffirms the resolution of the
League of Arab States adopted at its foreign ministers'
meeting in Cairo recently. The resolution
unambiguously condemned the Anglo-American
aggression against Iraq and called it a flagrant violation
of the United Nations Charter and of the principles of
international law. We would like to reaffirm this
resolution of the League of Arab States. It demands
that the foreign forces of invasion be withdrawn
immediately and unconditionally. It also demands that
the aggressors bear material, legal and moral
responsibility for the aggression. We reaffirm this
resolution, because we believe that all the arguments
adduced in support of using force are vain and invalid.
We have always advocated wisdom here and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We are aware of the
evils and shortcomings of the other option, and we see
now that everything supports what we said.

It now appears that the war will go on, that it will
take a long time, as admitted by those who are waging
it. And now it seems as if the suffering of innocent
civilians - men, women, children and the elderly - is
going to be even worse. I would like to refer to this
morning's bombing of civilians at dawn in Baghdad
where many innocent people were killed.

We expect that the Council will soon take the
necessary measures to restore international peace and
security in Iraq. We also expect the Council to fully
shoulder the burden of responsibility to protect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, as provided
for in the United Nations Charter.

We repeat our appeal for an immediate cessation
of hostilities in Iraq, to prepare for a more active part
to be played by the Security Council, and for the
inspectors to return, resume and conclude their task.

We call upon the international community to rise
above present differences, as the possibility of a
dreadful humanitarian tragedy looms before us. This
has been proven in the reports of the World Food
Programme and the International Committee of the Red
Cross.

The tremendous world solidarity manifested in all
the mass demonstrations against the war that have
taken place and continue to be held in the world's
largest cities, and the sincere appeals of the religious
leaders of every faith and creed, should lead to an
international consensus based on respect for the
Charter. This document, the Charter, which we have all
agreed to uphold as our supreme guide, must not be
allowed to become merely a small blue booklet that is
selectively invoked or ignored as seen fit.

