Mr. Benitez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to express the Cuban
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you, Madam, preside
over the Security Council and to commend you for the
manner in which and your team have led the work of
this organ this month.

I also affirm Cuba's full support for the statement
made by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the Middle East remains complex
and characterized by continued instability and
insecurity. The ongoing illegal Israeli occupation of
Palestinian and other Arab territories remains the
principal obstacle to a just and lasting peace in the
region.

The international community cannot stand idly by
in the face of the untenable situation in the Gaza Strip.
The imposition by Israel of road blocks and restrictions
on the freedom of movement and on access of persons
and goods, including humanitarian and medical
supplies, have made the recovery and reconstruction of
the area virtually impossible and have compounded
even further the already precarious standard of living
of the population.

Cuba reiterates its demand that Israel
immediately, fully and unconditionally lift the cruel
and illegal blockade of Gaza in order to allow for the
free movement of supplies as well as permanent
humanitarian access.

Cuba condemns the criminal attack perpetrated
by the special forces of Israel in the early hours of
31 ay against a flotilla of boats in international waters,
delivering humanitarian aid to the Palestinian people
living in the Gaza Strip, causing the death and injury of
a number of members of that flotilla. Likewise, Cuba
supports the request of the Human Rights Council for
the immediate carrying out, under the auspices of the
United Nations Secretary-General, of a full, impartial,
credible, transparent and independent international
investigation into the Israeli attack on the humanitarian
maritime convoy.

Israel cannot be allowed to continue to commit
grave and flagrant violations of international law with
impunity. The international community, including the
Security Council, must demand that Israel comply with
its international obligations.

Israel's settlement activities in the occupied
territories, even after the partial and temporary
moratorium announced in November 2009 have
continued unabated. At present, more than 3,700
dwellings are being built, and more than 200
Palestinian dwellings have been demolished in order
for those illegal activities to proceed.

Cuba expresses its profound concern at that
continuing Israeli demolition of Palestinian dwellings
and eviction of Palestinian families in East Jerusalem,
as well as other illegal acts of incitement, provocation
and aggression carried out by extremist settlers against
the Palestinian population and the Holy Sites. That
now makes the situation very volatile and dangerous.
The enormous physical, economic and social
devastation caused by those illegal and destructive
settlement practices profoundly impairs the peace
process and may jeopardize the outcome for an
agreement on the final status of Jerusalem.

Such measures and policies undertaken by Israel
constitute grave and flagrant violations of international
law, of the United Nations Charter, of many United
Nations resolutions, including Council resolution 497
(1981), of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 9 July 2004.

The Security Council must urgently act in
response to those dangerous illegal measures taken by
Israel, which are geared to hindering and negating
peace initiatives in order to continue to consolidate its
illegitimate occupation of Palestinian territory and de
facto to annex more Palestinian territories.

I wish to conclude by restating once more Cuba's
position in support of a just and lasting peace for all
the peoples of the Middle East, one that puts an end to
the occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
in 1967 and that guarantees the exercise of the self-
determination of the Palestinian people through the
establishment of the independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

