Ms. Power (United States of America): Last
November, the Security Council was confronted with
reports ofan alleged mass rape in Thabit, a town in North
Darfur, the Sudan. The United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Darfur attempted to investigate, but was
systematically denied meaningful access. The one
time the peacekeepers were permitted to reach Thabit,
Sudanese military and intelligence officials refused to
let them interview alleged rape Victims in private, and
in some cases recorded the interviews. To this day, the
Government of the Sudan has shamefully denied the
United Nations the ability to properly investigate the
incident, despite the Council's mandate for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to do precisely that.

Yesterday, a report released by Human Rights
Watch alleged that at least 221 women and girls were
raped in an organized attack on Thabit over a period
of 36 harrowing hours, beginning on 30 October 2014.
According to the report, Sudanese soldiers went door-
to-door looting, beating and raping inhabitants. Over
50 current and former residents provided testimony
corroborating the crimes, as did two reported army
defectors who separately told Human Rights Watch that
their superiors had ordered them to rape women.

Because the Government of the Sudan denied the
United Nations a proper investigation, we have to rely
on organizations such as Human Rights Watch to gather
witness and perpetrator testimony and to shine a light on
what happened. One woman told Human Rights Watch
that soldiers entered her home and said, "You killed our
man, we are going to show you true hell". Then, she said,
"They started beating us. They raped my three daughters
and me. Some of them were holding the girl down while
another one was raping her. They did it one by one". Two
ofher daughters were younger than 11 years old, she said.
Many of the witnesses interviewed told Human Rights
Watch that Government officials had threatened to kill
them if they told anybody what happened.

Nearly 10 years after the Security Council adopted
resolution 1591 (2005), with the aim of protecting
civilians in Darfur and stopping the violence there, the
horror of Thabit is just one attack in one place out of
too many to count. In 2014 alone, more than 450,000
additional people were displaced in Darfur - the
highest number of new internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in any year since 2004 - adding to the
approximately 2 million people already displaced. In the
first six weeks of this year, humanitarian organizations
estimate an additional 36,000 people have been driven
from their homes in North Darfur state. people living
in areas afflicted by violence are in desperate need
of humanitarian aid; yet obstruction, harassment and
direct attacks by the Sudanese Government have made
them increasingly hard to reach.

Two weeks ago, Medecins sans frontieres shut down
its operations in three states in the Sudan, including
two in Darfur, citing "the Government's systematic
denial of access" to communities in the greatest need.
In one example Medecins sans frontieres cited, the
Government of the Sudan prevented its emergency
workers from travelling to the IDP camp in E1 Sireaf
in Darfur, where the organization said residents did not
have enough drinking water to survive. Medecins sans
frontieres also suspended operations in South Kordofan
state, where its hospital was bombed by a Sudanese Air
Force jet.

Today we renewed the mandate of an important
UnitedNations Panel that monitors the sanctions imposed
by the Council - sanctions that the Government of the
Sudan continues to flout. The Government and armed
groups it supports routinely violate the arms embargo,
a fact that they openly acknowledge. They continue
to launch deliberate attacks on civilians, as well as
on UNAMID peacekepers. According to the Panel
of Experts, between December 2013 and April 2014
alone, 3,324 villages were destroyed in Darfur. And the
Sudanese Government continues to allow individuals
subject to sanctions to travel and access their finances.

Today we renewed a sanctions-monitoring Panel
that has provided thorough, independent monitoring
of the Government of the Sudan and other armed
groups in Darfur, with a resolution that is more
forward-leaving than its predecessors. But even as
we take this important step, we are reminded that
the sanctions regime is impotent when the Sudanese
Government systematically violates it and the Council
cannot agree to impose sanctions on those responsible
for the violence and the abuses. Nonetheless, today's
resolution 2200 (2015) matters. It speaks to our deep
concern about the ongoing violations. It presses the
Government of the Sudan to take the long-overdue steps
necessary to protect the people of Darfur and stop the
violence. For the first time, in condemns the violence
perpetrated by the Government-backed Rapid Support
Forces - the heirs to the janjaweed - and urges the
Sudanese Government to account for the situation of
civilian populations that are suffering from devastating
waves of attacks in North Darfur, like the reported
mass rapes at Thabit.

Yet encouraging as it is to see some very modest
improvements to today's resolution on renewals, the
most important measure of our efforts will be our
ability to alleviate the immeasurable suffering of the
people of Darfur, and on that front the Council and the
international community have failed. Our complacency
is deadly for the people of Darfur, so perhaps today,
with a slightly more robust sanctions resolution, we can
reignite the Council's engagement in this continuing
crisis. People's lives depend on it, and so does the
credibility ofthe Council, because our ability to promote
international peace and security depends on our ability
to keep our word and implement the measures we
impose. We need to do that, because for every Thabit
we know about, there are so many more villages that
have been the victims of unspeakable atrocities over the
past decade in Darfur. They demand that we find a way
to stop this, and we must.

