Mr. Chambas: I am pleased to be here today to
brief the Council on the situation in West Africa and
the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA). Further to
the fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(8/2015/472), which is before the Council, I would like
to highlight a few issues and update members on the
most recent developments.

The general picture in West Africa today is
that of, first, continuous concerns regarding the
security situation in the Lake Chad Basin area and its
humanitarian impact, in spite of the progress made by
the affected countries in the fight against Boko Haram;
secondly, continuing risks of instability in several West
African nations in the lead-up to their presidential
elections later in the year, following the resounding
success of the Nigerian electoral process; and, lastly,
transnational organized crime and the Ebola virus
disease remain a matter of serious concern in spite of
continuing national, regional and international efforts
to curb these threats. These are areas that will continue
to guide our preventive diplomacy and good-offices
efforts in the months to come.

Since May, the Boko Haram insurgency has
stepped up its attacks and violence in the Lake Chad
Basin area mainly against civilian targets, leading to
renewed deterioration in the security and humanitarian
situations. Although Boko Haram's structure and
capacity for conventional warfare has been destroyed,
that terrorist group continues to perpetrate violent
attacks and rampages not only in Nigeria but also in
the Niger and Chad, as seen in recent weeks. This
underscores the necessity for continued vigilance
and coordinated regional action. In this regard, the
unprecedented solidarity exemplified by the joint
military operations carried out by Nigeria, Chad, the
Niger and Cameroon against Boko Haram terrorists
since January, with the support of international
partners, is indeed commendable.

Immediately after his inauguration, President
Muhammadu Buhari visited the Niger and Chad on
3 and 4 June to highlight the high-level consultations
and galvanize support in the fight against Boko Haram
terrorism. On ll June, an extraordinary summit of
the Heads of State and Government of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission member States plus Benin was held
in Abuja, where far-reaching decisions were taken
to accelerate the effective operationalization of the
multinational Joint Task Force. To ensure continuity
in the war effort, greater support from all partners
remains crucial. In the longer term, addressing the root
causes of the insurgency constitutes a condition for
lasting stability. A coordinated post-conflict strategy
is required to help restore normal living conditions and
livelihood activities and organize the return of refugees
and persons displaced by the conflict.

While Boko Haram-related insecurity has impeded
field assessment in the northern areas, I am pleased
to report that in the context of the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, which I chair on behalf of the
United Nations, the two countries have not relented
on completing the demarcation of their common land
boundary. As the Commission is actively preparing
to initiate confidence-building projects in favour of
populations in Cameroon and Nigeria adversely affected
by the demarcation, I should note that the United Nations
support team has already outlined a completion strategy
that establishes specific timetables and projections for
concluding the work of the Commission and for passing
responsibility for residual and follow-up activities to a
bilateral commission exclusively comprising the two
countries.

In Guinea, the inter-Guinean political dialogue
kicked off on 19 June, with the international partners,
including the United Nations, sitting as observers.
Subsequently, however, the representative of the
International Organization of la Francophonie and I
assumed an informal facilitation role at the request of
Government facilitators and the parties. It is pertinent
to note that the contentious issue of the sequencing of
the elections has been resolved in favour of the holding
of the presidential election before the communal and
local elections. Longstanding contentious elements
dividing the Government and the opposition are now
being addressed, notably strengthening the technical
capacity of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, a credible electoral register, and the
monitoring and evaluation of the preparations for the
presidential election, with the support of the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the International Organization of la
Francophonie, and bilateral and multilateral partners.

One remaining major challenge is the financial
and expertise gap that needs to be bridged for the
electoral process in Guinea to be on course. Time is of
the essence, given that we have only about four months
until the presidential elections. While a number of
partners have made pledges, it is expedient that these
promises be redeemed soonest.

Concerning Burkina Faso, the International Follow-
up and Support Group for the Transition in Burkina
Faso met on 12 June 2015, in the margins of the twenty-
fifth Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union, in Johannesburg. The Group noted the
progress made in the preparations for elections, notably
with the completed revision of the voters' register.
Meanwhile, there are concerns regarding what is
emerging as the fragile equilibrium of the transition,
and in particular the underlying tensions between
Prime Minister Zida and the Presidential Security
Regiment (RSP). Our concerns increased following the
recent incident on 29 June, when elements of the RSP
reportedly attempted to arrest Prime Minister Zida upon
his return from a foreign trip. Several gunshots were
heard in the Regiment's camp that evening. I should,
however, mention the commendable efforts made by
President Kafando in appeasing the situation and in
keeping the transition on track towards the holding
of presidential elections on 10 October. Meanwhile,
I plan to visit Ouagadougou upon my return to the
region, jointly with the Chairperson of the ECOWAS
Commission and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, in our capacity as co-Chairs of the
International Follow-up and Support Group.

Before I conclude, let me draw the Council's
attention to the continuous challenges posed by the
Ebola virus disease in the region. On 24 June, UNOWA
facilitated a telephone conference between the Mano
River Union secretariat and peace missions in the region,
during which emphasis was placed on the difficulties
encountered in border areas, as none of the security
and confidence-building mechanisms is operational,
and restrictions due to Ebola continue to affect local
livelihoods. Despite significant achievements in the
fight against Ebola, Guinea and Sierra Leone are
yet to attain zero-case situations. Most worrisome is
the fact that, after declaring a zero-case situation on
9 May, Liberia has detected three new cases; the last
was confirmed on 28 June. There have been remarkable
examples of neighbourly solidarity in facing the Ebola
crisis. With the epidemic still active and in a sensitive
political context, especially in Guinea, the resources in
place since 2014, including those of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, remain
essential to achieving the goal of zero Ebola cases.

