Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and High
Commissioner for Human Rights Al Hussein for their
powerful briefings.

I was a 24-year-old reporter in July 1995 living
in Sarajevo when the Bosnian Serbs made their move
on Srebrenica. I was there when, a few days after the
Srebrenica safe area fell, a colleague first told me about
reports of mass executions. "No!" was all I could say.
"No!" Even having lived in a war zone and under siege,
and even having seen innumerable atrocities, I could not
bring myself to believe that Bosnian Serb forces would
execute every Muslim man and boy in their custody. For
all of the brutality of a horrific war, that was a singular
horror. It was genocide, a fact now proven again and
again by international tribunals.

When I learned that Russia was planning to veto
the Security Council draft resolution (S/2015/508)
commemorating the genocide in Srebrenica, I confess I
had a similar reaction: "No!" I said. "No!" Why would
Russia vote to deny recognition of the Srebrenica
genocide? Today's vote mattered. It mattered hugely to
the families of the victims of the Srebrenica genocide.
Russia's veto is heartbreaking for those families, and it
is a further stain on the Council's record.

I spent the tenth and the fifteenth anniversaries
of the genocide in Srebrenica - there, in Srebrenica.
In 2005 I met up with my former colleague journalist
David Rohde, who is here with us today. In August 1995,
days after the massacres, it was David who discovered
a leg protruding from a mass grave site in the woods
and fields ofNova Kasaba. Subsequently, he discovered
a pile of canes and another pile, of eyeglasses - the
canes of the old men who had been executed for one
reason: because they were Bosnian Muslim. Canes!

In 2005 David and I joined the Bosnian families of
those who had been massacred as they walked along
the route that many of Srebrenica's Muslim men and
boys had taken while fleeing the fallen safe area. The
families were tracing their loved ones' journeys in
reverse. Although it was 10 years since the genocide,
all along the route we came across the human remains
of the victims: scraps of clothing, shoes, discarded
identification cards and even scattered bone fragments
protruding from the earth.

In 2010, when I led a United States presidential
delegation to Srebrenica on behalf of President Obama,
I retraced the final leg of that journey again. Many
children of those killed in Srebrenica were interspersed
among those on the march. Most were teenage girls
and young women who had grown up without fathers
and brothers. Far fewer young men than women took
part in the walk - a chilling result of the fact that so
many young boys had been executed. Remains were
still being dug up and mourned. One mother I met in
Srebrenica was burying the fourth of her five sons at
a mass grave site in the centre of town. She was still
searching for the remains of her fifth. It is that mother's
truth and pain that was vetoed by Russia today.

Why should we continue to retrace victim's
harrowing journey, or why, for that matter, do we
continue to gather, whether it is here at the United
Nations, or in Srebrenica, to mark this day and to retell
these gut-wrenching accounts of the victims? We revisit
so we can try to learn from our collective failure - and
by ours, I mean the world's, the Security Council's and
particularly that of Governments, including mine, that
had the power to prevent what happened but did not.

Bosnians believed that they would be protected
by a United Nations flag and by the principles it stood
for. They took refuge in a place literally called a safe
area, yet when Bosnian Serb forces probed the United
Nations willingness to protect civilians under its
watch, the peacekeepers melted away and the Bosnian
Serbs pressed ahead. First, they cut off fuel and other
essential supplies; they then attacked the peacekeepers'
outposts; and after that, they disarmed and humiliated
the peacekeepers themselves. Promised NATO air
strikes never materialized.

We also commemorate Srebrenica to show our
ongoing commitment to holding accountable the
perpetrators of those atrocities. The perpetrators of
the genocide in Srebrenica killed more than 8,000
Muslim men and boys and raped countless women
and girls, in part because they felt confident that they
would never be punished. That is why it is so important
that all of the indicted masterminds and commanders
of the genocide in Srebrenica - most notably Ratko
Mladie and Radovan Karadzie - are now facing trial
for their crimes in The Hague. That shows that the arm
ofjustice is long and that abusive regimes - from the
Al-Assad regime that gases its own people to the North
Korean Government that works its people to death in
gulags - will one day have to answer to their atrocities.

As we saw today, some political leaders and groups
denied that genocide took place in Srebrenica or fail
to wish to recognize it. Bosnian Serb leader Milorad
Dodik last month called the genocide "the biggest
sham of the twentieth century". We have heard such
statements from Holocaust deniers and even, more
recently, from Rwandan genocide deniers. Individuals
who use such phrases humiliate themselves, and they
embarrass and mislead those whom they claim to
represent. Genocide happened in Srebenica. That is the
conclusion reached by both the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Court of Justice, based on mounds of evidence. The
refusal to acknowledge that genocide occurred is not
only deeply hurtful to the victims and their families,
who have already endured so much, but it is the very
obstacle to reconciliation.

Imagine being the mother of those five sons, killed
in the Srebrenica genocide, and being told that a denial
of the genocide would advance reconciliation. It is
madness - a madness motivated by a similar negation
of the Bosnian Muslim experience that helped fuel the
slaughter at Srebenica in the first place. As long as
the truth is denied - whether in the Council or in the
region - there can be no meaningful reconciliation.
Imagine if this were us - if those were our families.
Would we reconcile when our experience was being
denied? There is no stability in genocide denial. The
Council did everything in its power to get Russia on
board with this simple draft resolution, which does not
even name the perpetrators, but Russia had a red line.
The draft resolution could not reference the genocide in
Srebrenica; it could not reference a fact.

Twenty years ago, the international community
failed to protect the people taking refuge in Srebrenica,
and the result was genocide. Today, because of Russia's
refusal to call what happened in Srebrenica by its
rightful name - genocide - the Council is again
failing to live up to its responsibility. This is a veto of
a well-established fact, documented by hundreds of
thousands of pages of witness testimony, photographic
evidence and physical forensic evidence of the kind I
encountered on my walks. The Rwandan genocide,
like the Srebrenica genocide, is an established fact.
Would anybody here dream of arguing that we should
not mark the Rwandan genocide or, indeed, that we
should deny it because a group of genocide deniers said
it might undermine reconciliation or stability? Does
Holocaust denial advance reconciliation, or do we all
agree that recognition and remembrance are the key,
critical ingredients to moving forward? Everyone here
knows the answer to those questions, yet a number
of countries today have chosen to remain neutral on
genocide recognition by abstaining from supporting the
draft resolution.

If the mothers of the boys executed in
Srebrenica - boys executed just because they were
Bosnian Muslims - were present today, they would
ask how anybody could abstain on their reality; but,
far worse, they would ask how any country could use
the privilege of permanent membership on the Council
to negate entirely what has happened to them. The
crime of genocide is the crime that the United Nations
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide was written and ratified to prevent
and punish. The crime of genocide in Srebrenica is what
the genocide Convention, which all of us have ratified,
exists to prevent and punish.

Reconciliation cannot be built by burying the dark
parts of one's history, however unsettling they may be.
At the hearings at the ICTY, perpetrators and victims
alike testified to how heavy machinery had been brought
in to dig up the earth in order to bury victims before the
executions even occurred. As the victims - many of
them blindfolded with their hands bound - were led to
their death, they heard not only gunshots and cries, but
also the roar of bulldozers digging the mass graves in
which they would eventually be buried.

In closing, I wouldjust like to tell one story. Ramiz
Nukie nearly ended up in one of those mass graves. As
Bosnian Serb forces approached Potocari in July 1995,
he said goodbye to his wife and children and fled into
the forest with his father, brother and thousands of other
Bosnian men and boys. He shared his story recently
with a reporter. When the men and boys paused briefly
at the top of a hill, tanks and guns opened fire. His
father and brother were killed immediately, along with
others. Nukie himself managed to escape, eventually
finding his way to a refugee camp.

In 1999, Nukie returned to Potocari and found his
way back to that hill. He found bloodied clothes and
shoes and three skeletons there, but none belonged to
his family. Since then, he has spent every single day
searching the woods around Srebenica for victims'
remains. What began as a search for his father and
brother has become a search for the remains of all
victims. He has said that a day rarely goes by that
he does not find some remains, which he reports to
Bosnia's Missing Persons Institute, which then tests
the bones' DNA against a network of survivors' DNA.
The identification is important for victims' families,
particularly those who never have been able to confirm
what happened to their loved ones and who expect to
find out that they were killed but have nothing tangible
to prove it. The remains help give them a long overdue
sense of closure. Thanks to Nukie, many bones got their
names, as a staffer at the Institute has said.

This year, partial remains of Nukie's father were
finally found - though not by Nukie himself - in a
mass grave. Nukie will bury his father on Saturday in
Srebenica - one of 136 newly identified victims to be
buried alongside the 6,241 victims already interred in
a joint cemetery there. He will be joined by thousands
of mourners who assemble each year to mark the
genocide. On recovering part of his own father, Nukic
said, "Although he is not complete, I will bury him, and
I will know where his grave is". He said he intends to
keep searching for the remains of other victims for as
long as he lives.

We too must continue to search relentlessly for
the full truth about Srebenica. The remains of more
than 1,000 victims are still out there. They continue
to haunt us, and we cannot rest until they are all
found. Only by unearthing those truths and only by
recognizing this genocide, the gravity of this genocide
and how we outside failed to prevent it will we be able
to help the region move beyond such a dark part of its
history - help it walk towards greater reconciliation,
which we all seek - and live up to the promise of
preventing genocide in our time.

