Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov,
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East. I
also express appreciation to the Chinese presidency for
convening today's open debate which highlights the
crisis in the region and collectively seeks concerted
action on several fronts in each ofthe critical countries.

The situation in the Middle East region is of
great concern to Kazakhstan because the region is
the epicentre of numerous armed conflicts of extreme
complexity. These flash points and tensions have grave
implications for international peace and security.
Rivalry and the lack of trust, unity of purpose, justice,
escalating stark economic and social inequalities and
underdevelopment prevent the global community from
achieving progress in the Middle East. As a result,
today we are witnessing the rapid growth of terrorism
and violent extremism, a grave humanitarian situation
and violations of the most basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We also see an unprecedented
migration crisis and the suffering of millions of people.
A most serious and dangerous problem is the fact that
terrorism has spread all across the region. Syria, Iraq,
Libya, Lebanon and Yemen are impacted and suffering
from this scourge, and the international community
needs to take a coordinated and united approach to
combat this threat.

On the Palestinian question, we are concerned over
the ongoing construction of settlements and the growing
threat of violence, the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and economic backwardness, all of which are
unacceptable. The escalated tensions in the holy city
of Jerusalem - sparked by the killing of two Israeli
policemen, the closure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
imposition of restrictions on worshippers - are further
worsening the fragile security situation. As a member
ofthe Organization ofIslamic Cooperation, we urge the
Government of Israel to lift these restrictions, as such
actions could escalate into a religious confrontation
with dangerous repercussions. All acts of violence
should end, and parties should refrain from conduct
and actions that could lead to a further escalation of the
already complicated situation on the ground.

The early resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, without any preconditions, is urgently
needed. In this connection, we commend the efforts
of the United States and Russia to facilitate the
resumption of the peace dialogue within the framework
of the Middle East Quartet. Kazakhstan supports a
negotiated two-State solution, leading to the realization
of the inalienable right of Palestinians to statehood and
Israel's right to security. Both sides need to demonstrate
the political will necessary to reach a historic and
long-awaited peace agreement. One of the positive
outcomes of the efforts undertaken thus far is the
water-sharing agreement between Israel and Palestine,
and we hope that it will create a positive atmosphere
towards cooperation on other important issues on the
bilateral agenda.

Kazakhstan welcomes the outcomes of the recent
international high-level meetings within the framework
of the Astana and Geneva processes and the recent
agreements between the Russian Federation, the
United States of America and Jordan regarding the
de-escalation areas in south-western Syria. We call
on all parties and countries involved to fully observe
the ceasefire and continue to pursue every possible
constructive interaction in order to restore peace and
stability, for only then will we be able to find a political
solution to the crisis in Syria.

We congratulate the Government of Iraq and the
Iraqi people on liberating Mosul from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). This marks a significant
turning point in the conflict and in countering
international terrorism. The post-ISIL long-term
recovery and reconstruction process will require unity,
inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation.
We call upon the international community to support
the Iraqi Government's new five-year national
development plan, its lO-year reconstruction plan and
its poverty reduction strategy.

Kazakhstan welcomes the consensus reached
among the various political forces of Lebanon to
adopt a new electoral law. The parliamentary elections
scheduled to be held in May 2018 will positively
promote the stabilization of the situation in the country
and strengthen its State institutions. The number of
Syrian refugees in Lebanon has exceeded 1 million.
The international community must provide greater
assistance to Lebanon for its generous gesture in
hosting such an enormous number of refugees, in spite
of its most limited resources.

The Yemeni crisis, which is a direct result of
armed conflict, has no military solution but only a
political one. My country is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian and epidemiological situation in Yemen,
where the cholera outbreak has further escalated an
already acute humanitarian situation. We call upon
all parties to the conflict to take decisive measures
to prevent the spread of the epidemic by respecting
international humanitarian law and to refrain from
impeding humanitarian and medical access and
supplies, which are obligations under international
humanitarian law.

