Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to state France's flrm
condemnation of the bloody attack carried out
yesterday in Mogadishu. France extends its
condolences to the families of the victims and
reaffirms its full support for the Somali institutions,
including the Transitional Federal Government and its
President Sheikh Sharif, as well as to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I pay tribute to
the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for their
actions within the force.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Ms. O'Brien, for their briefings and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his statement.

Pirates continue to pose a constant threat to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Somali
population and to the supplying of AMISOM. The
underlying causes of this phenomenon are to be found
on land.

In the medium term, security and development
will defeat piracy. For now, determined military action
off the coast of Somalia remains essential. This action
has evolved a great deal since the first protection
convoy put in place by France in November 2007.
Since 2008, the Security Council has established the
necessary legal framework to act against pirates. The
European Union - which will speak later and whose
statement, of course, has France's full support - has
deployed the first naval operation in its history -
Atalanta - off the coast of Somalia. In addition to the
European Union, a great many regional and bilateral
partners from all continents are involved.

The impressive mobilization of the international
community has made it possible to reduce the
percentage of successful attacks by two thirds. The
military tool is therefore effective and remains
indispensable, even if it is insufficient by itself.

I would like to stress the legal dimension of the
fight against piracy, which is essential. As the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/394) demonstrated,
piracy is defined in a unique way in the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, but the
legal tools of States to combat it are very different,
which makes cooperation difficult. Seven hundred
suspects were released just during the first half of
2010, and without a doubt a significant part of them
should have been prosecuted.

Here I would like to express my appreciation to
the Russian presidency of the Security Council, which
originated resolution 1918 (2010), today's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/ 16) and the Secretary-
General's report, which we have before us. This report
sets forth various options for consideration. Our
common objective is to bolster the rule of law in
Somalia and to create the conditions so that the
Somalis can themselves try and imprison the pirates
running wild in their territorial waters.

In the short term, we invite States in the region to
conclude transfer agreements, following the example
of Kenya and Seychelles. In the absence of such
agreements, the dissuasive impact of actions at sea is
diminished. States in the region are the main victims of
the deterioration of security off their coasts. The
international community is deploying significant assets
at sea. Cooperation among countries in the region with
regard to trial and detention would make it possible to
fight even more effectively against this scourge.

In the medium term, the setting up of a Somali
court outside Somalia seems to us to be the option
which best prepares for the future while remaining
realistic, since the security conditions limit the number
of pirates which can be tried in Somalia.

This discussion must continue. We are
considering this within the framework of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. It seems to
us to be essential that the United Nations, for its part,
continue its consideration and that the Secretary-
General continue to inform the Security Council of
developments.

I welcome the Secretary-General's announcement
of his intention to appoint a special adviser on the legal
aspects of the fight against piracy. That adviser will be
able to provide useful insight to the Secretary-General
over the coming months for possible future
recommendations to the Security Council, if
appropriate.

I also note that the Secretary-General's report
quite rightly stresses the importance of the imprisoning
of pirates. I welcome the actions of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), which lend their
support to Kenya and Seychelles, in particular, as well
as the regions of Puntland and Somaliland. France
hopes that UNDP's work in Puntland in particular will
rapidly achieve results. France fully supports the trust
fund set up by the Contact Group and which has
already disbursed $2.4 million.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
Security Council's action against piracy off the coast of
Somalia is part and parcel of the Council's larger
strategy on Somalia. In this respect, France reaffirms
its full support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Ambassador Mahiga.

