Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation and the resort to violence in the
South Ossetia region of Georgia that has taken place
over the past several days. The underlying problems in
the South Ossetia region have a long history and need
to be addressed through appropriate diplomatic and
political channels.

However, the situation has seen an even more
dangerous downturn with the introduction of additional
Russian forces into South Ossetia and with Russian air
and missile attacks against Georgia. That raises serious
concerns about the commitment of Russia to respect
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well
as questions about ultimate Russian intentions and
objectives. We are profoundly troubled by these
developments, and we regret the resulting loss of life
and numerous casualties among innocent civilians.

We call on Russia to cease attacks on Georgia by
aircraft and missiles, to respect Georgia's territorial
integrity and to Withdraw its ground combat forces
from Georgian soil. The violence that has taken place
must stop in order to avert further escalation and loss
of life in Georgia - escalation of a conflict that affects
not only Georgia but the wider region. What has been
happening in the past days in Georgia clearly poses a
threat to international peace and security that affects all
of us around this table.

For those reasons, the United States calls for an
immediate cessation of hostilities by all parties to avert
further risk of escalation and to stop the suffering for
the people of the region. That cessation should lead to
a restoration of the status quo ante by all concerned.

My Government is working actively with others
to secure a ceasefire. We also support international
mediation to calm the situation. We seek Russia's
support for these efforts. We call on the parties to show
the utmost restraint and to refrain from actions that
would further inflame the situation. We also call on all
parties to facilitate access for humanitarian assistance.

Let me close by reiterating a fundamental tenet of
this Council's engagement on issues that affect
Georgia: support for Georgia's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

