Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is
most positive to see you, Mr. President, in this position
of leadership - such a trusted face and such confident
words from a leader from our part ofthe world.

I should also like to welcome the words of Mr.
Solana and Mr. Bildt. I believe they have made a very
good contribution.

For over eight years now, I have spoken before
this Council of the plight of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and our confidence, despite everything, in the future of
coexistence, tolerance and pluralism. Maybe some of
have come to doubt my sincerity; others may have
questioned my sanity. Unfortunately, generalizations
about ethnic hatreds and age-old religious animosities
still plague debates about our region within this
Council. Again, we reject the notion that ethnicity and
religion are the cause of war and instability in our
region. Rather, ethnicity and religion are used as
weapons of war by the forces of political darkness that,
unfortunately, still exist.

That is why we supported the vote rejecting the
participation of the current regime in Belgrade in this
debate and we further endorse the comments of
Ambassador Holbrooke, Ambassador Greenstock and
others on the status of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the United
Nations.

But now I move on to an equally important
matter. It is our opinion that much can be done between
people of goodwill given the opportunity to work
together. Where institutions may be sadly
inadequate - and that certainly is the case in Bosnia
and Herzegovina - goodwill can overcome such
structural deficiencies. Mr. Milos Prica at one time may
have been considered my enemy. Suspicion and
animosity were rife. Today, we are compatriots in the
same progressive endeavours in the service of our one
common country. He is my Deputy now; he sits behind
me. I have full confidence in his commitment as well
as in his words.

I would therefore like to pass on to Milos Prica
the opportunity to continue and make the statement on
behalf of our delegation. It is important that now the
Council also hear his words- our words; feel his
commitment and our commitment; and understand the
common goodwill and vision of our one future.

With your permission, Sir, I would like to cede
the floor to Mr. Prica.

