Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalf of my
delegation, I warmly welcome you, Sir, to the Security
Council and thank you for presiding over this meeting.
Malaysia appreciates New Zealand's tireless efforts to
propel the Council to take urgent action on the Palestinian
question. We share your View, Sir, on the crucial role
of the Council in creating the necessary conditions for
peace and pushing the parties to restart the dialogue
process in order to salvage the two-State solution. My
delegation is also grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence and briefing today.

My delegation decided to take the floor today
in view of the worsening situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and the ongoing apathy in the
Council to address the situation. In particular, we wish
to highlight the expansion of settlement activities,
which constitutes the biggest threat to peace and the
two-State solution.

Over the years, we have heard repeated warnings
from the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov, about the expansion of settlement
activities, which threatens to bury the two-State
solution. Over the past few months alone, hundreds of
Israeli settlements have continued to expand despite
their undeniably illegal nature under international
law, clear recommendations of the Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) and widespread condemnations on
the part of the international community. In addition,
we also see attempts by the Israeli authorities to
retroactively legalize outposts in another systematic
attempt to change the realities on the ground.

For far too long, such activities have persisted
with impunity as we continue to restrain our response
to mere verbal disapproval without any effective
measures to halt the illegal activities. The expansion
of settlement activities and the legalization of
outposts are accompanied by increasing demolitions
of Palestinian homes and structures, the confiscation
of Palestinian lands and increasing settler violence. In
2015, on average, four cases of settler violence against
Palestinian civilians were reported per week. In one
recent incident, Israeli settlers unleashed dogs to attack
a Palestinian man, while, in another, Israeli settlers
pumped sewage onto land belonging to Palestinian
farmers, consequently damaging Palestinian-owned
trees. Even young Palestinian girls have not bee spared
from settlers' violence, as they have been harassed and
beaten by Israeli settlers. In most cases, there is no
recourse to justice.

In the case of one Palestinian family, which owns
olive orchards and agricultural lands in the occupied
West Bank, the members were prevented from working
their land located in close proximity to an illegal Israeli
settlement. Their trees and land were damaged and
poisoned by the settlers. Despite complaints submitted
to the Israel police 86 times, no action has been taken
to hold the settlers to account or provide redress. Settler
violence can no longer be treated as isolated incidents.
It is clear that the settlers are becoming emboldened
as a direct result of the Israeli Government's policy on
settlement expansion and the impunity allowed them.

Settlement expansion occurs against a backdrop
of severe restrictions on the national growth and
development of Palestinian communities. We are all
aware of the near-impossible prospect of obtaining
permits from Israeli authorities to enable Palestinian
families to expand their homes to accommodate the
natural growth in Area C of the occupied West Bank.
Many Palestinians have had to resort to building homes
without permits, only later to face Israeli demolition
orders and costly fines. Unable to pay the unjust fines,
which could amount to tens of thousands of dollars,
many have been forced to demolish their homes. We
saw one such case just last week. As a Palestinian who
had to destroy his home in East Jerusalem stated,

"The first hammer blow feels like you are hitting
yourself. It is not easy to demolish your dream".

In another incident, a Palestinian father had to demolish
a room for his three small children to avoid exorbitant
demolition fines issued by the Israeli municipality
after spending 12 years in a failed attempt to fight the
demolition order in Israeli court.

Such examples are part of a brutal and systematic
attempt by Israel to break the spirit of the Palestinians
and make their lives in occupied East Jerusalem
unbearable, so that they will eventually leave. We agree
with the Secretary-General that it is disturbing that any
opposition to Israeli settlement expansion to protect
the legitimate rights of Palestinians is now labelled
by the Israeli leadership as ethnic cleansing. That is
truly provocative, senseless and reflects nothing more
than a feeble attempt to defend the indefensible * an
incorrigible attitude to stay the destructive course of
harvesting Palestinian despair and misery.

Clearly, doing nothing is not an option for the
Security Council as the organ entrusted to maintain
international peace and security. We must take urgent,
effective actions to halt and reverse illegal settlement
activities, which are fuelling radicalization owing to
widespread frustrations and anger among occupied
Palestinians. We must discourage Israel from wallowing
in their repressive policies. We must not allow our plea
to fall deaf cars. We must have the courage to nurse our
bleeding conscience.

To maintain international attention on this issue,
Malaysia, together with like-minded members of the
Council, is planning to hold an Arria Formula meeting
in October with a focus on the issue of settlements.
Malaysia also welcomes the upcoming meeting of the
Quartet in New York as a follow-up to the international
ministerial conference held in Paris in June. We continue
to support the French initiative, which complements the
efforts of the Middle East Quartet. We look forward
to concrete actions being taken by the relevant parties,
backed by the international community, to recreate the
much-needed political horizon for a two-State solution.

In conclusion, I reiterate Malaysia's call for the
Council to use the various tools at its disposal to create
the necessary conditions for peace and to influence the
parties' behaviour in order to salvage the two-State
solution. We stand ready to engage constructively with
other Council members in that regard.

