Mr. Lowcock: The Security Council has asked
me to update it today on the humanitarian situation
in Yemen. In a word, it is bleak. We are losing the
fight against famine. The situation has deteriorated
in an alarming way in recent weeks. We may now be
approaching a tipping point, beyond which it will be
impossible to prevent massive loss of life as a result of
widespread famine across the country.

As the Council knows, Yemen has for some time
now been the world's worst humanitarian crisis. Years
of very intense and protracted fighting all over the
country have destroyed infrastructure, wrecked public
services, displaced millions of people from their homes
and livelihoods, and have led to what is believed to
be the worst cholera outbreak the world has ever seen
ravage the country. All that, together with a dramatic
economic collapse in a country already among the
world's poorest meant that, at the beginning of this
year, fully three quarters of Yemenis - 75 per cent,
that is, 22 million people - were in need of some kind
of humanitarian assistance or protection.

Many millions no longer have any regular source
of income, including the families of teachers, health
workers, water and sanitation workers and other public
servants who have not been paid a regular salary in two
years. Approximately 18 million people, including a
high proportion of Yemen's children, are food insecure,
and more than 8 million of them are severely food
insecure, meaning they do not know where their next
meal will come from. They need emergency food
assistance to survive.

Notwithstanding all that, the humanitarian situation
has been kept stable and the worst loss of life avoided so
far this year. That is because the world's worst crisis has
attracted the world's largest and one of the world's most
effective humanitarian relief efforts. In the first half of
the year, humanitarian organizations supported under
the United Nations response plan provided assistance
to more than 8 million of the most vulnerable Yemenis.
The operation has been substantially scaled up and
broadened since last year. While food distribution
reached 3 million people a month last year, it has been
dramatically expanded: we aim to reach 8 million
people this month. A third wave of the cholera outbreak
has been kept at bay with intensified prevention
campaigns, repairing and chlorinating water networks
and vaccinating people in high-risk districts in Aden,
Al-Hudaydah and Ibb. Health facilities that would
have otherwise closed have remained open through an
incentive programme paid to health-care workers to
keep services going.

Running such a large-scale relief effort requires
an enormous operation on the ground. I want to pay
tribute to all the aid workers - thousands of them from
United Nations agencies, including UNICEF, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization
and others - as well as to the Red Cross and Red
Crescent organizations and countless international, and
especially national, civil society organizations. Most
of the aid workers are Yemenis helping other Yemenis,
often at considerable personal risk.

The relief effort would also be impossible without
the generous funding voluntarily provided by our
donors. I want to again thank the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait,
the United States and many European countries, which
together have committed about $2.6 billion, including
$2 billion through the 2018 Yemen humanitarian
response plan, to finance the operation.

I also want to note that the aid operation would not
be possible, given the intensity of the conflict, without
the deconfliction system run by the coalition authorities.
We notify the Evacuation and Humanitarian Operation
Cell in Riyadh of the operations ofthe aid agencies, and
that protects aid workers, to a large degree, from being
caught up in the fighting and helps the coalition to meet
its obligations under international humanitarian law.

But the issue I want to flag to the Council today

is that two recent developments threaten to overwhelm
the aid operation.
First, there is a marked economic deterioration,
symptomized by the depreciation of the Yemeni rial
by some 30 per cent in the last month or so. Because
almost all the food consumed in Yemen is imported, that
depreciation translates directly into a sharp increase in
the price of food for approximately 10 million Yemenis
who are food insecure but are not reached by the aid
operation. We are already seeing pockets of famine-like
conditions, including cases where people are eating
leaves because they have no other form of sustenance.
We estimate that an additional 3.5 million people
may soon be added to the 8 million already severely
food insecure.

Compounding that, the depreciation of the rial and
access problems are producing unprecedented increases
in the price of fuel. My team on the ground reported
yesterday that people are waiting in kilometre-long
queues at petrol stations. As petrol prices have doubled
just this week, transportation costs have gone up and
reaching a health facility or fleeing fighting when it
reaches one's neighbourhood is becoming unaffordable
for many families without outside help.

Commercial imports of food and fuel have yet to
recover from last November's blockade. Fuel imports
in September are only one third of what they were
in August. Commercial food imports dropped from
a registered 410,000 metric tons in May to 280,000
metric tons in August. That is a decrease of 30 per cent.
With the confidence of shipping companies already
very battered, as reflected in a 35 per cent drop in
clearance requests since the blockade, any further
shocks could add to the core humanitarian caseload
in a way that would simply overwhelm the capacity of
humanitarian organizations.

Secondly, the intensification of fighting in recent
weeks around Al-Hudaydah is choking the lifeline that
the aid operation and commercial markets rely on. The
combination of the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef,
where most of Yemen's food imports arrive, the access
roads from the ports to the large population centres in
the north and the west of the country and the facilities
in the city in which imported grain is milled before
onwards transportation is the essential, irreplaceable
infrastructure on which aid operations and commercial
imports rely.

The main Al-Hudaydah-Sana'a road, which is the
principal artery used by commercial importers and
humanitarian organizations to move commodities
from the ports to people across the country, has been
cut off in recent days due to fighting. Other routes are
heavily damaged and transport times have increased,
and therefore the cost has risen for humanitarian
organizations and private companies.

The Red Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, which currently
holds 45,000 tons of grain imported by the World Food
Programme - enough to feed 3.5 million people for
a month - has recently been inaccessible because of
fighting in the local area. Armed groups have occupied
humanitarian facilities. Attacks against civilians and
humanitarian sites have resulted in dozens of deaths,
especially of children, and serious damage has been
caused to public health and water facilities and other
humanitarian assets.

Aid agencies, including the United Nations,
still have 600 staff in Al-Hudaydah. While we have,
since June, provided direct assistance to over half a
million people fleeing the fighting in the governorate,
aid activities, including life-saving immunization
campaigns, have been delayed or prevented.

It is far from clear that the recent intensification
of fighting is producing any winners. It is, though, all
too abundantly clear who the losers are * millions of
Yemeni civilians, most of them women and children,
whose lives are now right on the line. I know that some
people will want to talk about who is to blame for the
position we now face. That is, with respect, the wrong
question for today. The issue for today is who can do
something to head off the impending catastrophe. While
we will continue to push to scale up the humanitarian
response, humanitarian organizations simply cannot
look after the needs of all 29 million Yemenis. That
is untenable. We ask the Security Council for support
in three key areas to prevent a complete collapse
and to safeguard the lives of millions of the most
vulnerable people.

First, immediate measures are needed to stabilize
the economy and support the exchange rate. That
includes usable liquidity for the Central Bank and the
implementation of long-standing commitments to pay
key public-sector salaries across the whole country,
so that more people have the wherewithal to buy food
and keep alive the commercial markets, which, as
I have said, aid agencies cannot replace. It is, at the
same time, essential to avoid any policy measures that
would damage the already paper-thin confidence of
commercial importers any further.

Secondly, everyone with a stake in this must
uphold their obligations to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and facilitate access to vulnerable
people. We have to keep all ports and main roads open,
functional and safe. No humanitarian site should be
used for military purposes. As I have said to members
of the Council, the lifeline through which the aid
operation runs now hangs by a thread.

Thirdly, we ask all parties to find practical solutions
to key issues, including the opening of an air bridge for
civilians to seek medical treatment outside Yemen for
diseases that are no longer treatable inside the country.
That would pave the way for the opening of the airport
in Sana'a.

Finally, the parties need to come to the negotiating
table and engage seriously with the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy on a positive path
towards peace.

