Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
letter from the Permanent Representative of Russia
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
contained in document S/2014/264 is an item on the
Council's agenda. Russia, as a member of the Security
Council, asked for a meeting to be held under this agenda
item and proposed a time for the meeting, in line with
the rules of procedure. China therefore supports the
decision by Indonesia, President of the Council for this
month, to convene a meeting this afternoon. We regret
the fact that the meeting cannot be held as scheduled.
We hope that Council members will respect one another,
maintain their solidarity and effectively implement and
fulfil their obligation to maintain international peace
and security. China voted in favour of the provisional
agenda based on the following three considerations.
First, on the question of Ukraine, China has
always maintained an objective and impartial position,
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries, including Ukraine.

Secondly, China believes that the parties concerned
should work to implement resolution 2202 (2015) and
the Minsk agreements comprehensively, keep to the
general direction of a political settlement and actively
seek a comprehensive, lasting and balanced solution
to the issue of Ukraine. The situation in Ukraine has
a complex background, both historically and today.
China supports all parties concerned in their efforts
to resolve their differences as soon as possible and
reach a final settlement that is acceptable to the parties
through dialogue and negotiations, taking into account
and accommodating the legitimate concerns of all the
various regions and ethnic groups in Ukraine.

Thirdly, and more importantly, we believe that the
Council should play a constructive role by creating an
external environment conducive to the proper resolution
of the relevant issues, promoting peace, stability and
development in Ukraine and achieving harmonious
coexistence among Ukraine's various ethnic groups,
as well as peaceful coexistence between Ukraine and
other countries in the region.

