Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to begin by thanking Mr. Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing, and to commend the effort by
him and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which he leads, to
maintain peace and stability in Kosovo and the
Balkans. We also listened carefully to the statements
made by Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of
Serbia, and by Mr. Hyseni.

During the past four months, the security
situation in Kosovo has remained substantially stable,
but there has still been tension in some parts of
Kosovo. In particular, there have been violent clashes
in Mitrovica. It is China's hope that all parties will
examine the relevant issues from a broader and longer-
term perspective and intensify dialogue to maintain
peace and stability in the region.

China has also noted that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/ 149) mentions in particular
a sharp decline in the number of voluntary returns of
members of minority communities. We are very much
concerned about that situation. China calls for the
parties concerned to coordinate their efforts to create
an environment favourable to the voluntary return of
the members of minority communities.

China is of the view that all parties should uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and Security Council resolutions, and respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Serbia.

China has always maintained that the best way to
resolve the issue of Kosovo is through a negotiated
settlement acceptable to both Serbia and Kosovo. We
encourage all parties to seek such a compromise
settlement through negotiations.

Almost 10 years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1244 (1999), which serves as the
legal basis for the settlement of the question of
Kosovo. During the past nine years, there have been
some changes in the situation in Kosovo, but the
foundation for implementing resolution 1244 (1999)
remains unchanged. UNMIK should continue to fulfil
its mandates. China also notes that the report of the
Secretary-General mentions that the reconfiguration of
UNMIK has been accelerated in order to enable its
functions to be adapted to the changing situation on the
ground. While valuing highly the relevant proposals by
the Secretary-General about the reconfiguration of
UNMIK, we believe that the adjustments undertaken
by the Mission should be technical in nature. It should
not touch on the status of Kosovo or compromise the
United Nations neutrality. The issue of Kosovo remains
an important item on the agenda of the Security
Council.

We have taken note of the commitment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) to comply with resolution 1244 (1999), as
well as of the fact that it has submitted a report on its
recent activities. We hope that EULEX will continue to
act pursuant to that resolution, assume its
responsibilities under the United Nations umbrella and
support the work of UNMIK in playing a positive role
to maintain peace and stability in the region.

