Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to reiterate to the Government
and the people of Egypt the solidarity and sorrow of
my Government for the criminal attack they suffered
last weekend.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary- General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing
and welcome the presence here today of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis.

Chile associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Peru on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti.

Today's debate is historic, since, as agreed by
the Security Council, we will be begin the process of
drawing down the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and establishing a successor
peace operation. That concludes a cycle initiated in
2004, when the international community came to the
aid of our Haitian brothers and sisters by setting up
a multidimensional mission with a broad mandate,
in which, for Chile and other countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean, the link between security
and development as a way of achieving sustainable
peace was fundamental. Rapid-impact projects and
programmes to reduce community violence carried out
by the MINUSTAH contingent are the most concrete
manifestation of that.

There are areas where achievements have been
considerable, such as stabilization and security,
and others where tasks are still pending, such as the
strengthening of the rule of law, access to justice and
human rights. Similarly, MINUSTAH played a key role
in addressing the humanitarian challenges posed by
the catastrophic 2010 earthquake and the subsequent
reconstruction, as well as the devastating consequences
of Hurricane Matthew and other natural disasters that
have regularly struck Haiti in the past.

The recent conclusion of the electoral process, the
restoration of constitutional order, the formation of
the new Government, the legislative power's return to
functionality, the election of local authorities and other
milestones provide an opportunity that we cannot pass
up in our efforts to strengthen the principle of national
ownership and produce needed synergies with the
international community.

The United Nations will continue to be necessary
in supporting Haiti, and, accordingly, the peace
operation that will succeed MINUSTAH will play a
key role, together with the country team. That is why
we fully share the Secretary-General's assessment that
a responsible transition in the United Nations presence,
grounded in the achievements of the past 13 years, is
required. Only in that way can we keep from losing
what we have gained on the road to stability and
development. We reiterate the importance of always
keeping in mind the conditions on the ground, and
especially of avoiding security gaps. Coordination
among all actors will be crucial.

Challenges to making progress in sustainable
development remain. However, the main humanitarian
challenge is the need to tackle the cholera epidemic.
Chile fully supports the new approach of the United
Nations in that connection, and we recently made a
contribution to the trust fund established to combat the
disease. However, funding is still very low, so we call
on the international community to contribute.

In addition, given the magnitude of the efforts
required, we find it difficult to believe that the new
United Nations mission in Haiti would not be linked to
the tasks that must be fulfilled. We reiterate our support
for the work of the Senior Adviser on the Impact of
Cholera in Haiti.

Chile will continue to promote United Nations
support for the new Government and the Haitian people
and to bolster the development of public policies aimed
at economic development, the consolidation of the rule
of law and the political participation of the country's
citizens. After 13 years and the withdrawal of our
troops, we will continue to support Haiti. Indeed,
our assistance during the period from 2015 to 2018
represents nearly half of the what Chile earmarks for
the entire region.

This is an appropriate time to pay tribute to all
the men and women of various nationalities who have
served in MINUSTAH, particularly those who have
given their lives for peace.

In conclusion, I reiterate my country's commitment
to Haiti and its people, reaffirming the importance
of continuing to support this sister nation, which has
sovereignty over its own development. As President
Bachelet pointed out in her latest visit to that country
a month ago: "We are sure that the road that Haiti has
started down with the support of the international
community will bear fruit sooner rather than later."

