Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank you
and your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing
today's important debate on conflict prevention and
resolution in the Great Lakes region of Africa, and
for the concept note you circulated to Member States
(S/2016/223, annex). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. His presence here
today once again highlights his commitment to conflict
prevention and resolution, particularly in our region.
And I welcome the briefings by the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail
Chergui, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes, Mr. Said Djinnit, and Mr. Vijay
Pillai of the Office of the Vice President for the Africa
region of the World Bank.

Conflict prevention and resolution have become
central to the work of the United Nations, but in the
wake of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
the growing intra-State conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, we see that the concept of
conflict prevention has been applied more in theory
than in practice. The United Nations, especially the
Security Council, was and still is much more focused
on crisis management than on crisis prevention.

The report (see S/2015/446, annex) of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, as well
as the recommendations of the Secretary-General with
regard to the Panel's report, rightly acknowledges the
primacy of politics with a focus on mediation and
conflict prevention. At the same time, it recognizes,
among other equally important tools, the usefulness of
strong global and regional partnerships in addressing
conflicts. Working together with the region in assessing
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
decisions of the Security Council can also help in
addressing the sources of conflict as early as possible.
The principles that we support will not bear fruit if
they are not implemented in good faith with a cohesive,
inclusive and effective strategy that brings on board all
stakeholders. That is why early-warning mechanisms
should guide the work of the Security Council in
preventing conflicts from arising. That would not only
improve the work of the United Nations, and of the
Security Council in particular, but it could also be cost-
effective when it comes to saving lives.

The situation in the Great Lakes region of Central
Africa speaks for itself. It is a region that has been
in turmoil since the 1950s. While various successive
efforts have been deployed, very few of them have
been aimed at addressing the root causes of the crisis.
For instance, the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and the peace process in Burundi created
hopes that the epoch of violence in the African Great
Lakes region was finally drawing to an end. Howevr,
progress in realizing those initiatives has been limited,
if not disappointing.

With regard to the current situation in Burundi
since May 2015, political and security unrest in the
country have proved that the Great Lakes region is far
from being stable. Burundi is in political turmoil, with
State-sponsored armed militias murdering innocent
civilians in broad daylight. Moreover, the unverified
allegations from part II of the progress update in the
January 2016 report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the rumours
from Refugees International seek to externalize the
responsibility for the current conflict and represent
another failed attempt to shift focus away from the
real causes of the instability. Rwanda has already
demonstrated its obligation to protect and care for
refugees. While my Government is committed to
meeting its obligations under international humanitarian
law, it should not be negatively exploited by those who
expect to find solutions to the crisis.

The fact that Burundi has now descended into
a spiral of violence has not helped make the case for
our collective ability and will to prevent conflict, or to
protect civilians. By that I mean that the response from
the international community has been geared more
towards rhetorical exchanges than actions aimed at
preventing the escalation and the commission of mass
atrocity crimes. Nor has the response from Burundian
officials been better. Instead of exercising leadership
and living up to their responsibilities and obligations
to protect their own citizens, they have opted to turn a
blind eye to the daily killing of innocent civilians, and
the carnage continues.

On our side, in order to avoid any misunderstanding
of our intentions, we have requested the international
community to work with us to plan the orderly and safe
relocation of Burundian refugees to third countries. Let
me just add that hatred and rhetoric directed against
my country, or against my President, are unacceptable.
He is our hero. Do not ever dare - ever - to treat him
that way.
The persistent presence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of roaming predators under the name of
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR) - by the way, the FDLR are also in Burundi
today, working with the Government of Burundi, which
started the crisis - and the inaction on the part of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
implementing the decisions of the Security Council, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community have raised serious concerns about the
commitment of the stakeholders to seeking sustainable
peace and stability in the region. While we will
welcome the transfer of Ladislas Ntaganzwa yesterday
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we can
only note that nothing tangible has been achieved so
far on the ground when it comes to dealing with the
FDLR. Rwanda deeply deplores the lack of meaningful
action in the neutralization of that genocidal group
and terrorist organization, including its leadership.
It is unfortunate that the international community,
especially MONUSCO and its Intervention Brigade,
has not followed through with any military action
after the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23),
as called for by the regional bodies and the Security
Council. When we served in the Security Council from
2013 to 2014, we voted for resolution 2147 (2014).

The President's concept note (S/20l6/223, annex)
for this open debate also highlights the linkage between
natural resources and the forces of destabilization
and conflict. Without a doubt, natural resources have
served as the backbone for the efforts of countries so
endowed to advance their development agenda and to
lift their citizens out of poverty. In some parts of the
world, including the Great Lakes region of Africa, those
resources have been a blessing for some and a curse for
others. Many resource-rich countries remain in abject
poverty and continue to experience poor economic
growth - and, consequently, a lower standard of living.
The argument that the more resources a country has the
greater its economic growth and prosperity will be does
not necessarily hold true, just as it does not necessarily
hold true in marriages. The illegal exportation of
resources can be a factor in prolonging - and, in
some cases, fuelling - conflict, both in the areas of
exploitation and, at times, across the borders with
neighbouring countries. Armed groups in our region,
such as the Allied Democratic Forces, the Mai Mai,
the Lord's Resistance Army and the genocidal group
FDLR, have benefitted from the illegal exploitation of
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to cause insecurity in neighbouring countries,
including in mine.

The Government of Rwanda has set up verification
mechanisms that help to identify the origins of mineral
resources on its territory. Rwanda is one of the most
advanced countries in the region in the implementation
of the ICGLR certification mechanism. That was
confirmed at a meeting of the ICGLR on the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources held
in Kigali in November 2015.

The country's Geology and Mines Authority has
set up a mineral tagging and sealing scheme, which
aims to curb illegal trading of conflict minerals such as
tin, tantalum and tantalite. The project, called the ITRI
Tin Supply Chain Initiative, was set up by the United
Kingdom tin industry to assist countries in the region,
and the Government of Rwanda ensures that minerals
from Rwanda are verified and traceable right from their
source to smelters. We encourage counties in the region
to adopt similar measures, which will contribute to the
transparency of mineral trading in the region.

Allow me, before I conclude, to respond to the
remarks made by Ambassador Samantha Power and her
analysis of the situation in four countries of the region,
including my own. I hope she is watching this on the
webcast. If not, I ask that the message of Rwanda be
conveyed to her. First, I hope that she does not confuse
her name with her assignment - Ms. Power does not
have power over Rwanda.

In reaction to her remarks, we need first of all to
caution her against lumping together the approaches
of the four countries. There is no one-size-fits-all
solution in responding to the challenges confronting
the region. While we commend her remarks as to the
positive trajectory achieved by Rwanda in the economic
and social fields, and as to Rwanda's key role in the
maintenance of peace and security in the international
arena, there is a need to emphasize that Rwanda's
achievement did not occur in a vacuum. Indeed, the
success Rwanda encountered stemmed from many
factors, including good governance and an enlightened
leadership - led by His Excellency President Paul
Kagame - that single-handedly put together solutions
tailored to the Rwandan situation in the immediate
aftermath of the genocide against the Tutsi. Had it
not been for him, I would not be here talking to the
Council today.

Would the Council like me to tell my story, about
why we Rwandans want him? My grandparents were
refugees. My parents were refugees. I was born as a
refugee. Luckily, President Kagame went back home
and stopped the genocide. Luckily, I went back home,
too. In 1994, when over 10,000 people were killed on a
daily basis, what did the Security Council do? Nothing.
Nothing! We want that man there. He was the only one
to take up his responsibility and come and stop the
genocide. He is our hero.

As I was telling a gentleman in the Chamber,
we will never, ever accept anyone who tries to deny
what the Rwandans want to achieve, or what Rwanda
chooses. Drawing lessons from the bad politics that
led to the genocide, it was imperative for the Rwandan
people to build on a culture of ongoing dialogue with all
citizens of Rwanda so as to enable them to have a voice,
to participate, to redress any attempt to hamper their
well-being and to have an opportunity to claim their
rights when they feel their leaders are not responsive.
With that approach, pluralism has been deepened
in a consensual democracy in which citizen-led
consultations have yielded tangible results in mending
the social fabric and in addressing all issues of concern.

Citizens of Rwanda have been afforded numerous
platforms to convey their views and concerns. Rwanda
understood, as a vital element, that the only way to
consolidate gains was to stay connected through a
participatory democracy that enables people to have
a voice in all matters concerning their well-being.
That well-tested system has prompted the people of
Rwanda to opt massively to keep this very precious
man - the President we have today, namely, President
Kagame - at the helm of the nation.

If Rwanda has made the most progress in the
world in terms of human development over the past
25 years - as Ms. Power stated well - it has done so
through the President's leadership. We know what is
good for Rwanda and Rwandans. One does not really
have to agree with us, but one can respect our choices.
There are some aspects of her country with which we
do not agree, but there is nothing we can do about it. We
leave it to them.

What we cannot agree with is this apparent desire
to occupy our political space. No one will ever come
to occupy our political space. It belongs to Rwandans
and only to Rwandans. Ifa democracy is for the people,
by the people, as she and her country's leaders have
well stated, then please let the people of Rwanda have
their own choice. Attempting to ensure the peace and
stability of the country without taking into account the
political, economic and historical factors would be a
mere exercise that leads nowhere. We in Rwanda came
to the realization that it has to be an ongoing process
of education and dialogue with the people. It cannot,
by any means, be a cut-and-paste exercise from one
country to another; nor can it follow the same pattern,
as a country's issues are unique to it.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my call for the
Security Council to shift from a culture of reaction
to one of prevention. With unfolding events in
Burundi - and elsewhere, of course - it is inevitable
that the Security Council try to improve its record with
regard to fully understanding early warning signs of
conflicts and responding through early action if it is to
remain relevant. While there has been a huge increase
in the level of international preventive diplomacy
and diplomatic peacemaking, for the most part by
the United Nations and more recently in partnership
with regional organizations, those efforts will remain
inadequate if they are not followed up by concrete
actions on the ground.

