Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
must begin by expressing the United States profound
condolences to the victims of the horrific Taliban
attack on a school in Pakistan. This gruesome attack
deliberately targeted Pakistan's - indeed all of
our - most precious and sacred resource, our children.
Cowardly and senseless violence like this only increases
our resolve to fight terrorism and violent extremism.

I thank you, Mr. President, for being here and for
convening this important debate. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and High Representative
Buyoya for their briefings.

Enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is critical for
advancing peace and security in Africa. From the
Central African Republic to Mali, to Somalia, every
improvement in the important partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union has very
real impacts on regional stability and on security. The
African Union and its member States have demonstrated
important leadership in responding to African conflicts
through peacekeeping and preventive diplomacy to
stop potential conflicts from becoming actual ones.
Peacekeeping, whether it is done by the United Nations
or the African Union, or in some cases both, is only
as strong as its troop and police contributors. Member
States must be willing to contribute the needed
troops and resources, and troop contributors must be
willing to robustly carry out difficult mandates. We
commend the African troop-contributing countries
that have answered the call again and again to serve
in peacekeeping operations and that have demonstrated
a commitment to implement their mandates, including
the protection of civilians.

While Blue Helmet United Nations peacekeeping is
a critically important tool, it is not always the best tool
to respond to a particular conflict. That is why so many
of us have redoubled our efforts to support regional
organizations' capacities, including that of the African
Union, to launch and support peace operations when
they are needed and consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations. The Security Council has a unique role
under the Charter, but our decisions and actions should
be taken in close consultation with all stakeholders,
including Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and potential troop contributors.
Decisions related to the deployment of United Nations
or African Union peacekeeping missions must be made
on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the unique
circumstances of each particular situation. Enhancing
the capacity of regional forces to respond is critical,
but the ability of regional organizations to deploy peace
operations must be seen, of course, as a complement to,
not a substitute for, the United Nations own ability to
carry out robust peacekeeping operations.

We continue to be immensely grateful for Africa's
contributions to peacekeeping. In September of this
year, Vice-President Biden joined other leaders at
a summit focused on generating new commitments
to peacekeeping to ensure that the whole of the
international community does more to share the
burden. We have made demonstrable progress in
our cooperative efforts to deploy troops quickly to
crisis areas when the need arises, but we are still too
slow. Delay in our crisis response often means more
unnecessary deaths. To be quicker and better, we must
work more closely and collaboratively. That is why the
United States is committed to improving the Security
Council's engagement with the African Union Peace
and Security Council.

In our effort to do better, to do more and to do so
more quickly, we should learn from the past. The recent
transitions from African Union-led peacekeeping
operations to United Nations-led operations in Mali and
the Central African Republic demonstrate once again
that the African Union is sometimes in a position to
deploy troops to trouble spots much more quickly than
others. Without the initial leadership of the AU and the
contributions of African, French and other European
troops in Mali and the Central African Republic, far
more civilians would have died over the past year in
both countries. That is why the United States has created
the African Peacekeeping Rapid Response Partnership,
which envisions a new investment of $110 million
per year for three to five years to build the capacity
of African forces to rapidly deploy peacekeepers in
response to emerging conflict.

Under this programme, African partner nations
will receive additional support and will commit to
maintaining forces and equipment ready to rapidly
deploy as part of United Nations or AU missions to
respond to emerging crises. The United States is also
prepared to provide additional support, including
training for headquarters staff in key enabler functions
such as engineers, to catalyse the AU's efforts to
establish its African capacity for immediate response to
crisis, which is intended to facilitate the deployment of
tactical battle groups of approximately 1,500 military
personnel deployed by a lead nation or group of AU
member States.

There has been some discussion today about the
financing of peacekeeping operations. In order to be
effective, peacekeeping operations must be accountable,
and they must be accountable to the organization that
has authorized and funded them. That is why we do
not support assessing States Members of the United
Nations for the expenses of regional organizations.
Such arrangements do not allow the United Nations
to exercise critical, and indeed essential, oversight of
complex operational undertakings.

However, it is also why we continue to champion
and invest heavily in support for AU operations through
voluntary contributions and bilateral assistance. Since
2009, the United States has committed to providing
nearly $892 million to develop African peacekeeping
capacity and strengthen African institutions. Most
recently, in 2013 the United States committed nearly
$200 million towards training, equipping, sustaining
and airlifting African peacekeepers of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali.

In the Central African Republic, we provided
critical equipment and airlift to both AU troops and the
French forces operating alongside them. In Somalia we
have obligated more than $680 million to the African
Union Mission in Somalia on top of the more than
$455 million in United Nations assessed contributions
for the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia that are attributable to the
United States. Other partners such as the European
Union, through its African Peace Facility, have
similarly provided very robust support, and we look for
other partners to do the same.

In closing, I want to reiterate the depth of my
Government's commitment to strengthening African
responses to crises on the continent, both bilaterally and
through the Council. Today there are more than 67,000
African peacekeepers serving with the African Union
and the United Nations in Africa. Their contributions
to peace cannot be overstated. They deserve more
support from all of us to train, equip and enable their
deployment.

As President Obama said during our United States-
Africa leaders' summit held in August,

"The United States is determined to be a partner in
Africa's success - a good partner, an equal partner
and a partner for the long term."

