Mr. Jurica (Croatia): We thank the Secretary-
General for his thorough and comprehensive report on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/159), and we
welcome the observations and conclusions contained
therein. We would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing.

We have noted with satisfaction the Secretary-
General's appointment of Mr. Kai Eide of Norway as
his Special Representative for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We are confident that, with his excellent
background on security issues and his much-needed
experience and diplomatic skills, Mr. Eide will
successfully accomplish the mission entrusted to him.

In recent years, since the fall of the Taliban, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community have together taken some significant steps
in improving the political, social and economic plight
of Afghans. Conversely, and despite significant
increases in the number of foreign troops and in the
amount of aid provided to Afghanistan, violence,
insecurity and opium production have risen
dramatically. The international community must stand
united in support of the Government and the people of
Afghanistan and must, together with them, confront the
challenges and threats facing the country. Genuine
security remains the fundamental prerequisite for
achieving stability and development in Afghanistan.

As far as security is concerned, the main role
undoubtedly belongs to the military and the police. In
our View, the capacity of the Afghan national security
forces to guarantee security in their own country is of
the utmost importance in that regard. Therefore,
enhancing that capacity should be our first and most
urgent task.

At the same time, it is important to underline that
security cannot be provided by military means alone.
The military clearly has its place in such efforts, but, at
the same time, we must be aware of its limits. We
would like to see more civilian experts engaged on the
ground. Good governance and the rule of law, as well
as economic reconstruction and social development, all
play important roles in the efforts to stabilize
Afghanistan. We must support the efforts of the Afghan
Government to deliver services to its citizens. In our
View, that is a truly decisive element that will, over
time, build the people's confidence in the Government.

Of particular importance in that connection are
the strong support provided by the international
community to the Afghan Government and mutual
respect for the principles of aid effectiveness as
expressed in the vision set out in the Afghanistan
Compact. That important agreement should be
thoroughly implemented and should become the main
promoter of the Government's policies at the provincial
and local levels. Croatia welcomes the announcement
of preparations for an international conference to be
held in Paris to review progress in the implementation
of the Afghanistan Compact, as well as to discuss the
way ahead.

Afghan ownership is crucial for the ultimate
success of all peace efforts. We expect that there will
be great interest in the finalization of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy as a result of the open
public policy dialogue undertaken in Afghanistan on
the most important security, economic and
development issues. We are also confident that
coordinated and effective implementation of the
National Development Strategy will lead to substantive
improvements in the daily lives of most Afghans.

The rule of law and improving the current state of
affairs in the judicial sector are also of great
importance, and we support all activities pursuant to
the outcomes of the 2007 Rome Conference. However,
owing to the fact that the majority of cases still go
through traditional dispute settlement mechanisms,
Croatia believes that serious consideration should be
given to looking at ways to include human rights
principles in those mechanisms as well. We believe that
attention should be paid to the findings of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, because it
is precisely the concept of human rights that should be
the foundation for a stable and functioning political
system. In that context, particular attention should be
accorded to improving the status of women and
children and improving respect for their rights.
Croatia agrees with the view of the Secretary-
General that civilian-military cooperation is truly
indispensable if we are to overcome the existing
challenges. To that end, my Government would like to
stress the importance of the Provincial Reconstruction
Teams. As a practical form of civilian-military
partnership, these relatively small teams deployed in
Afghan provinces should be considered an innovative
form of crisis management unit designed to achieve
synergy in the joint activities of the two components.
That is why we believe that they should be fully
supported in their activities and that this concept
should be further developed on the basis of the lessons
learned since its establishment. In that regard,
UNAMA could assume a greater coordinating role in
relation to international assistance programmes.

We believe that the promotion of Afghan-led
reconciliation programmes, under the vigilant control
of the Afghan Government, is a particularly important
factor in the attempts to pacify the security situation in
the country. It bears repeating that a dialogue to that
end should take place exclusively within the
framework of the Afghan Constitution and with full
respect for the sanctions regime established by the
Security Council, particularly through its resolution
1267 (1999). National reconciliation would facilitate
the cooperation of various groups throughout the
country with the central Government and would, we
hope, lead to the pacification of the country and to
regional stabilization.

As expressly stated in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2008/159), the drug-related economy
represents a fundamental threat to political, economic
and social institutions in Afghanistan. There are clear
and growing links between the drug-related economy
and the insurgency, which has been financed largely
from that source. Moreover, the drug-related economy
in Afghanistan is a serious regional and international
problem, since Afghanistan is the largest producer of
opium in the world.

Accordingly, we place high hopes in effective
implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy,
particularly at the local level, in order to achieve a
sustained and significant reduction in the production
and trafficking of narcotics, leading to their complete
elimination. Afghan farmers should be strongly
encouraged to eradicate poppy production and should
be given assistance so that they can pursue alternative
livelihoods.

Croatia also believes that regional and
international cooperation is essential in the fight
against the illicit trafficking of drugs, including
through border management cooperation in the area of
drug control and through contributions to the Counter-
Narcotics Trust Fund. It is clear that a certain number
of high officials benefit from this trade and that the
drug-related economy generates widespread corruption.
Bearing that in mind, we urge the Afghan Government
to implement the national anti-corruption strategy and
to curb this silent destroyer.

