Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for the
constructive work that your delegation, Mr. President,
has been doing to advance the subject that we are
discussing today.

The delegation of Uruguay welcomes the
significant progress that has been made since the last
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277), which
helps in various ways to improve the situation of
civilian populations in armed conflict. This includes
the entry into force of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions in August; the progress made at the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute in extending criminal
individual responsibility to various circumstances;
recent developments with regard to the prevention of
genocide and other mass atrocities; and, in general, the
important normative progress made at Headquarters
with regard to various areas that pertain to innocent
civilians, particularly the most vulnerable, such as
women and children.

Despite this progress, Uruguay believes that there
is a wide gap between the legal developments that have
taken place in recent years with regard to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, and the real
situation of civilian populations affected by such
conflicts, including in those places where the United
Nations is represented by peacekeeping operations.

This is why we can only endorse the approach
suggested by the Secretary-General that we concentrate
on making a tangible difference on the ground and take
into particular account the situation as it is experienced
before we make critical decisions with regard to the
future of the United Nations presence on the ground.
On the one hand, we should avoid the premature
withdrawal of missions when we have yet to
effectively stabilize the security conditions. On the
other hand, we must reconcile this with the principle of
the consent of the host State, which has the primary
responsibility to provide such protection - a crucial
aspect that constitutes one of the pillars of the
legitimacy of this system and sets it apart from other
alternatives. The existence of realistic indicators, based
on the well-being of the population and prepared using
the input of the stakeholders involved, could be an
important step forward in this regard.

There is a world of difference between the will of
the Council and the effective implementation of
protection, not only in terms of the geographic
separation between Headquarters and the areas of
conflict, but also because of the lack of understanding
and coordination that may exist between those who
establish mandates and those who implement them,
given the difference between our desires and
expectations here and the reality of scarce resources
and wide-ranging difficulties on the ground. For this
reason, which we perceive primarily from our
perspective as a contributor of troops and police, our
country has attempted to play a constructive role at
Headquarters, particularly in the General Assembly,
which is the body that represents us, with the aim of
bringing those who establish mandates and those who
implement them closer together in order to reach the
broadest possible consensus on these issues.

In this regard, we believe that we should
recognize the valuable progress that has been made
over the past two years in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. It is in our interest to
continue working constructively along these lines. To
that end, on 6 December, together with the Mission of
Australia, we will organize a third workshop on the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. This
time, we will focus on the strategic framework for the
protection of civilians, as called for last March by the
Special Committee.

Finally, my delegation stresses the importance of
all parties in all situations preserving, strengthening
and complying with the standards of international
humanitarian law in order to ensure full respect for the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, as well as the absolute necessity of
facilitating access for humanitarian workers and of
ensuring adequate security for the fulfilment of their
tasks. In this regard, dialogue with armed non-State
groups should not be understood as a legitimization of
such groups; rather, it should be sought in order to
foster their understanding of and respect for
international humanitarian law.

Similarly, we reiterate that all humanitarian
responses must be sustainable and take the
development perspective into account so as to ensure
the required capacity-building at the national level in
this critical area. Uruguay believes that the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is a multidimensional
issue that feeds and is fed by other different but linked
issues, such as children in armed conflict and women
and peace and security, among others. For that reason,
it is critical to maximize coordination, produce
synergies, avoid duplication of efforts and make the
most effective use possible of the means at this
Organization's disposal on the ground.

