Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
and the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine for their
interventions.

As we enter the second quarter of 2013, the situation
in the Middle East remains a source of grave concern
for the world. The peace process between Israelis and
Palestinians remains perilously stalled. The situation in
Syria is deteriorating still further and the spillover effect
on its neighbours, with a full-fledged humanitarian
crisis, is ever more serious.

Despite the international community's best hopes
that appropriate conditions for the resumption of
negotiations on the two-State solution will eventually
prevail, the continued occupation of Palestine
indefinitely prolongs the uncertainty, instability and
insecurity so detrimental to both Palestinians and
Israelis. This state of affairs is untenable, and we must
see progress towards two States living side by side
in peace and security. That will be beneficial for the
Israelis, the Palestinians and the world as a whole, as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict constitutes one of the most
serious challenges to international peace and security.

The illegal construction and expansion of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, continue to pose the most
significant and immediate threat to the two-State
solution. Brazil reiterates yet again its call on Israel
to cease all settlement construction immediately and
unconditionally, to reconsider its decision to build in
the so-called E-l area, and to dismantle all settlement
construction. Settlements are illegal under international
law, constitute a major obstacle to peace, and contribute
to the indefinite protraction of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We must recall that Israel, as the strongest
party and the occupying Power, bears the greater
responsibility to take steps in order for peace to thrive.

Brazil followed with keen interest and expectation
the recent visit of United States President, Barack
Obama, to Israel and Palestine, and the subsequent talks
between Secretary of State John Kerry and leaders of
the region. We do hope that the resumption of effective
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations will once again figure
as a top priority for all involved. We urge Israelis
and Palestinians to take advantage of the momentum
that Brazil hopes will soon be generated and to show
the political resolve needed to reach the goal of an
independent, democratic, contiguous and economically
viable Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, living
side by side with Israel.

Although economic measures alone cannot
substitute for progress in the political arena, we
are convinced that fostering inclusive economic
development in Palestine is essential to consolidate the
State and build a solid basis for lasting peace.

In the same vein, the active engagement of Israeli
and Palestinian civil societies with their Governments
and with each other can contribute significantly to
peace efforts. Indeed, many civil society organizations
from both sides are a source of hope in the search for
peace. It is important to give adequate voice to those
civil organizations devoted to reconciliation, solidarity
and sustainable peace. They should receive greater
attention from multilateral organizations, including
UNESCO and the Human Rights Council.

In addition to the efforts of individual actors to
bring about the resumption of peace negotiations, the
Security Council must actively carry out its Charter-
based responsibility to promote peace in the Middle
East, as it currently does in so many other parts of the
world.

Turning to Syria, let me express our dismay at the
continuation of the unabated violence against civilians
and at the destruction of a brotherly country in a
conflict that has simply lasted far too long and taken too
high a toll. It must come to an end. Brazil reiterates its
strong and unequivocal condemnation of all violations
of human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated
by all sides. As we have consistently pointed out, the
primary responsibility to protect civilians lies with the
Government of Syria. At the same time, we recall that

all parties must fulfil their obligation to halt violence
and fully abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

Brazil views with serious concern allegations that
chemical weapons may have been used in Syria. We
believe that it is essential that this issue be dealt with
in accordance with established legal procedures, in an
impartial and transparent manner. We recall Syria's
obligation under the 1925 Geneva Protocol and reiterate
our view of the importance of Syria's accession to the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

Ifthe violence is to end, all stakeholders, especially
those who have significant influence on the parties,
must actively seek to convince all sides that there is
no military solution to the conflict and that they must
engage in a Syrian-led negotiation process. For this
purpose, it is critical to stop the flow of weapons into
Syria, which further feeds the erroneous perception that
military victory is a realistic possibility. Meanwhile,
civilians continue to bear the brunt of doubtful political
calculations.

We commend the work of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. Brazil
regrets that political differences have prevented this
body from engaging in the implementation of the final
communique ofthe Action Group for Syria ofJune 2012.
The elements contained therein provide the guidelines
for a viable negotiation process that will open the way
to putting an end to the crisis and meeting the legitimate
claims of the Syrian people for democracy, economic
opportunity and social justice, while preserving the
independence and territorial integrity of Syria. We
continue to firmly believe that a Syrian-led transition
can be attained only through comprehensive national
dialogue. In this sense, we should listen carefully to
the proposal of Guatemala for a second meeting of the
Geneva Action Group for Syria.

In view of the grave deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, Brazil continues to urge all parties
to facilitate safe, unfettered and immediate access for
humanitarian organizations to all those in need. We
praise the humanitarian assistance provided to Syrian
refugees by neighbouring countries. Brazil has been
contributing financially through the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to mitigate the
plight of the refugees and internally displaced persons.
Consideration must also be given to the lifting of all
unilateral sanctions that affect the lives of the civilian
population, in line with recommendations contained in
reports of the independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic of the Human
Rights Council.

Finally, let me briefly refer to Lebanon. Brazil
commends President Sleiman and the Lebanese
Government for continuing to adhere to the dissociation
policy. We call upon parties in Syria and actors in
Lebanon to effectively cooperate with the Lebanese
Government in its efforts to preserve such a key policy.

