Mr. Bolton and Mr. Rubio say the same. Look at this:
here are 40 tweets from Mr. Rubio against President
Nicolas Maduro. Could this man be representing the
people of Florida? Are these the values of the people
of the United States? Calling for the assassination of
a President? Given the context, that is clearly what it
means. And he does it, and nothing happens.

And the famous President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaido, said that last Saturday's events
"compel me to take a decision: formally tell the
international community that we should remain
open to all options to ensure the liberation of this
nation, which is fighting to be able to continue
to fight".

What does he mean by "all options"? He is saying: we
want a military intervention. Against my own country.
He must not have any family or friends in his country,
because, when the bombs fall in Venezuela, they will
not differentiate between who is a Chavista or not, or
between who is rich or poor. We have already seen that
in Iraq. We have seen it in Afghanistan. We have seen
it in Libya. We have seen it in Syria. And we have seen
it in how many other countries? Wherever the United
States goes, it leaves a humanitarian crisis behind. Who
assumes responsibility in the aftermath?

It was said that President Maduro was celebrating
on Saturday. That is absolute cynicism. The United
States destroys countries. The United States invades
them, alleging that there are weapons of mass
destruction. Millions of people die in the country, and
they celebrate it. The United States watches as a Head
of State, Muammar AI-Qadhafi, is lynched alive, and
then its Secretary of State celebrates and laughs about
it. Is that not cynicism? How many people have died
in Venezuela? They were expecting a tragedy. And it
was planned, as happened so many times over the past
20 years, including in 2002 when the United States
and the opposition used paid snipers to justify the
coup against President Hugo Chavez. It is all planned.
It was all a show to produce fatalities and then blame
President Maduro. It did not work out. However, they
blame Maduro, as Ms. DiCarlo did. "Yes, some people
died in Santa Elena de Uairen; we are investigating the
facts". In fact, it was a group of armed persons from the
opposition who were attempting to overtake a military
unit. They were contained through the use of progressive
and varied measures and the tools of the police, with
a view to maintaining public order. What happened?
How did those people die? "We are investigating all
the facts." Yet they have already accused and judged.
They already have autopsies in hand. That is something
really shameful.

Allow me to continue. What are we asking for
in that draft resolution? We ask that the threat or use
of force against Venezuela be rejected. That might
even be enough. But, in line with the United Nations
Charter, they should reject the blockade and pillaging
of Venezuela's funds and resources, which is making
the Venezuelan people suffer but which is being ignored
here. From August 2017 to date the cost has been
$30 billion. There is also the $15 billion lost because
of the confiscation of Citgo, which they stole from us
through United States imperial pillaging. There is the
$1.2 billion in Venezuelan gold held in the Bank of
England. There is the $1.4 billion being held by a Belgian
intermediary, Euroclear. And that is in addition to the
tens of billions of dollars blocked in banks. We have to
pay war-risk insurance to be able to bring imports into
Venezuela today. Is nothing happening in my country?
People are working in Venezuela. People are going to
school. People are going to university. They are going
to the beach. There are carnivals. Service provision is
better than last year and the year before. On prices, yes,
we have a problem with inflation. But we are starting to
see the light at the end of the tunnel, with the exchange
rate beginning to stabilize, as well as some prices. But
no, every day it is said here "the situation is worsening
dramatically" and "we have to intervene in Venezuela".
The Council is starting off with lies, and the United
Nations cannot stand for that.

We resolutely say that what we saw last Saturday
was a case of propaganda. Would it be too much to ask
all the members of the Security Council to at least agree
and adopt a draft resolution rejecting the use of force
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela? Or do we
have to help the United States leave "all options on the
table"? Or help President Trump eventually win Florida?
For we too are a product of domestic politics. They
use us in American domestic electoral politics. They
need the Cuban-American vote. And how do they pull
in those votes? By attacking whom? Cuba, Venezuela
and Nicaragua. They ideologize foreign policy so that
Mr. Trump can secure Florida, should he succeed in
being a candidate, which he intends to be. They have to
attack Nicolas Maduro. And ifit goes quite badly in his
campaign and there are many scandals that compromise
his integrity as President, then perhaps they will decide
to launch a military operation against Venezuela. And
some countries here are standing behind them. They say
so openly. Mr. Bolton has said repeatedly that it is about
oil. Mr. Trump himself has said that they will have to
get spoils when they intervene - we cannot just kill
people and seize political control over the Government;
no, we need to hang on to territory and resources, as
wars used to be. So in the case of Venezuela it is about
oil. And Mr. Bolton has already said that United States
companies will go and produce oil and take Venezuela's
oil. My God.

Venezuela was attacked. Some spokespeople,
including from the United Nations system, claim that
we were the aggressors last weekend. That is painful
to hear. Our national Bolivarian police, national guard
and armed forces, in a gesture of stoicism, restraint
and proportionality, were able to contain the madness.
However, it is easier to say, "Maduro massacred",
"Maduro burned" and "Maduro killed". Is that not
easier? Is that not better for the script justifying war?

Mr. Trump has threatened migrants that if they
reach the southern border of the United States they
will be shot at. Is anyone saying anything about that?
Mr. Trump declared a humanitarian crisis in the south of
the United States so that his contractor friends can build
a racist wall. Well, what would happen if there truly
were a humanitarian emergency and Cuba, Venezuela
and Nicaragua were to arm a convoy and try to force
it through the southern border to get humanitarian
assistance to the population in the south of the United
States, where according to its Government one in fact
exists? What would happen? What would happen to
those who tried to do so? Council members should ask
themselves that question. There is a lot of hypocrisy,
cynicism and arrogance at play here. That is what the
Security Council should underscore.

Let us take a look at the injuries. Major Ribero
Quevedo Ivan Alfredo with a contusion to the temple;
and a Second Sergeant with an irregular tibia fracture.
Injured civil servants. A Third Sergeant. A civilian
chief, Jennifer Yulente, with a fracture to the wrist.
Indeed, our people were injured. And who talked about
that. Where was it in the media? Who here mentioned
it in their statements today? It is as if we did not exist,
just like the almost 10 million Venezuelans who voted
to elect Nicolas Maduro last year do not exist. Just as
Chavism does not exist, which in fact accounts for more
than half the country. It is easy to try to erase history,
but attempts to do so will be unsuccessful.

There was a false-flag operation in which members
of the national guard were paid as much as $20,000
to desert. They are also after diplomats to get them to
defect. They went after the people, almost killing them,
including a Chilean journalist who was covering the
events. Did anyone here denounce that here? No one.
They were received as heroes by Mr. Duque, Mr. Guaido,
Mr. Pifiera and others, and the President of Paraguay,
whose name I cannot remember at the moment.

Also on the subject of false-flag operations, they
face two challenges in Colombia, regrettably, as the
Council will know - and this is the truth, it cannot
be denied - cocaine production and "false-positives"
operations. That is what is being endorsed here.

I want Venezuela to be left out the domestic debate
and electoral campaign in the United States. It cannot
be that they have to attack Venezuela to win the state of
Florida. Is it not just shameless? But it is clear; they say
it. Where did Mr. Bolton go to make a few important
announcements? To Miami. Where did Mr. Pence go to
meet with the Venezuelan community and others to make
some important announcements? To Miami. Where did
Mr. Trump go last week to announce sanctions against
Venezuela? To Miami. And the former Governor of
Florida and its senators were there, already preparing
the ground for the elections. They use Venezuela. They
use Cuba. They use Nicaragua. That cannot be allowed.
Where does the Charter of the United Nations say that
can be allowed? That is not possible.

The coup d'etat failed. Yesterday Mr. Pence,
Mr. Duque and Mr. Guaido called on the cartel
group of countries against Venezuela - which is
called the Lima Group, even though Lima is a very
beautiful Bolivian country; it should instead be called
the Washington Group. We have information that
in that debate many countries - and they should
be acknowledged - opposed the use of force and
military intervention proposed by those gentlemen to
attack Venezuela militarily. The Secretary-General
must pronounce himself in that regard. Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, whom I hope to see in a few hours, must do the
same. Or are we going to leave unaddressed the fact that
there is an intention to invade a country militarily and
nothing is being done preventively using international
law - not bombs, but international law? We think it is
high time to do so. We therefore underscore the need
for a draft resolution in that regard.

How are institutional crises resolved? And we can
indeed call it that in our case; I would even go so far
as to say that one of the five branches of Government
in Venezuela is in conflict with the other four. We
are prepared to sit down and craft solutions with
Mr. Guaido, Mr. Henry Ramos Allup and anyone else
who wants to sit down with us. However, they do not
want to sit down with us. They say, "the time is up
for dialogue", "Maduro has to go", "the regime has
to change", "Venezuela has to be invaded". Why is
there not a call to the Venezuelan opposition from the
Security Council and the various spokespersons of the
United Nations? They are the ones who do not want to
sit down; we already have.

They say we are wasting time. We were in
negotiations called by President Maduro from 2017 to
2018. The President appointed me Foreign Minister
on one day, and the following Saturday I was in
the Dominican Republic speaking with President
Danilo Medina Senchez and Foreign Minister Miguel
Vargas Maldonado, from where we called on former
Spanish Prime Minister Rodriguez Zapatero and
Mr. Julio Borges to sit down at the negotiation table. We
negotiated throughout November, December, January
and February. When everything was ready and agreed,
the Venezuelan opposition received an order not to sign
what was agreed upon and made us waste our time,
the time of the international community lose time and,
worst of all, the time of the Venezuelan people. And yet
it is said that Maduro is wasting time in the dialogue.
We cannot countenance so many lies.

I am deeply indignant at this. I love my country.
We love our people. How can you here say we want our
people to die, when the Bolivarian revolution saw social
investment on a scale unparalleled in Latin America.
The Venezuelan people did not know what investment
from oil meant until Hugo Chavez came to power.
In spite of the blockade, difficulties, aggression and
attempts to isolate us, President Nicolas Maduro has
not sacrificed a cent of that investment. We continue to
deliver housing. No schools or universities have been
closed. We continue to promote the social services
for Venezuelans free of charge, as far as we can. We
continue to provide subsidized food. We have deployed
1,000 different tools to redistribute the profits generated
by oil and our national wealth and to be able to contain
international aggression. But nobody sees any of that.

I should like to conclude by thanking the
Ambassadors who are here from many countries
across the five continents, because a group has been
created at the United Nations which saw 60 delegations
present at its most recent meeting. The spirit of that
group is to defend the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations - peace and security. It is not to
defend Venezuela - although in this case it is to defend
Venezuela, but if Nicaragua were in need tomorrow, it
would be Nicaragua; and if the day after that, for some
reason, it were Indonesia, it would be Indonesia. To
recover the principles of the Charter; to recover the
principles of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
we have agreed on the need to put a stop to this. As
the Ambassador of South Africa said at a meeting of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries: "Today it is
Venezuela. Who will it be tomorrow?"

(spoke in English)
Who is going to be next?
(spoke in Spanish)

It could be anyone, if we do not put a stop to the
madness of the United States and its pretensions. To
our friends in Europe - I would show the German
Ambassador that I have here a report from the Bundestag
research services division. Regarding recognition of the
supposed Government of Mr. Guaido', the report states:

"There are therefore important reasons to hold the
view that the recognition of an ad interim Head
of State in the present case involves interference
in the internal affairs of other States. Thus the
question of whether interference in internal affairs
in the present case should be defined as unlawful
interference continues to be appropriate".

The report continues:

"Such recognition must not be premature, that is, it
must not take place before the new Government has
been definitively inaugurated".

That is something that will never happen.
It goes on:

"Premature recognition of itself does not turn a
Government into a legitimate Government".

It therefore has not effect on international law.

In addition, such recognition constitutes a
violation of the legitimate Government whereby those
who recognize,

"... bear criminal responsibility under international
law. It also raises serious questions about the
maintenance of peace".

Did it not matter to the German Government that
the Bundestag's legal unit issued such information? Ask
the Bundestag now, because it turns out that Mr. Guaido
made an interpretation of Article 233 of the Constitution
supposedly to determine that President Maduro was

nowhere to be seen - President Maduro disappeared.
The ground swallowed him up; he vanished into thin
air. He does not exist. The 10 million Venezuelans
who voted for him do not exist. The other branches
of Government do not exist either. Then, faced with
this total absence, the utterly unconstitutional illegal
interpretation here is that Mr. Guaido could become
President of the National Assembly to undertake the
presidency of the Republic for 30 days, during which
elections would have had to be organized and held.

Those 30 days were to be just for that. But what
do we have 30 days on? We have a gentleman from the
National Assembly who illegally approved something
called a transition statute, claiming that those 30 days
can be renewed as many times as they want. Where
is that in the Constitution? President Maduro was in
charge of the presidency when Comandante Chavez
died. Elections were held in 35 days, not 30, because the
National Electoral Council requested five more days
and the Constitutional Chamber, the Electoral Chamber
of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice, granted five extra
days for the organization and holding of elections.

Therefore, this transition statute means that
Mr. Guaido has now assumed executive powers,
legislative powers, citizen's powers, electoral powers
and legal powers. But it turns out that Europe and the
United States have recognized an absolute dictator.
Fortunately, this Government is a fiction. It is like
the Government of Narnia - it does not exist. But it
poses a risk, for it opens the doors to this international
intervention. If it were not so dangerous, it would be
funny, but we cannot laugh. It is a total risk. I call on
the Council to reflect on this.

Please excuse my tone, but I speak as someone
who is outraged because he loves his country and its
people and its peace. I have heard so many groundless
statements here that are so biased it hurts to listen
to them, because one would hope that the United
Nations and multilateralism are what would halt the
unilateralism that the United States and the dictatorship
that the United States intends to impose upon the world.
I am sure that will be the case. I call on the Council to
reflect on behalf of my people, on behalf of President
Nicolas Maduro.

At one of our meetings, I gave Mr. Elliott Abrams
a book: Free Peoples Defeat Powerful Empires. It is
possible - we have done it - but we do not want war
in our country. We do not want a war in Venezuela; we
must prevent war in Venezuela. Read it. There is even
a quotation from Mr. Thomas Jefferson. I swear that I
will close with this, because I know that I have spoken
for a while, but the history of Latin America and the
United States must be understood. This is from one of
the founding fathers - incidentally, President Duque
thanked the founding fathers the other day for having
helped win the independence of our republic. That is
false. In 1786, Jefferson said the following:

"Our confederacy must be viewed as the nest
from which all America, North and South, is to
be peopled. We should take care to not to think it
for the interest of that great continent to press too
soon on the Spaniards. Those countries cannot be
in better hands. My fear is that they are too feeble
to hold them till our population can be sufficiently
advanced to gain it from them, piece by piece."

That was in 1786 - before the Monroe Doctrine,
before Manifest Destiny, before the Roosevelt Corollary
and before the current imperialist doctrine of President
Trump. That is the history of Latin America. With our
people, with our dignity, with our peasants, with our
indigenous peoples, with our communes and communal
councils, we - with the Venezuelan people and with
our Government - will always triumph.

