Mr. Bredi (Hungary): First, let me thank the
Austrian presidency for organizing this debate to mark
the tenth anniversary of the Security Council's work on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The Republic of Hungary fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union, and strongly
welcomes the resolution on the subject that was
adopted today (resolution 1894 (2009)).

The fact that today's armed conflicts still
continue to have a severe impact on civilians, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277), indicates the enduring need for the
Security Council and United Nations Member States to
further strengthen the protection of civilians, enhance
compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law and promote accountability for
violations thereof.

The primary responsibility to take all feasible
steps to ensure the protection of civilians is
undoubtedly that of the parties to an armed conflict.
Nevertheless, peacekeeping operations also can, and
must, make significant contributions to the safety and
security of civilians in all circumstances. Ensuring the
coherent, coordinated and effective implementation of
mandated protection activities is a major challenge for

United Nations peacekeeping that has to be addressed
as a priority by all of us.

As part of the next steps in the New Horizon
process, mission-specific protection strategies need to
be developed, and peacekeepers need clear operational
guidance based on reliable information gained through
an effective reporting system. The protection and
assistance needs of women, children and persons living
with disabilities - including refugees and internally
displaced persons, who constitute an especially
vulnerable group in situations of armed conflict -
have to be strengthened and specifically defined in
protection mandates.

This year, we have witnessed an alarming rise in
the frequency and gravity of attacks against
humanitarian personnel which have had significant
implications on humanitarian operations. It is
extremely important for the success of those operations
that all parties to armed conflict engage in the
facilitation of safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in need.

The Republic of Hungary supports the
comprehensive approach to preventing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
avoiding their recurrence and seeking sustainable peace
and justice.

As regards possible preventive action in the case
of serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law such as genocide and mass
atrocities, recent research shows that the progression of
events towards the actual commission of an
international crime is gradual, and that the period from
the initial threat to full genocide offers ample warning
time for the international community to take preventive
action. Hungary believes that the planned Budapest
Centre for the International Prevention of Genocide
and Mass Atrocities, as a catalyst for information and
early warnings from various sources, will serve as an
indispensable research mechanism to process and
transform this information into relevant policy
recommendations for the international community, thus
obviating further threats to the security of civilians in
armed conflicts.

Let me assure the Council once again of the
engagement of the Republic of Hungary and its
commitment to enhancing the protection of civilians.
