Mr. Wouters (Belgium) (interpretation from French):
We have read with keen interest the Secretary-General's
report on Africa. The analysis of the in-depth causes of
African conflicts and the formulation of a series of
recommendations have today given rise to an open and
helpful debate. We hope that the interest shown in the
course of this debate will be followed by concrete actions
from all actors identified in the report. This report cannot
be seen as an end in itself. It is rather an instrument that
should guide us in our action. Our efforts must be sustained
and should apply in other appropriate forums and be part of
a long-term programme. Failing this, however
commendable this good report is, it will remain just another
document.

The report strikes a subtle balance between the
responsibilities of the various parties in the past and at
present. My delegation wishes to highlight the importance
of an overall approach that would no way undermine this
balance. Partial implementation of these recommendations
would give rise only to a partial solution to the many
problems that have given rise to conflicts and impeded
sustainable development in Africa.

On the basis of a frank and honest analysis of the past,
with its successes and failures, the Secretary-General has
presented a vision for the future. Belgium, for its part, has
not hesitated to face up to the past, draw the necessary
lessons and determine a new approach in policy of
partnership and cooperation. In 1995, the Government of
Belgium drew up an agenda for a new dialogue and new
cooperation with Africa. More recently, it carried out an
overall assessment of its peacekeeping policy following the
1994 events in Rwanda, and certain conclusions have been
drawn as a result.

In order to develop a global strategy for the future,
one cannot merely analyse the past. I would therefore take
this opportunity to highlight those recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report that deserve special mention,
without doing an injustice to the rest of this excellent
report.

All organized societies are based on assurance that
their members will settle their differences without turning
to violence. Unfortunately, one cannot always rely on the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Consequently, the priority
goal of the Untied Nations must continue to be that of
providing instruments that would stem and resolve
conflicts while attacking their root causes. In this context,
cooperation with regional organizations opens up great
prospects. The recent close ties established between the
secretariats of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the United Nations are a good example, in particular
in improving the mechanism for monitoring and detecting
threats to peace and security. However, in order to
transform the rhetoric of prevention into the reality of
peace, an early-warning capacity must be followed up by
swift decision-making.

Using mandatory sanctions is a very useful
instrument available to the Security Council which
enables the United Nations to exert pressure without
resorting to force. Nonetheless, the concern expressed at
the negative repercussions on the most vulnerable sectors
of the population should encourage us to find ways of
transforming sanctions into a less indiscriminate
instrument and, if possible, a better targeted one.

Despite the significant progress made recently in
arms regulation and disarmament - I have in mind in
particular the success of the Ottawa Treaty - a great deal
remains to be done to make up for the absence of norms
governing conventional weapons, in particular small arms
and light arms. We note that in many armed conflicts in
Africa where the United Nations is called in to play a
role, the main and even sole weapon is precisely this type
of arms, which is readily available in the marketplace and
for which there is keen competition in exports. We
welcome the reactivation of the international commission
to investigate arms trafficking in Central Africa, and
Belgium intends to contribute to its financing.

Virtually all internal conflicts in Africa have an
influence on the stability and internal security of
neighbouring countries. There is therefore a need for
regional and subregional political cooperation.

Belgium has been paying special attention to
stepping up the peacekeeping capacity of African
countries. We are contributing to this effort through
support in terms of material and logistical support, as well
as through support for training peacekeeping forces. We
contributed to equipping a Malawi company participating
in United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda in

 

1994, to the deployment of OAU observers in Burundi in
1995 and to equipping a Burkina Faso battalion to
strengthen ECOMOG's forces in Liberia in 1997. More
recently we have taken part in training exercises in the
context of the initiatives undertaken by France and the
United States.
On the basis of our initial experiences, our
Government will soon be drawing up an overall approach
to assistance for peacekeeping efforts in Africa. This
concept will demonstrate Belgium's determination to
complement the efforts of the African countries, as opposed
to replacing them. Further, we welcome the steps taken by
the United Nations and the OAU to establish an appropriate
multilateral framework for the exchange of information and
for coordination.

In these days when humanitarian action is taking place
in an increasingly complex, explosive and dangerous
context, it is alarming to note that combatants deliberately
target civilian populations, either to displace them by force,
to terrorize them or make use of them. Similarly, major
humanitarian missions have been jeopardized, blocked or
manipulated following tactical or strategic calculations on
the part of the warring factions. These deplorable practices
very often confront the international community with
difficult choices. Nonetheless, these practices should not
stop the international community from making those who
impede humanitarian action and who refuse to respect the
essential norms of international humanitarian law face up to
their responsibilities.

Like the Secretary-General, we are convinced that
humanitarian action cannot replace political action. If we do
not at the same time attack the root causes of conflicts,
humanitarian assistance will only have a palliative effect.

The results of our cooperation with Africa show that
foreign aid, interventions or pressure, however significant,
cannot by themselves bring about sustainable development,
good governance or the rule of law. More than ever,
development in Africa is a long-term undertaking. Africa
must itself establish models for democratic societies in
which individuals can develop their potential and take part
in the decisions that concern them, in which minorities are
involved in decision-making and where there is a
consensus-based form of democracy. Regimes in which
corruption prevails over good governance, where human
rights are violated, where democratization remains a dead
letter or where there is complete reliance on foreign aid do
not meet the conditions for lasting stability. Such regimes
might well find international attention turning elsewhere.

The international community must, however,
undertake to support actively the efforts of those African
countries that have made a new beginning, or are
preparing to do 50. Development assistance should focus
on those areas in which it will have the greatest impact
and should seek to reduce the dependence of recipient
countries. We fully associate ourselves with the efforts of
the European Union, which, in particular through the
Lome process, assists developing countries to integrate
themselves into the world economy. We also support
efforts to assist Africa in escaping the debt trap.

In conclusion I would like to express my country's
fervent wish that the report of the Secretary-General
would contribute to mobilizing the political will required
from all sides. For its part, Belgium is prepared to
continue to assume its responsibility in Africa. We will be
active in those areas in which, in collaboration with our
African partners, we will be able to achieve progress and
open the path to development.

