Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending a warm welcome to Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and by thanking
him for his participation in this debate and for his
statement. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council in his capacity as Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

I also want to sincerely compliment the people of
Timor-Leste on their outstanding achievements, which
include, among other things, the successful conduct of
two rounds of presidential and parliamentary elections
this year. I believe that those achievements will enable
them to enjoy peace and prosperity as they harvest the
fruits of democracy.

We have witnessed a process whereby a close
partnership between the host country and the United
Nations has led that country on a promising path. In
that regard, I would like to make special mention of
the role played by successive earlier United Nations
operations in Timor-Leste, which will come to a close
at the end of this year with the drawdown of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

After Timor-Leste became independent, the United
Nations missions operating in the country evolved in
step with the country's progress. They maintained close
relations with the Timorese and supported the people
in their efforts. To that end, the Security Council
has played a very important role in synchronizing
the missions' mandates with the progress in Timor-
Leste. Such experiences give us confidence regarding
the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping for
international peace and security. The achievements in
Timor-Leste give us great hope for those who suffered
in the aftermath of conflict there and should serve to
encourage them as they move forward towards their
future.

Japan feels privileged to have been a part of United
Nations efforts in Timor-Leste. Japan's engineering
units participated in the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor, and helped to
establish a foundation for the country's development. In
addition, Japan dispatched its civilian police personnel
to support Timorese efforts to build their policing
capacity and strengthen their security institutions.
Japan also supported the national electoral process
by sending election observers. Up until September,
Japan continued to assist UNMIT by contributing two
military liaison officers to the Mission. The success
of Timor-Leste assures us of the effectiveness of our
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping. On the
basis of our experience in Timor-Leste, Japan would like
to intensify its efforts in working towards international
peace and security.

The achievements of the Timorese have opened the
door to a new stage of further development. In order
for Timor-Leste to begin its efforts on the right track
in that new stage, a successful and seamless transition
is vital. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
importance of ongoing joint efforts by Timor-Leste and
UNMIT for a smooth transition. Japan firmly believes
that the strong partnership between Timor-Leste and
UNMIT will add a successful transition to their success
story.

I believe that the key to the Timorese success is a
spirit of unity, which has been fully exercised not only
among the Timorese people but also among all entities
working on the ground, including UNMIT, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund, UN-Women, UNICEF and Timor-
Leste's bilateral partners. The future will require more
coordinated, harmonized and strengthened efforts by
all relevant entities, under the strong ownership of the
Timorese with their enhanced spirit of unity working
towards the country's future prosperity.

In conclusion, Japan will do its utmost to support
the further development of the country. As an old
friend of Timor-Leste, going back to the days before
independence, Japan supported its nation-building
efforts, while also supporting its development of human
resources, infrastructure and agriculture. Japan will
continue to assist Timor-Leste and further deepen its
support, together with our friends responsible for the
future of the Asia-Pacific region and the world.

