Mr. Bousquet: At the outset, I am very grateful
for the opportunity to appear before the Council today.

On behalf of the World Bank's Chief Executive
Officer, Kristalina Georgieva, allow me to commend
the leadership of the United Nations and the members
of the Security Council, particularly the presidency of
Peru, for organizing this crucial meeting.

The issue at hand today - how to effectively
support countries impacted by fragility, conflict and
violence - is one of the key challenges of our time. For
the World Bank Group, it is absolutely central to our
mission of eradicating extreme poverty.

Over the past three decades, the international
community has made impressive strides in reducing
poverty around the world. However, we know that
poverty is, in fact, rising in countries impacted by
fragility, conflict and violence, and it is estimated
that, if business continues as usual, by 2030 around
50 per cent of the global extreme poor will live in those
fragile settings. Furthermore, we know that levels of
conflict are on the rise. In fact, we see more violent
conflicts today than in the past 30 years, and we have
unprecedented numbers of people fleeing conflict
and violence, with over 70 million forcibly displaced
people around the world - double the level of 20 years
ago. These figures demonstrate that if we are to end
extreme poverty by 2030 and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, we must focus our collective
efforts on addressing fragility, conflict and violence.

The World Bank Group has indeed significantly
scaled up its investment on this agenda in recent years by
doubling our financial resources from $7 to $14 billion
for low-income, fragile and conflict-affected situations,
as part of the International Development Association
(IDA), our fund for the poorest countries.

While financing is essential, we also know that it
is not enough. Indeed, we must do things differently
if we are to make a positive and lasting change in
fragile settings. That is why we shifted our approach
under IDA to invest in prevention; to support refugees
and host communities, in recognition that it is both a
humanitarian and a development challenge; and to
catalyse private sector investment in the most difficult
environments. Perhaps more importantly, we have
scaled up our partnerships across the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus. Let me commend the
Secretary-General for his personal leadership on this
matter. In his briefing, he clearly and compellingly
spelled out the need for a more coherent approach
that builds on the complementarities and comparative
advantages of all actors.

In this context, we at the World Bank are very
pleased about the strong partnership between the United
Nations and the World Bank Group f the Partnership
Framework for Crisis-Affected Situations - which has
in fact helped us deepen our cooperation on the ground
in over 40 countries impacted by fragility, conflict
and violence. Furthermore, we have strengthened
partnerships with a diverse range of actors
beyond the United Nations, including the African
Development Bank, the European Union (EU),
civil society organizations and bilateral partners,
through what we call joint diagnostics, joint recovery,
peacebuilding assessments and on-the-ground
operational engagements.

For example, in response to the deteriorating
situation in Burkina Faso, we are currently working
in full cooperation with the United Nations under the
leadership of the Peacebuilding Support Office, the
EU and the African Development Bank to support the
country through a joint prevention and peacebuilding
assessment. This type of engagement is critical
to exploring how we can collectively support the
Government's efforts to promote peace and maintain
social cohesion, and to ensuring that scaled-up support
from international partners is well coordinated and
aligned, with a comprehensive strategy that links
prevention, relief, recovery and development.

Despite the important progress made, we know that
more needs to be done. That is why the World Bank
Group is building on the progress made under IDA
and now developing the first strategy to address the
challenges posed by fragility, conflict and violence.
We know that providing development support in fragile
settings is different than in non-fragile settings, given
the low capacity, insecurity and often fractured social
contract that characterize those environments.

Therefore, our forthcoming strategy will be
aligned with the sustaining peace agenda and aimed
at ensuring that our approach fully supports the most
vulnerable communities and effectively contributes to
the international community's efforts to promote peace
and prosperity. Concretely, the strategy will propose
tailoring our interventions to diverse situations of
fragility, while respecting our mandate as a development
actor and working in close partnership with the United
Nations and other actors. This is critical, as we know
that in order to maximize our impact on the ground, we
must address the distinct root causes of fragility and
offer solutions adapted to the specific local context. Let
me therefore highlight four key pillars of engagement
on which we are currently focusing our efforts.

The first pillar is prevention. We are scaling up
our investment, as a development actor, in prevention
in order to more effectively address risks before they
turn into full-blown crises. Prevention saves lives
and resources. In fact, we know from our flagship
study with the United Nations, Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
that every $1 invested in prevention saves about $16
down the road. Therefore, by focusing on prevention,
we can direct more of our resources to sustainable
development outcomes, rather than continuously
responding to emergencies. For example, our support to
youth, women and pastoralist communities in the Niger
exemplifies that approach, as we proactively help the
Government to address the grievances that often lead
to the emergence of violent conflict.

Our second pillar is remaining engaged in situations
of conflict in order to preserve essential institutions
and maintain service delivery. For example, in Yemen
we are partnering with the United Nations to help
deliver over $1.8 billion in development programmes
that focus on strengthening capacity, building the
resilience of local institutions and preserving hard-
won development gains, in full complementarity with
the essential humanitarian work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs the World Food
Programme, UNICEF and other partners.

Partnerships with security actors, such as
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali or the Central
African Republic, have also been key in providing
development support in the most fragile environments.
In the Central African Republic, for instance, the World
Bank is partnering very closely with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic to support peacebuilding
and social cohesion efforts by providing short-term
employment opportunities to over 20,000 workers in
some of the most insecure areas of the country, thereby
strengthening the presence and legitimacy of the State
in the eyes of its citizens.

The third pillar is supporting countries in critical
moments of transition to escape the fragility trap over
the long term. Critical to that effort is building State
legitimacy and capacity, fostering inclusive institutions
and renewing the social contract between citizens
and the State. We have also partnered with the United
Nations, under the leadership of the Department of
Peace Operations, to assess the macroeconomic and
fiscal impact of peacekeeping transitions. In Somalia,
we partnered with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia to assist the Federal Government in
evaluating the fiscal sustainability ofthe security sector
and the strength of its public financial management
system, in the context of a transition in the country.

Thefourthandlastpillarishelpingcountriesmitigate
the spillovers, such as forced displacement shocks,
that are created by fragility, conflict and violence. For
example, in countries hosting refugees, like Ethiopia,
Bangladesh, Jordan, Lebanon, and Colombia, we are
complementing the essential work of humanitarian
actors by supporting long-term development solutions
for refugees and host communities, including by
working very closely with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on promoting the policy
reforms needed to build social cohesion.

Let me conclude by stating that this approach is
underpinned by our firm conviction that partnerships
are essential to effectively prevent conflict, build
resilience and sustain peace. Only through collective
action will we be able to succeed in our mission to
end extreme poverty, and only though a shared vision
will we be able to effectively support the vulnerable,
disadvantaged and marginalized.

