Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Kang for her
briefing, which provided a vital update on ongoing
efforts to respond to the critical health needs of civilians
in the hard-to-reach and besieged areas in Syria.

We deplore the unacceptable human cost of the
ongoing conflict. It is simply staggering that more
than 400,000 Syrians live under siege conditions, a
tool of warfare that hearkens back to the Middle Ages
and which civilized nations and people have since
rejected. It is unimaginable that, in the twenty-first
century, parties to the Syrian conflict would resort to
the deplorable tactic of besieging cities and starving
whole populations, including women and children, as a
strategy of war. The employment of that strategy adds
another inhumane and horrifying dimension to the
Syrian conflict.

Earlier this week, we were heartened by the
breakthrough made by the United Nations and its
partners in securing safe passage for and conducting
humanitarian relief missions in the besieged towns of
Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya. We call on all parties to
ensure that such access continues to be provided to
those towns. We expect that access for humanitarian
relief and supplies will be granted to other hard-to-
reach areas, including those under siege by various
parties to the conflict.

Malaysia shares the concerns about the plight
of the 400 people in immediate need of medical
evacuation from Madaya, as highlighted by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We urge the relevant authorities to expedite their
immediate evacuation. For those whose condition
makes evacuation impossible, we would demand that
the necessary providers of medical assistance be given
unimpeded and expedited access to Madaya. While my
delegation welcomes the lifting of the blockade against
Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya, we stress that all parties
to the conflict have an unequivocal responsibility to
protect civilians at all times. The besiege-and-starve
strategy, which callously devalues human life and
violates international law, should cease.

In addition to the daily struggle to survive the
hail of bullets and bombs, the situation of ordinary
Syrians, including those under siege, is increasingly
precarious, in particular with the onset of winter.
We wish to underscore that a political solution to the
conflict requires no further amplification. For that,
the enablers must be put in place. Malaysia affirms its
support for the initiative led by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for a political resolution to the
Syrian conflict as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).
In that connection, we call on all the relevant parties
to participate in the talks facilitated by the United
Nations, which are scheduled to take place 25 January,
without preconditions. Syria and ordinary Syrians have
bled long enough.

In conclusion, while we are hopeful that the
upcoming talks can pave the way for a sustained truce
or a cessation of hostilities among the various parties,
particularly between the Government and the opposition
forces, the dire humanitarian crisis faced by ordinary
Syrians necessitates urgent action by the international
community to ensure the safe passage and conduct of
humanitarian assistance, aid and relief to those most
in need, especially those in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. We call on States with influence on the parties to
the conflict to do their utmost to ensure that the sieges
end and that humanitarian aid be made accessible to all.

