Mr. Konishi (Japan): In the years since the Pan Am
flight 103 and UTA flight 772 were downed, various
ongoing efforts have been made to clarify the facts
surrounding the disasters, among whose Victims was a
Japanese national. Nearly seven years ago, two persons
were accused of the terrorist attacks, and the Security
Council has sought through its resolutions 731 (1992), 748
(1992) and 883 (1993) to bring them to trial in an
appropriate court of either the United Kingdom or the
United States. Japan, which vigorously condemns terrorism
in all its forms, has appealed repeatedly for the Libyan
Government to comply with the requirements of those
resolutions. Regrettably, the Libyan Government failed to
do so, and efforts to bring the crime to justice seemed to be
hopelessly deadlocked. Such a prolonged stalemate is also
undesirable from the viewpoint of the authority of the
Security Council and the United Nations system.

Japan recognizes that it was under these circumstances
that the United Kingdom and the United States announced
the exceptional initiative of arranging for a trial of the
suspects before a Scottish court sitting in the
Netherlands - an initiative which is in line with the
proposal of the League of Arab States, for which the
Libyan Government has already indicated its support and
which has been endorsed by the Organization of African
Unity, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We pay high tribute to the United Kingdom and the
United States for their determination to resolve this

 

deadlock situation and thus maintain the authority of the
Council. Japan also commends the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for its cooperation in this complex and
difficult arrangement.

Japan welcomes Libya's confirmation, in its
statement of 26 August, with respect to the United
Kingdom/United States proposal that,

"it will deal positively with this step and will give it
the attention it deserves",

and hopes that it will respond promptly and positively to
the initiative by delivering the suspects. In doing so it will
pave the way for the resolution of this tragic situation and
for the lifting of the sanctions under which its people
have been suffering, both of which the international
community - including Japan - has long been waiting
for. It is in the hope of moving forward towards the
resolution of the situation that Japan supports the adoption
of this draft resolution.

