Mr. Fassi Fihri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
The Security Council's meeting today regarding the
very crucial and difficult situation in the Middle East -
the result of the horrendous Israeli aggression against
the Palestinian territories in Gaza. The continuous
menace has lasted for 11 days, the last four of which
have witnessed ever more serious escalations as a
result of the air, land and sea operations by the Israeli
military machine. Israel has used every indiscriminate
lethal weapon, destroying homes and their occupants,
exterminating entire families and creating orphaned
children and infants. Indeed, neither the mosques, nor
the schools, nor the funeral homes, nor the ambulances
have escaped the might of the Israeli military machine,
which has left a broad swath of destruction of property
and infrastructure. There has been heart-wrenching and
horrendous bloodshed, murder and the killing of
innocent civilians.

This painful situation imposes a special
responsibility on the French presidency of the Security
Council. You, Mr. President, represent a State that has
been fully versed in all aspects of the issue before the
Council for more than half a century. This issue has
many emotional and political implications, as
recognized in the proactive and responsible initiative to
harmonize positions undertaken in the context of the
President Sarkozy's visit to the countries of the region.

I would also like to commend His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and thank him for the firm and
principled positions he has taken since the beginning of
Israel's aggression against the Gaza Strip.

The level and mandate of the committee of the
League of Arab States attest clearly to the grave
concern of people in Arab countries with regard to the
seriousness of the situation in Gaza and its implications
for the peace and stability of the region as a whole.
They also reflect the concern and commitment of Arab
countries to responsibly and constructively adopting
and implementing the decisive political positions
called for by current events.

The eyes of the whole world are on the Council
today. The world is hoping that it will assume its
responsibilities by putting an end to the bloodbath,
maintaining international peace and security and
compelling Israel to immediately halt the activities of
its military machine and lift the siege on the
Palestinian people, who have suffered hugely from the
scourge war and displacement. In the face of this
escalating crisis, the Security Council cannot but
assume its political, moral and humanitarian
responsibilities to the brotherly Palestinian people and
all the peoples of the region.

The Security Council and the international
community at large must call the occupying Power to
task on its legal and political obligations, including
with regard to the provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law and norms. In that
connection, the Security Council is called upon to
assume its responsibility to deter Israel from
continuing its aggression before it further escalates the
situation in a way that would have consequences of
which we are all aware. The Council must do so by
adopting a strong, enforceable and comprehensive
resolution.

The Arab Group has very carefully crafted its
draft resolution to respond to all objective and
reasonable elements proposed, as well as to take into
account the concerns of everyone. The Group has
always been prepared to discuss all the ideas put forth.
Given the escalation of the situation and the rising
number of victims, the Group of Arab States calls upon
the Council to respond positively to the provisions of
the draft resolution that the Arab Group has submitted.

In addition to its horrendousness, what is taking
place in Gaza should not lead us to forget that the
Palestinian territories have suffered from siege and
oppression for years. That is the fundamental tragedy
that the Palestinian people have experienced for
decades. That tragedy has also been subject to Israel's
policy of establishing settlements and its ongoing
attempts to Judaize Jerusalem and eradicate its Islamic
character, to which His Majesty King Mohammed VI
has called for an end.

It is high time that the international community
assume its historic responsibilities towards the
Palestinian people and the other peoples of the region
in order to end repeated tragedies and contribute to the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to the
resumption and acceleration of negotiations on the
right track with a View to reaching a just and
comprehensive solution to the problem of the Middle
East that ensures Israel's withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State. That requires stepping
up efforts to achieve national reconciliation and unity
among the Palestinians and the strengthening of their
legitimate institutions. The Palestinian people are one
people, destined to live in dignity in a land that is
united, independent and viable, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, side by side with the State of Israel in
mutual peace and security and in accordance with
international legitimacy, the principle of land for
peace, the Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

