Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): We wish
to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his extremely
specific briefing, which will be most useful in our
further considerations. The representative of Ireland
will shortly make a statement on behalf of the
European Union, which we fully endorse.

Like other delegations, we have many reasons to
be pleased by events in Timor-Leste. First, we take the
opportunity afforded by the presence of Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-
Leste, to express our gratification at the progress that
has been made by the people of Timor-Leste since its
accession to independence and the deployment of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

At the same time, along with that outstanding
progress, there remain reasons for concern. I refer
especially to the fact that, in some ways, the domestic
security of the country is still fragile, due in particular
to the activities of armed groups, which have already
been mentioned. Externally, the armed forces of Timor-
Leste are apparently unable to cope alone with
potential serious border incidents. Finally, the issue of
the repatriation of East Timorese refugees in West
Timor remains a potential source of instability.

In that context, what should we do? France, for
its part, supports an extension of UNMISET's mandate
for a one-year period, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Such an extension should enable the
United Nations to consolidate the gains achieved. In
our view, we should reconfigure the mandate and
emphasize assistance to Timor-Leste's authorities. The
main ideas proposed by the Secretary-General seem
relevant. UNMISET must continue to provide
assistance to the country's judicial system and
administrative agencies and must help to maintain
security and stability by supporting in particular the
training of Timor-Leste's police force.

At this stage, it is difficult to assess either the size
or the components UNMISET will need after the
extension and reconfiguration of its mandate. For our
part, we have confidence in the proposals to be made
by the Secretary-General when he indicates the format
he believes to be best adapted to the needs on the
ground. We should, of course, also be attentive to the
concerns of the various parties involved and to the
development of the situation on the ground.

In parallel, it remains important that we define a
clear exit strategy. The extension of UNMISET's
mandate must enable the United Nations to continue its
disengagement. Clearly, it is essential that the
Organization show its capacity to terminate its
operations when the right conditions have been met and
its capacity to extend stabilization efforts through
development assistance and involvement by bilateral
donors.

Thus, we should like to make a threefold
suggestion. UNMISET's timetable should not exceed
one year, depending, of course, on the situation on the
ground. We believe that in order to hold to such a
deadline, we should set out a precise troop-reduction
schedule until UNMISET's ultimate withdrawal.
Finally, we believe we should also continue to
encourage the Timorese authorities to pursue their
efforts with a View to consolidating the State and
strengthening the country's independence.

