Mr. Haysom: In 2016, Afghanistan is being as
severely tested as it was in 2015, by the task ofmanaging
its difficult transition, with its interrelated political,
economic and security challenges. To survive 2016,
the National Unity Government will need to overcome
five distinct hurdles, namely, a contracting economy
characterized by low growth and high unemployment;
an intensifying insurgency, regarded by some as an
eroding stalemate; and an increasingly fractuos and
divided political environment. In addition, Afghanistan
will need to secure significant medium-term financial
support from the international community at the
Warsaw and Brussels conferences this summer. Finally,
it will need to achieve progress towards sustainable
peace, without which all the other gains will be
threatened. For 2016, survival will be an achievement
for the National Unity Government. Some may criticize
that benchmark as being low. Yet Afghanistan must
overcome each and every one of those five hurdles
to avoid severe consequences. Survival cannot mean
inaction or treading water; it means active engagement
in confronting those challenges.

On the economic situation, we acknowledge that
there was a failure to appreciate the shock of the
withdrawal of the international community at the end
of 2014. In 2012, decisions on the future of Afghanistan
assumed the continuation of an annual growth rate of
8 per cent and that the exploitation of Afghanistan's
abundant mineral resources would drive economic
development. It is now clear, however, that neither would
occur. The World Bank now expects low economic
growth, off a low base. In addition, the latest weather
forecast suggest that some areas of the country may be
affected by drought this summer, thereby increasing
Afghanistan's humanitarian vulnerabilities. Low levels
of growth have resulted in high unemployment. The
hundreds of thousands of young people who seek to join
the work force each year confront the absence of jobs
and complain of corruption in public and private life.
That combination fuels not only the impulse to migrate,
but also lays a foundation for social volatility.

However, that picture is mitigated by the
Government's effort to implement its reform agenda,
as articulated in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, to create jobs. In 2015,
the Government met the International Monetary Fund
goals under the recently concluded staff-monitored
programme, as well as domestic revenue-collection
targets. It avoided the liquidity crisis it faced in 2014.
And the Government has now stated its clear intention
and taken preliminary steps towards putting an end
to the pervasive culture of graft in the armed forces,
the civil service, the banking sector and in public
sector procurement. The Government's engagement
with it neighbours, bilaterally and through initiatives
such as the Heart of Asia Process and the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan,
for the purpose of regional economic integration has
begun to bear fruit, inter alia, with the launch of the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline project.
Those are encouraging, but only first, steps in a long
road towards self-reliance.

With regard to the security situation, we can expect
a difficult fighting season. The Taliban, emboldened
by their military successes in Kunduz and elsewhere,
will continue to test the Afghan security forces across
the country, including as we speak, from Helmand
in the south, to Baghlan province in the north. Yet in
this first year of independent command, the Afghan
security forces have largely held their own in the face
of continuing high rates of attrition.

The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
are undertaking efforts to adapt and improve. They
are absorbing the lessons from Kunduz and elsewhere,
including, we hope, as they relate to the use of armed
militias. They are reconstituting their front-line units and
concentrating their otherwise thinly spread presence in
the field in order to adopt a more offensive operational
posture to prevent insurgents from gaining momentum
in advance of the fighting season. The stakes are high,
not least because the loss of a provincial capital, even if
temporarily, will have significant repercussions for the
political standing of the National Unity Government. On
a positive note, since my last briefing (see S/PV.7591),
the active presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh has been confined to a small area in the
east of the country, following operations by Afghan
security forces, with international military support.

With regard to the political transition, the
National Unity Government continues to be subject
of criticism on account of the economic and security
deterioration, although that is not of its own making. It
is being challenged by a fractious political elite and the
erosion of a necessary sense of national unity - and,
consequentially, that most precious political commodity,
confidence in the future. In the face of calls for
reviewing the current political framework, the United
Nations and the international community have made it
clear to all stakeholders that they stand firmly behind
the National Unity Government. We can even positively
report that, despite delays in effective decision-making,
the Government has now appointed an Attorney
General and a Minister of Interior. A number of key
posts, however, remain to be filled.

Electoral reform is important for the National
Unity Government to indicate manifest progress in
democratization and to fulfil the commitments it made
to the population in 2014.

The announcement ofa 15 October election date has
brought some clarity, but for there to be real progress,
what is required is the introduction of electoral reforms
and the standing-up of the election management bodies.
The United Nations has made it clear that it expects
Afghans to take these decisions expeditiously and on
the basis of the broadest consensus. We can report
that, only this week, the Government finally issued
a decree establishing a new selection committee to
nominate independent election commissioners. Yet
the urgency to complete preparations remains, and
the failure to undertake these preparations will have
political consequences.

In the coming months, the international community
will make critical decisions at Warsaw and Brussels on
the level and type of assistance that it will continue
to provide to Afghanistan. As the country continues
to rely on external funding sources for 69 per cent of
Government expenditures, failure by the international
community to pledge a medium-term commitment
to Afghanistan will have a devastating impact
both materially and on the levels of confidence of
ordinary Afghans.

Because of alternative demands for international
attention and resources, donors will need to be
assured that their assistance will have a tangible
impact. Afghanistan must show, in particular, that
it is committed to tackling corruption, making the
necessary governance reforms, addressing the illicit
economy and generating confidence in Afghanistan's
future. Investment in Afghanistan's must be shown
to be a better alternative to the costs of integrating
immigrants. However, donor expectations of
Afghanistan's reform agenda must be realistic, taking
into account the formidable challenges facing the
country. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) itself will assist donors and
the Government in formulating a joint consensus on
this programme. The final hurdle is progress towards
a sustainable peace. Afghans want peace, they deserve
peace, but most importantly they need peace. Without a
peace process, the sustainability and viability of all our
efforts in Brussels, Warsaw, New York, and elsewhere
to bring stability and prosperity to Afghanistan will be
called into question.

The establishment of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group is a welcome development that has reinvigorated
efforts to put a peace process on track. We notably
appreciate the efforts of Pakistan to assist in midwifing
such talks. A successful peace process will require the
support of neighbouring countries and the wider region.
As such, and with the increasing regional dimension of
terrorism, it will be important for countries ofthe region
to collaborate on a common approach to the shared
threat as well as to act in support of Afghanistan's
peace initiatives.

We have called repeatedly and we will continue
to call for nothing less than direct talks between the
Taliban and the Afghan Government. I again met
with the Taliban Political Commission last week
and reiterated that peace in Afghanistan requires
an intra-Afghan dialogue that must, by necessity,
involve the Taliban and Taliban groups. However,
they reiterated that they were not yet ready to engage
directly with the Government. The United Nations will
continue to energetically engage with all stakeholders
offering support, assistance, advice, good offices and
supplementary channels of communications. Whatever
the eventual path forward, the United Nations will also
encourage the participation of women in any peace
process so as to ensure that women's voices are heard
and that their rights are protected.

Some 11,000 civilian Afghans were killed or injured
last year as a result of the conflict. A quarter of these
victims were children. We are conscious that behind
this figure lies the tragic loss and grief of surviving
members of families and communities. It is no longer
sufficient for parties to the conflict to make public
statements on the need to avoid civilian casualties;
they must change the way they conduct the war. The
United Nations has recently expressed its concern at the
disturbing pattern of attacks and raids on educational
and medical facilities, in contravention of international
humanitarian standards. We do, however, welcome the
Government's renewed commitment and recent steps
to prevent the recruitment of children by parties to
the conflict.

UNAMA welcomes its refreshed mandate to be
adopted by the Security Council today. We reassure the
Council of our commitment to the ever more effective
discharge of our mandate for the benefit of the people
of Afghanistan.

