The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Alain Dej ammet, Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of July 1996. I know I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Dejammet for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 9 July 1996 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/542)

Letter dated 11 July 1996 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1996/556)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have the following
documents before them: S/ 1996/542, letter dated 9 July
1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the report
of the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
S/1996/556, letter dated 11 July 1996 from the President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/l996/510, S/l996/523, S/l996/565 and S/l996/576,
letters dated 2, 3, 18 and 22 July 1996, respectively, from
the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and S/ 1996/535, letter dated 8 July
1996 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
annexed to the letter from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Council of 9 July 1996
(S/ 1996/542).

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the conclusions reached at the Peace
Implementation Council in Florence, Italy, on
13-14 June 1996 (S/l996/446). It stresses the
importance of the forthcoming elections in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to be carried out in accordance
with the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto
(collectively the Peace Agreement, S/l995/999, annex), which will allow for the establishment of the
common institutions and which will be an important
milestone for normalization in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It calls upon the parties to ensure the
prompt functioning of these institutions after the

 

elections. It supports the preparatory work done in this
regard.
"The Security Council expects the parties to
increase their efforts towards the maintenance and
further enhancement of conditions necessary to ensure
democratic elections, as provided for in Article I of
Annex 3 of the Peace Agreement, and to abide fully
by the results of those elections. In that context, the
Council stresses the importance of the agreement
reached by the Bosniac and Bosnian Croat leaderships
in Mostar and facilitated by the European Union
Administration of Mostar (EUAM) that has at last
secured Bosnian Croat participation in a unified city
administration in Mostar on the basis of the election
results of 30 June 1996. The Council expects the
Bosniac and Bosnian Croat leaderships in Mostar to
implement this agreement fully and without delay, and
stresses that failure to do so would seriously
undermine crucial efforts to ensure lasting peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It expresses its
full support for the international organizations which
are currently working in Mostar, and in particular for
the EUAM, and calls on both leaderships to cooperate
fully with the EUAM. It calls on the Government of
the Republic of Croatia, which bears a special
responsibility in this context, to continue to use its
influence on the Bosnian Croat leadership to ensure
full compliance with its obligations. The Council will
continue to follow closely the situation in Mostar.

"The Council underlines that the continued lack
of progress in transferring authority and resources to
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
potential danger for the peace implementation process.
The Council calls upon the Federation partners to
accelerate their efforts for the establishment of a fully
functioning Federation, which is an essential
prerequisite for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"The Security Council notes with particular
concern the conclusions of the report of the High
Representative on the implementation of the human
rights provisions of the Peace Agreement that the
parties are not implementing their commitments in
respect of human rights, and that this failure is
impeding the return of refugees. It condemns all acts
of ethnic harassment. It calls upon the parties to the
Peace Agreement to take immediately the measures
identified in the report to stop the trend of ethnic
separation in the country and in its capital, Sarajevo,
and to preserve their multi-cultural and multi-ethnic

heritage. The Council deeply regrets the undue delay
in implementing measures regarding, inter alia, the
development or creation of new independent media
and the preservation of property rights, and calls
upon each party to implement them immediately.
The Council is ready to consider further reports by
the Office of the High Representative on all aspects
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
including those mentioned above.

"The Security Council stresses that, under the
Peace Agreement, persons indicted by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
who have failed to comply with an order to appear
before the Tribunal may not stand as a candidate or
hold any appointive, elective or other public office
in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Any
continued holding of such an office is unacceptable.
In this context the Council notes the fact that, as a
first step, Radovan Karadzic, after officially handing
over his executive powers in Republika Srpska on
30 June 1996, agreed on 19 July 1996 to cease
definitively all political and official activities, thus
facilitating the electoral process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Council expects this undertaking
to be implemented fully and in good faith, and will
closely monitor further developments.

"The Security Council stresses that all States
and concerned parties have an obligation, in
accordance with resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May
1993, other relevant resolutions and the Peace
Agreement, to cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal and to comply without exception with
requests for assistance or orders issued by a trial
chamber. The Council has considered the letter from
the President of the International Tribunal of 11 July
1996 (S/ 1996/556), which referred to the conclusion
of the Trial Chamber of the International Tribunal
regarding the failure to execute the warrants of
arrest issued against Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic due to the refusal of the Republika Srpska
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate
with the Tribunal. It condemns this failure to
execute these arrest warrants. The Council notes the
recent visit by the delegation from the Republika
Srpska to the International Tribunal in The Hague
for the purpose of discussing all aspects of
cooperation with the Tribunal, and expects that
cooperation with the Tribunal to bring to justice all
persons indicted will be realized. The Council
condemns the failure to date of the Bosnian Croat

 

leadership and the Croatian Government to comply
with the orders of the International Tribunal regarding
several persons indicted for war crimes. The Council
demands the full cooperation of all parties concerned
in the immediate execution of all warrants of arrest
and the transfer to the Tribunal of all persons indicted,
in accordance with article 29 of the Statute of the
Tribunal. The Council further condemns any attempt
to challenge the authority of the International Tribunal.
The Council underlines the importance of the
obligations undertaken by the parties to the Peace
Agreement to cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal and stresses that failure to arrest and transfer
persons indicted by the Tribunal is a violation of these
obligations. The Council stresses that compliance with
the requests and orders of the International Tribunal
constitutes an essential aspect of implementing the
Peace Agreement, as provided by previous resolutions;
the Council is ready to consider the application of
economic enforcement measures to ensure compliance
by all parties with their obligations under the Peace
Agreement.

"The Security Council condemns any threat or
act of violence directed against international personnel
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular those directed
against personnel belonging to the United
Nations International Police Task Force on the
territory of the Republika Srpska. It condemns also
the obstacles put in the way of forensic
investigations carried out by international
organizations on the territory of the Republika
Srpska as well as on the territory of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It calls upon all parties
to lift those obstacles and to ensure full freedom of
movement and safety for all international personnel.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the High Representative and for all international
organizations currently working in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. The Council stands ready to consider the
need for further action in order to continue and
consolidate the efforts made for full implementation
of the Peace Agreement. The Council welcomes all
initiatives which will lead to a greater degree of
stability and cooperation in the whole region."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l996/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

