Mr. Codman (Turkey): First of all, Mr.
President, let me join previous speakers in welcoming
Your Excellency and commending the Ugandan
presidency for organizing this timely meeting on post-
conflict peacebuilding and preparing the draft
presidential statement, which we fully support. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive report (S/2009/304) and briefing, which
included valuable assessments and recommendations
on how to develop United Nations activities pertaining
to post-conflict peacebuilding. I wish also to thank the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Assistant Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the representative of the
World Bank for their valuable contributions.

I will try not to repeat what has been said around
the table regarding the Secretary-General's report. In
brief, we support the Secretary-General in his efforts to
streamline the response of the United Nations in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, and we share his ideas
with respect to the way forward. Yet, I would like to
emphasize and reiterate some issues which we deem
particularly important.

As experience shows, winning peace is often
more difficult than winning war. Peace processes in
their early stages are often fragile, and relapse into
conflict poses an even greater threat. Thus, the risk of
failure is very high if peace is not supported from day
one. In that respect, the first two years after the end of
a conflict are perhaps the most critical period, during
which we can either sow the seeds of a lasting peace or
set the course towards a dead end, albeit with good
intentions.

It is also a fact that tangible results in that period
can be achieved only if political, social, humanitarian
and economic considerations, as well as security needs,
are addressed in a holistic manner. In this context and
as was pointed out in the thematic debate held on
29 June under Turkey's presidency of the Council,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are inseparable,
integral parts of a whole, and success can come only if
we treat them as such.

In the realm of peacebuilding, the United Nations
undoubtedly has a significant role to play. There is
ample room for improving the United Nations response
to post-conflict situations, including, first and

foremost, taking the necessary measures to ensure that
the entire United Nations system acts in unison
towards a single set of objectives and delivers as one.
Quick and effective results can be achieved only
through such a synergy of efforts. Thus, we welcome
and support the Secretary-General's recommendations
towards that end.

That said, and notwithstanding its key leadership
responsibility, the United Nations is not the only actor
that can make a difference on the ground in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict. Indeed, given the
manifold and multifaceted challenges, effective
peacebuilding requires much broader international
support. Thus, the coherence and coordination of
international endeavours become key to helping
countries succeed in their efforts to construct and
implement a viable road map to peace. Indeed, echoing
the words of the Secretary-General,

"National authorities, the United Nations system
and other international partners can have a much
greater and earlier collective impact if we agree
on an early strategy with defined and sequenced
priorities, and align action and resources behind
that strategy" (5/2009/304, para. 6).

In other words, the strategy for building peace ought to
be devised as early as possible, should cover all aspects
of the requirements of the post-conflict situation, has to
be based on the common vision of national and
international partners alike, and must be well supported
by financial resources and technical expertise.

Additionally, priority-setting must reflect the
unique conditions and needs of the country, taking into
account the lessons learned from past experiences and
matching the existing capacities available to the task in
hand. The expertise and accumulated experience of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme, in particular, can be extremely helpful in
guiding post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. We
also believe that the rapidly progressing Peacebuilding
Commission could and should play an important role in
promoting an integrated approach to peacebuilding. We
therefore look forward to the review in 2010 with a
view to further enhancing its capacity and
effectiveness.

In the light of the foregoing, we agree with the
five-point agenda set out by the Secretary-General to
facilitate an earlier and more coherent response of the
wider international community that reflects all these
core elements. In particular, we strongly support the
view that building national capacity and thus ensuring
national ownership is an essential priority and that it
has to be considered from the outset as the central
element of all peacebuilding efforts.

Indeed, we have to seize the rather limited
window of opportunity in the immediate aftermath of
conflict by responding rapidly and effectively in
support of the development of national capacities
across the entire spectrum, ranging from security to the
rule of law, from national reconciliation to electoral
processes, and from basic socio-economic services to
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.

Cognizant of the importance of delivering
substantial assistance in these key areas, Turkey
continues to focus its support in post-conflict societies
on these key deliverables. For instance, our policies
and programmes in Iraq and Afghanistan, where we
continue to undertake rather ambitious reconstruction
and development activities, are designed precisely for
that purpose. Turkey's provincial reconstruction team
in Vardak, Afghanistan, in particular, is a good example
of our comprehensive and multifaceted approach,
placing national capacity-building at its core.

We also recognize the importance of rapidly
deployable civilian capacity to help achieve these key
deliverables, and we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the pool of civilian experts be
broadened.

Finally, I would like to touch upon the issue of
financing. Better peacebuilding practices require better
financing. Thus, we recognize the need for more
flexible and predictable funding for post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts. In this context, the
Peacebuilding Fund is setting a good example. Turkey
stands fully behind its commitments to the Fund and
makes its contributions to the Fund without caveat. We
also agree with the observations of the Secretary-
General that the country-level multi-donor trust funds
should be used more extensively and that the
partnership between the United Nations and the World
Bank must be further improved.

Before concluding, I would like to underline once
again Turkey's continued commitment to supporting
the enhancement of the United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in every possible way, as well as our
determination to help ensure a well-coordinated
international response in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, which represents a vital window of
opportunity to build and sustain peace. As Ambassador
Mufioz said, the time has come to move from words to
action, and Turkey is ready to assume its fair share in
this endeavour.

