Ms. Rasi (Finland): It is a great pleasure for me to
address the Security Council today under your presidency,

Mr. President.

I have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the
European Union countries.

On 5 May 1999 the Agreements on East Timor were
signed in New York. They will lead to a popular
consultation of the East Timorese people on whether they
will accept the proposed constitutional framework for
autonomy or reject it and opt for independence. The
European Union warmly welcomed the signing of these
Agreements in its declaration of 7 May 1999. The Union
believes that these Agreements constitute a major
breakthrough in the search for a settlement for East Timor.

Since 5 May 1999, substantial work has been done
towards the implementation of these Agreements. On 11
June 1999, the Security Council established the United
Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) to organize and
conduct a popular consultation, scheduled for 30 August
1999. Today the Security Council will decide to extend the
mandate of UNAMET until 30 November 1999 and to
adjust the tasks and structure of the Mission for the needs
of the interim phase between the conclusion of the popular
consultation and the start of the implementation of its
results.

The European Union reiterates its strong support for
the consultation process, which will enable the East
Timorese people to express their views as to the future of
the territory. In this context, I would like to mention that
the European Union is sending a number of observers to
the consultation and that the Presidency has appointed the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland as its personal
representative for these matters.

The European Union underlines its full support for
the work of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Representative; and the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) in pursuing the process and would like
to congratulate it for a successful registration of voters.
The European Union urges the Government of Indonesia
and the local authorities in East Timor to cooperate fully
with the United Nations.

The European Union continues to be deeply
concerned about the situation in the territory, in particular
the intimidatory behaviour of the pro-integration militias,
which numerous independent observers have linked to
elements of the Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI). We urge
the Indonesian authorities to live up to their obligations
under the New York tripartite Agreement and to ensure
that the necessary security conditions will be there before,
during and after the ballot.

The European Union therefore notes with profound
concern that acts of political violence continue to be
perpetrated in East Timor, in direct contravention of the
spirit and the letter of the Agreements. We are
particularly disturbed by the violence in Dili on 26
August 1999. The European Union recalls its position that
the Indonesian Government remains obliged to maintain
and preserve security, stability and public order in East
Timor, to disarm militias and to hold accountable the
perpetrators of the killings, whether they are advocates of
autonomy or of independence.

The European Union urges the Government of
Indonesia to establish a secure environment devoid of
violence and all forms of intimidation, which is a
prerequisite for the holding of a free and fair ballot in
East Timor.

A point of grave concern to the European Union is
the future of Xanana Gusmao. It is the view of the
European Union that his immediate release, as well as
that of all East Timorese political prisoners, is an
essential factor for the success of the consultation process.
Furthermore, given that Mr. Gusmao is a member of the
Commission on Peace and Stability, it is essential that he
should be allowed to participate fully in its activities.

 

The European Union welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to create an East Timorese consultative
commission and hopes that all parties will be able to
engage in its work.

The European Union has observed with great respect
the enormous efforts undertaken by the Indonesian people
and its Government to organize free and fair elections in
Indonesia. The European Union trusts the Indonesian
Government and local authorities will also honour their
commitments towards the implementation of the New York
Agreements. The European Union remains fully committed
to supporting them. The European Union also remains fully
committed to supporting the United Nations in this very
difficult mission on the question of East Timor.

