Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Valentine Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
tenth report covering the period from 20 April to
21 October. One cannot help but notice the contrast
between the dynamic of regional integration at the
European level and the persistent political crisis that
confronts the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Indeed, the implementation of the Dayton accords,
the basis for stabilizing the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, remains a daily challenge due to dissent
among the political parties, the paralysis of political
life, non-compliance with the rulings of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, and above all
to the secessionist rhetoric of the Republika Srpska,
which overtly threatens the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the unity of
the Federation.

In that regard, regrettably, the prospective rulings
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
will be subject to continued questioning and viewed
as unilateral acts adopted in violation of the Dayton
Accords. The negative impact of that impasse can
be measured by the scale of the demonstrations
in June that were triggered by the inability of the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
adopt amendments that would allow unique individual
identification numbers to be issued to citizens of the
Federation. This trend threatens to return the country
to the torment of the past and to destroy all that has
been laboriously built over decades with the support
of the international community. The parties' sense of
responsibility to their respective communities and to
the very survival of the Federation is immense. It must
lead them towards the compromises required to ensure
that, in the interests of all concerned, institutions are
able to function.

Despite those major challenges, some measures
taken offer grounds to hope for a return to constructive
dialogue, including the pursuit of discussions on State
and defence property; the regular meetings of the
Council of Ministers of the Federation, which have
allowed for the designation and the adoption of laws
in various areas; and the possibility of a compromise
solution that would permit local elections to be held
in Mostar and the naming ofjudges to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court.

In the sphere of economics, growth of almost 7 per
cent in industrial output and 8.5 per cent in exports,
and a steady, low rate ofinflation are encouraging signs
despite a record rise in unemployment to roughly 44 per
cent and a 61 per cent drop in foreign investment.

The Dayton accords were the fruit of an exceptional
effort that allowed for the stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire region after a murderous
war that still haunts the memory of the populations
involved. The accords have allowed peace and stability
to be maintained for the past 17 years, and represent an
achievement that all the peoples of the region should
preserve and which they should definitively cease to
undermine. We hope that, in the interests of all the
communities involved, through the efforts of the High
Representative, of NATO and of the European Union,
all parties will demonstrate political will and renew
their faith in the ability of the federal institutions to
find equitable compromises and pragmatic solutions to
the complex issues before them.

