The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.

I would like to thank the former Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, and the current Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and Permanent
Representative of Croatia, Ambassador Ranko Vilovie,
for their statements.

Let me start by saying that Rwanda considers
peacebuilding processes to be of vital importance
and constitutes a fundamental stage if countries are
to overcome the root causes of conflicts. Within the
United Nations system, the Peacebuilding Commission
has been given the role of proposing and advising on
strategies for post-conflict recovery and bringing
together all the relevant actors involved in political,
financial and technical resource mobilization. That
continues to be an important, yet very complex and
challenging role. I also believe that the Security Council
can and should contribute to the Commission's effort to
play such a role.

Therefore, my statement today will focus on two
main issues: first, the impact and effectiveness of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and secondly, the
relationship of the Peacebuilding Commission with the
Security Council.

With regard to the impact and effectiveness of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Rwanda believes that the
Commission can have an impact only if it is able to
leverage its unique membership structure by bringing
political support to its engagement in the field, as well
as within intergovernmental forums and with strong
advocacy. Furthermore, being on the PBC agenda must
entail certain responsibilities and expectations, such
as readiness to undertake specific financial, political
and technical tasks or to share expertise and experience
around country-specific priority areas.

Collective support for the countries on the PBC
agenda should focus on building national capacities.
We know from experience that there is no substitute
for strengthening national institutions as the only way
to achieve sustainable results. The generation of local
and national capacities and ownership of processes,
strategies and policies are indispensable to averting
a relapse into conflict. It is of the utmost importance
to create the conditions for countries to enjoy their
sovereign rights, generate development and promote
the welfare of their populations.

Within the PBC's unique membership structure,
there is a wealth of expertise and experience, as well
as financial resources, which each member should
be prepared to share and contribute depending on
its capacities and comparative advantages. The
Commission could become a viable platform for
promoting South-South cooperation that is focused on
experience-sharing in strengthening core Government
functions and the development of core national
institutions.

There is also a need for coordination and coherence
within the United Nations. Rwanda calls upon the PBC
to maintain mutually reinforcing relations with the
senior United Nations leadership in the field. The PBC
can put the political weight of its membership behind
the United Nations leadership at the country level,
and the United Nations missions are expected in turn
to support and pursue the PBC areas of engagement
and overall objectives. We also believe that the PBC
should support the United Nations in delivering as one,
remain focused on nationally identified priorities in
the field, and ensure that United Nations guidance to
field missions is aligned with national peacebuilding
priorities.

Coordination and coherence are relevant not only
between the PBC and United Nations entities, but also
among external actors. The PBC should continue to
explore practical ways to align such activities as the
assessment and planning of bilateral, regional and
multilateral actors behind national peacebuilding
priorities. Regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in that process. The World Bank and
the African Development Bank play an important role
in supporting intermediate and long-term recovery
and in rebuilding the social, economic and financial
structures of countries in transition from conflict.

Resource mobilization is also linked to coherence
and coordination, as well as to political progress. We call
for continued advocacy on behalf ofthe countries on the
agenda of the PBC in order to help underscore political
and socioeconomic progress to attract assistance and/
or investment, as well as to identify entry points to tap
into the potential of foundations, the private sector and
other non-traditional donors.

It is also important to pursue the mapping of
capacities, actors and resource flows with a view to
identifying gaps, channeling the necessary resources to
fill them, and supporting the creation of viable national
donor coordination mechanisms. We can therefore
certainly conclude that the effectiveness and strength of
the PBC lie in the capacity and readiness ofits members
to use it as the linchpin of multilateral and coordinated
support to sustainable peace and development, and to
bridge the traditional gap between the global security
and development architectures.

On the relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC, let me first emphasize that the joint
membership should play a leading role in guiding the
nature and scope ofthe PBC advisory role. Among other
things, the PBC should be tasked with monitoring the
effectiveness of the peacebuilding mandates of United
Nations missions, and suggest course adjustments as
necessary. The PBC should be asked by the Council
to provide specific information on coherence among
key actors, the support of international partners, the
political commitment of national actors, and risks to
the peacebuilding process in the countries concerned.

In countries on its agenda, the PBC is in a good
position to support a successful and smooth transition
and drawdown of United Nations missions. The Security
Council needs to provide clarity on the division of roles
and responsibilities between the PBC and the senior
United Nations leadership in the field, and ensure
that United Nations missions report on support to the
peacebuilding priority areas and to PBC engagement
in these areas. In order to improve the modalities of
engagement and interaction, we agree with the PBC
Chairperson that there is a need for greater use of
informal interactive dialogues, with particular attention
to timing and purpose.

In that spirit, and building on the initiative of the
Colombian presidency of July 2012, Rwanda will hold
an interactive dialogue among the Security Council, the
leadership of the Commission and the countries on its
agenda in order to provide an opportunity to exchange
opinions on how we can further strengthen the nature
and scope of the Commission's advisory role to the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at1.20p.m.
