The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council in the month of April 2014, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Lucas,
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg, for her
service as President of the Council during the month
of March. I am sure that I speak on behalf of all of
the members of the Council in expressing my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Lucas and her team for the
great diplomatic skill and superlative performance of
her delegation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan

Special report of the Secretary-General on the
review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2014/138)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/236, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Australia, France, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic of Korea, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/138, which contains the special report
of the Secretary-General on the review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur .

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2148 (2014).

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.


