Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Before
taking up the substance of the item, I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We are fully
confident that you will conduct the Council's work
wisely. We would also like to express our gratitude to
your predecessor for presiding over the Council last
month.

We would like to commend the activities and
vigorous efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee is undertaking concrete
activities that are undoubtedly commensurate with the
gravity of the terrorist crimes that manifested
themselves in the most heinous form of criminal
attacks on the United States of America in September
2001. Those painful events alerted the peoples and
Governments of the world to terrorism's devastating
effects in all its forms and manifestations. Suffice it to
say that international unanimity on combating and
eliminating terrorism has become a top priority in the
system of international cooperation.

However, as far as we know, the dangers posed
by acts of terrorism and the way to eliminate the roots
of terrorism in all its forms and causes requires clarity
of vision, unanimity of views and seriousness of
purpose on our part. It is logical that collective will
cannot be accomplished outside the framework of
international law and legitimacy.

Resolution 1373 (2001) laid the foundation for
legitimate, coordinated international action, but we still
need a legal framework that could govern our State
policies and Government practices, either individually
or collectively.

The delegation of the Republic of Yemen has
spared no effort in striving for success in the current
negotiations on the first draft international convention
that India, to its credit, has formulated. We feel that the
slow progress of these negotiations is evidence of the
desire that the proposed convention reflect the various
points of view and serve as a true expression of the
collective will. In this regard, we would like to affirm
the view of numerous States that the convention must
cover all acts of terrorism, whether they are undertaken
by individuals, groups or States.

We cannot envision, nor can we accept, any
formula that would deny peoples their legitimate right
to resist occupation. We insist on differentiating
between "terrorism" and "legitimate resistance by all
possible means against foreign occupation".

My country was among the first to call attention
to the dangers of terrorism, and we called for concerted
international and regional efforts early on to tackle
these dangers. Arab and Islamic States, including my
own, have ratified the majority of relevant conventions.
However, my country has been a victim of terrorist acts
and their devastating effects, which have adversely
affected the development process and have inflicted
severe damage on our national economy for more than
adecade.

We were given grounds for optimism with regard
to international cooperation through the Committee
established by the Council. We affirmed our
cooperation with it and presented the requisite national
report, which is contained in document S/2002/240.
The cooperation that we have affirmed in practice and
the actions taken by our Government to confront
terrorism and eliminate it within our borders are of
utmost importance. The mass media have spared me
the need to discuss these efforts.

Once again, we reiterate the readiness of the
Republic of Yemen to continue promoting international
cooperation in order to eliminate the scourge of
terrorism and to prevent the risks thereof.

