Mr. Schori (Sweden): First of all, I, like others,
would like to express my deepest condolences to the
Governments and peoples of India and Pakistan, and
particularly our thoughts are with the families of the
Victims of the catastrophe and those directly affected
by it.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

I would like to commend the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and
all the women and men of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and its partner organizations for their efforts to meet
one of the greatest challenges facing the United
Nations: leading East Timor towards independence.
The EU reaffirms its solidarity with the people of East
Timor and its support for UNTAET.

In October 1999, the Security Council established
UNTAET with the broadest mandate ever given to a
United Nations peace operation, with responsibility for
the administration of a territory vastly devastated by
those unwilling to accept the results of the popular
consultation. In the light of the complexity of the task,
the progress achieved has been considerable and merits
our deep appreciation. In the Secretary-General's latest
report, which is contained in document S/2001/42 and
is now before us, he concludes that the United Nations
has cause to be proud of what has been accomplished
in East Timor. The European Union agrees and
encourages UNTAET to continue its work.

The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to stress the importance of learning from
the UNTAET experiences. Some of the lessons learned
from East Timor are already reflected in the Brahimi
report, which outlines a number of recommendations to
better prepare the United Nations system for complex
peace operations.

The European Union pays tribute to the military
component of UNTAET. While the situation in West
Timor continues to constitute a threat to the security
situation in East Timor, the peacekeeping force has
done excellent work on re-establishing and upholding
safety and security throughout the territory of East
Timor. But this has not been without cost. The
European Union would not like to miss this
opportunity to recall the tragic loss of the New
Zealand, Nepalese and Portuguese peacekeepers.

At the same time, the European Union strongly
supports the gradual transfer to the East Timorese of
local ownership of the maintenance of law and order.
In that context, although it recognizes that that an
international police presence will be needed after
independence, the European Union encourages
UNTAET to accelerate the training process of the East
Timorese police force. The European Union expresses
its appreciation for the excellent work of the civilian
police in keeping law and order throughout East Timor.
The Union is, however, concerned by reports of
increasing criminality, particularly violence against
women.

During the past six months, progress has been
made in integrating the East Timorese into all major
decision-making actions within the administration. The
European Union particularly welcomes the inclusion of
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, who is present here today, as
cabinet member for foreign affairs.

The European Union would, however, like to
emphasize the need to further strengthen national
capacity-building in all governance areas. The
Timorization efforts within the Transitional
Administration must be pushed forward, and the role of
UNTAET should gradually change from execution to
an advisory role. Greater efforts can be made to
strengthen capacity-building, including through on-the-
job training. During the transition period it is essential
to involve the East Timorese, including women and
youth, in a broad, representative manner in the policy-
making and administrative structure at all levels.

The European Union welcomes the effort of
UNTAET to inform the population of progress in this
respect, but understands the natural desire of the East
Timorese to accelerate this progress.

UNTAET has now fully embarked on the
transition from emergency relief activities to
sustainable development and administration building.
Despite the difficulties encountered, the European
Union is pleased to note that significant improvements
have been achieved in providing schooling and health
care.

The European Union takes note of the Secretary
General's comments on the judicial system in East
Timor, and welcomes the taking of the first measures
against those persons who committed serious crimes
during the violence in 1999. The European Union also
stresses the importance of strengthening East Timor's
judicial system, which will be the guarantor of
democracy.

The EU welcomes the fact that the trial has
commenced in Jakarta against those accused of the
deplorable killings of three staff members of the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in West Timor last September. It also
welcomes the arrest ofthe suspected perpetrators ofthe
killing of a United Nations peacekeeper. The European
Union calls on the Government of Indonesia to
continue all necessary efforts to bring the perpetrators
of serious crimes committed during and before the
violence in September 1999 to justice. It also takes
note of the efforts being made by the Indonesian
Attorney-General concerning the investigation of
human rights violations in East Timor, and calls on the
Indonesian Government to follow the spirit of the
Memorandum of Understanding signed with UNTAET.
The investigation process and the bringing to justice of
those responsible for the atrocities that followed the
popular consultation must not be delayed. The
European Union also encourages the Indonesian
judicial authorities to continue their cooperation with
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

The European Union emphasizes the importance
of a reconciliation process, and welcomes the contacts
made between some pro-integration leaders and the
National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT) and
the soon-to-be established Truth, Reception and
Reconciliation Commission. Furthermore, it believes
that there exists at present a sincere willingness to find
ways and means to re-establish trust and confidence
among all East Timorese.

The European Union shares the Secretary-
General's appraisal of the timetable for East Timor to
achieve independence late in this year, as well as the
National Council's endorsement of a political calendar
for the transition to independence. The European Union
notes that UNTAET will be fully responsible for the
conduct of the elections, with the support of the
Secretariat, in particular the Department of Political
Affairs' Electoral Assistance Division. The Union
urges UNTAET to continue its efforts to ensure that
free and fair elections and the establishment of the
Constituent Assembly can take place within the time-
frame to be agreed by the mission and the East
Timorese people. The European Union stresses that the
composition of the Constituent Assembly needs to
reflect broad political participation and allow for an
open and truly democratic debate. The European Union
also considers that the United Nations Secretariat has a
role to play in conducting the elections and
implementing a broad civic-education campaign.

The European Union fully supports UNTAET's
and East Timor's goal of developing mechanisms for
good governance. The value of a lean, efficient and
transparent administrative system as a means of
achieving a democratic and prosperous society cannot
be overstated.

Closely linked to the political transition is the
security situation in East Timor. Despite considerable
improvements there are still reasons for concern. The
European Union reiterates its full endorsement of the
recommendations in Security Council resolution 1319
(2000), and urges the Indonesian Government to
continue its efforts to implement the resolution without
further delay. The Union also fully supports the
recommendations made by the Security Council
mission to East Timor and Indonesia in its report
(S/2000/1105) oflast November.

The European Union strongly condemns the
continued activities of militia groups in West Timor,
which have a destabilizing impact on the transition to
independence in East Timor. It is therefore imperative
to finally put an end to these activities, in line with
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000). The prompt
disbanding of the militia groups is essential in order to
resolve the refugee situation in West Timor. The
European Union would like to recall the urgent need
for a quick settlement. This unresolved matter could
have serious repercussions on the political situation in
East Timor and might be a factor that could jeopardize
the transition process.

The refugees must be given a free choice of
whether to return to East Timor or resettle in Indonesia,
including through a credible registration process. The
establishment of security in the refugee camps, the
resumption of humanitarian assistance, a resolution of
the refugee situation and support for reconciliation are
essential for the creation of lasting peace and stability
in East Timor. The Union is deeply committed,
together with the international humanitarian
organizations, to continue to play an active role in this
regard.

The European Union has noted the observation in
the Secretary-General's report that it might be
necessary to maintain what is now the UNTAET
military component after independence at a strength to
be determined in the light of developments. The Union
understands that a gradual downsizing of this
component will take place only if an objective
assessment of the security situation by UNTAET shows
that this is appropriate. It is crucially important that
security assistance be provided for the independent
state.

The European Union welcomes UNTAET plans
and the efforts of a number of interested Governments
aimed at the establishment of an East Timor Defence
Force (ETDF) and notes that this will be drawn
initially from the Armed Forces for the National
Liberation of East Timor (FALINTIL). With regard to
those FALINTIL members who will notjoin the ETDF,
the European Union welcomes the plans for the
reintegration programme organized by the International
Organization for Migration and the World Bank.

The role of the European Union as the biggest
contributor to the East Timorese development process
was most recently reaffirmed at the donors meeting in
Brussels last December. The Union agrees that there
will be a continued need for development cooperation
by the international community, and it is ready to
assume its part in further assisting with the
rehabilitation of East Timor and its transition to
independence. The European Union recognizes the role
of the international financial institutions and United
Nations agencies, particularly UNDP and the World
Bank, and encourages them to continue to play their
part.

The European Union supports the proposal by the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNTAET
until 31 December 2001 and looks forward to his
recommendations on the plan for a new integrated
follow-on operation that would function in the
independent East Timor. It is important that no vacuum
be created in connection with the transition to
independence.

The European Union will continue to follow the
process closely and to support the work of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General. As stated earlier,
we believe that there are reasons for the United Nations
to be proud of what has been accomplished so far in
East Timor. We must work together to ensure that the
UNTAET mission becomes a success not only for the
United Nations but, most importantly, for the people of
East Timor.
