Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country's successful presidency of
the Security Council this month, and especially for the
relevant topic chosen for today's discussion, "Threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts".

The Kingdom of Morocco takes this opportunity
to reiterate its firm condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and to underline that nothing can justify
a terrorist act. In that respect, Morocco strongly
condemns the beheading on 16 November of the
American hostage Peter Abdul-Rahman Kassig by the
terrorist organization Daesh, and expresses its complete
disapproval of that odious crime, which runs counter
to all universal human and moral values, including the
teachings of Islam, a religion of peace, tolerance and
coexistence. Terrorism must not be associated with any
particular religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic

group.

The discussion on this topic comes at a crucial
moment, marked by an unprecedented expansion
of terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization,
despite the efforts of the international community to
curb that phenomenon. Terrorism continues to strike
indiscriminately and viciously and to spread like a
cancer. Control of Iraqi and Syrian territory by the
terrorist group Islamic State is a challenge not only
for the two countries, but also for the international
community.
Terrorist groups increasingly exploit all existing
resources in order to achieve their goals. They use
advanced technologies in media, the Internet and social
networks to attract the maximum number of recruits
from among all social strata and all nationalities.
We have witnessed with great concern the alarming
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. While other
regions, such as Afghanistan and North Africa, have
experienced that phenomenon, which began as a limited,
local threat, today it has evolved into a global threat.
Terrorist groups are successfully recruiting young
people, including from wealthy families and developed
countries, making the traditional link between poverty
and terrorism less relevant. They are recruiting doctors,
engineers and students. Terrorists are brainwashing
their victims and exploiting them to carry out their
own macabre designs. That finding deserves increased
attention and analysis. Moreover, radical discourse
in places of worship and the incitement of terrorist
acts are other means they use to achieve their goals.
The international community is facing a destructive
ideology whose obscurantist goals must be countered
with will and determination.

The Kingdom of Morocco, struck by terrorist
attacks in Casablanca in 2003 and Marrakech in 2011,
has developed a comprehensive and consistent approach
focused on prevention and action, in accordance with
the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, including resolution 2178 (2014),
which my country co-sponsored. The Kingdom's
approach is one prong of the ongoing commitment of
Morocco, its King, its institutions and its people in the
struggle against terrorism in the wake of the attacks
of 11 September 2001. Our approach is focused on
the following principles, while remaining dynamic,
responsive, evolving and open to improvement.

The first principle concerns strengthening the
security sector and keeping the legal framework up to
date in the fight against terrorism. We have improved
our security operations to help crush the terrorist
threat. Our laws complement such vigilance through
the adoption of legislation aimed at stopping young
people from traveling to the theatres of conflict by
criminalizing such activity.

The second principle is the fight against social
instability and promoting sustainable human
development. In 2005, His Majesty the King launched a
national initiative for human development to overcome
social shortcomings, exclusion and instability.
The third principle involves the restructuring
and reform of our religious policy. In that capacity as
Commander of the Faithful His Majesty the King has
preserved the religious foundations and structures of
Morocco. Moreover, reforms of religious policy include
the establishment of a scientific authority responsible
for issuing religious edicts and interpreting Koranic
texts first. It is the role of the Senior Council of Ulemas
to discourage those who may be considering terrorist
or obscurantist activities, and to train young imams
and preachers in the teachings of Islam. Morocco
is committed to sharing and exchanging expertise
with its African partners; it has established religious
cooperation with a number of African countries and has
begun to host young African imams. The imams that
have received training will then train others in their
respective countries.

The partnership experience was described on
30 September before the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, in the presence of some of the beneficiary
countries. I take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the cooperation and support of the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, in this
area and especially for our very productive relationship
in the fight against terrorism.

A number of terrorist affiliates in West Africa
are involved in destabilizing Mali and have joined
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. That is a source
of concern for my country and for the entire region
of the Sahel and the Maghreb. This growing trend in
the region has allowed terrorist networks to acquire
financial and technological resources providing them
with greater flexibility and threatening the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the States of the region.
We must therefore redouble our coordination and
information-exchange efforts among the countries of
the Sahel and the Maghreb so as to wage a collective
and effective fight against the destabilizing activities of
the terrorists. Affiliates ofthese groups have announced
their allegiance to the Islamic State, which has further
heightened the threat to our region and must therefore
be taken into consideration.

Bolstering security on our borders, information-
sharing and halting the flow of financial resources
to terrorists are key and even vital measures in the
effective fight against terrorism, particularly foreign
terrorist fighters. In that regard, I note that, on 7 and
8 February 2012, Morocco hosted in Rabat the second
meeting of the Global Counterterrorism Forum's
Criminal Justice Sector and Rule of Law Working
Group , culminating in the adoption of a good practices
document, entitled "The Rabat Memorandum on Good
Practices for Effective Counterterrorism Practice in the
Criminal Justice Sector".

In the context of that same joint initiative under
the Forum, Morocco and the Netherlands organized,
on 14 and 15 May in Marrakech, the first meeting of
experts on foreign terrorist fighters. They discussed
issues related to police, border control, justice and
information-sharing. The most recent ministerial
meeting of the Forum, held on 23 September, adopted
The Hague-Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices
for a More Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Phenomenon. That Memorandum focused on a
better response to the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and also endorsed the creation of a working
group on the subject, to be chaired by Morocco and the
Netherlands.

On this occasion, I would just like to add that
Morocco and the Netherlands have been forerunners in
the sphere of border control to combat the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. I would like to commend
those who have taken a part in that fight.

