Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2454 (2019), on the sanctions regime for
the Central African Republic. In its capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
my country thanks all delegations for their spirit of
compromise, which made it possible to arrive at a
balanced text reflecting the Council's resolve to support
the Government and the people of the Central African
Republic in the process of achieving a lasting solution
to the crisis that our brother country is going through.

The resolution requires the Council to develop a
road map in the next three months whose implementation
will make it possible to ease the measures taken under
the arms embargo in order to assist the Central African
Government. While commending the progress achieved
by the Government in the area of security-sector reform
and the ongoing deployment of the security and defence
forces, as well as the adoption ofa national defence plan,
my delegation encourages the authorities of the Central
African Republic, in coordination with international
partners, to continue their efforts to address the
persistent security challenges in the country. In that
regard, we should underscore that under this new
resolution, the Government of the Central African
Republic is to report to the Sanctions Committee by
the end of June at the latest on progress in the areas of
security-sector reform; disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation; and the management of
weapons and munitions.

The relevant provisions of the resolution make
it clear that in easing the arms embargo, the Council
is taking account of the concerns expressed by the
Government of the Central African Republic, in
particular the urgent need to train and equip the national
defence and security forces in order to enable them to
provide a proportionate response to any threat to the
security of the citizens of the Central African Republic.
My country urges for synergistic action among the
Central African authorities, the States of the region
and the United Nations, through the Panel of Experts
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of
the Council's measures aimed at bringing a sustainable
end to the country's crisis. Cote d'Ivoire once again
reiterates its full support to President Touadera and his
Government and for the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

Finally, we are hopeful that the talks that have
been under way in Khartoum since 24 January at the
initiative of the African Union will lead to concrete
solutions, with a view to ensuring a lasting settlement
of the crisis and genuine reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

