Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Sweden for convening today's
open debate. We welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018) , which Mexico co-sponsored,
and we welcome the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) to
help consolidate concrete actions for the protection
of children and adolescents in armed conflict. We
appreciate Virginia Gamba's constant commitment to
her work.
Mexico, in its capacity as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, promoted the
negotiation and adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) on
this issue in 2009. Mexico is currently a lead country
for the Global Partnership to End Violence against
Children and a member of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict, among other groups and
initiatives that have served to continue to draw political
attention so as to alleviate the suffering of those who
are the future and the present of our societies. For the
same reasons, we also chair the Group of Friends of
Sustaining Peace.

At the national level, Mexico meets the needs of
approximately 39.2 million children and adolescents
through various regional and international initiatives
and projects related to protection from violence,
particularly in the areas of corporal punishment, sexual
exploitation and abuse, bullying and disappearance,
as well as other initiatives aimed at preventing
and eradicating forms of violence that violate their
human rights.

In addition to the work that all Members must
do in our national public policies, the protection of
the best interests of children and adolescents must be
the priority of the United Nations and of each of its
Members, agencies and sectors of its system. If we
shirk this collective responsibility, we will continue to
perpetuate the damage being done to children who live
in insecure conditions and are twisted by conflict, the
rule of law will deteriorate and the training of human
capital for the future will be put at risk. The causes
for the involvement of children in armed conflict
are comparable to those that spark and exacerbate
conflict. We need to see child protection as an essential
component of prevention and development and as a
central component of the sustainable peace for which
we work together at the United Nations.

We welcome the calls of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General for child protection measures
to be integrated into peace negotiations and into plans
for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation of child soldiers, who have been part
of armed groups, in order to ensure their protection,
well-being, inclusion and empowerment. We call on
the members of the Council to address this issue in
a manner that cuts across all items on their agenda
and to continue to strengthen the mandates of peace
operations, with child protection advisers in both
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
and to ensure that sanctions committees consider child
protection as a central component of their mandates.

For international society and for the United
Nations system, protecting the rights of children in
all circumstances must be seen as an obligation. It is
imperative that we turn environments of adversity into
environments of opportunity for the children of the
world. The path we all must take is clear and is universal:
it is through prevention and through the sustainable
and inclusive development to which we must aspire,
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals set forth
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

