Mr. Keating: The long-term and immediate
challenges facing Somalia remain formidable, be they
humanitarian, economic, security or political. The unity
of the Council and the solidarity of the international
community have been essential to the gradual if fragile
progress that is being made.

At my last briefing in March (see S/PV.7905), the
humanitarian crisis was deteriorating fast. Thanks to the
swift and generous contribution of more than $1 billion
for humanitarian action since the beginning ofthe year,
agencies have been able to mount a famine-prevention
response reaching over 3 million people per month. The
worst of the famine threat has been averted. However,
the damage to lives and livelihoods, particularly of
women, children and marginalized groups, has been
extensive. Approximately 900,000 people have been
newly displaced over the past five months, and the
risk of famine remains. An imperative for Somalis is
to escape the vicious cycle of recurring weather-related
shocks. Humanitarian and development partners
are coming together to build institutional capacity,
strengthen resilience and boost productivity in line
with the Secretary-General's new way of working.
The Federal Government, supported by the United
Nations and the World Bank, is developing plans for
a comprehensive post-disaster needs assessment of the
impact of the drought and a recovery and resilience
framework to reduce the risk of famine.

The peaceful transition of power earlier this year,
following the electoral process, generated a sense
of hope and a moment of opportunity. The Federal
Government remains determined to achieve core
objectives, including improving security, notably in
Mogadishu, creating jobs and adopting key legislation
that will make a difference, but its honeymoon period is
over. Somalia's Government is not the first to experience
that phenomenon. Immediate political challenges
are complicated by ill-defined relationships between
the Federal Government and Federal member states,
between the executive and the legislative branches of
Government, between the newly formed Upper House
of the Federal Parliament and the House of the People.
Other challenges relate to politicians and power brokers
using opportunities to advance their own clan interests
or personal ambitions and using tools such as threats
of impeachment and motions of no confidence. The
key issue is whether the Federal Government will be
successful in managing those constituencies and in
preventing them from threatening progress on core
objectives on the stability of the State.

The strong working relationship between the
President and the Prime Minister and the determination
of the Federal Government to deliver tangible
economic and security benefits for the population
are very encouraging. The immediate issues that are
currently generating strains in relations between
State institutions include the controversy over the
transfer to Ethiopia of a well-known Ogaden National
Liberation Front figure and the reverberations of the
Government's determination to maintain a neutral
posture in the dispute among important Gulf partners.
They also include simmering disputes around the
country, including in HirShabelle and the impeachment
of the state President there, the political standoff in
Galmudug, where the state President has been unable
to advance power-sharing and reconciliation talks with
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a, and tensions in the southern
part of HirShabelle.

If the are unresolved, those could undermine
the gains made so far in the state-formation process.
The United Nations is working closely with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other partners to play a constructive role, including
to support the HirShabelle elections. A resolution is
needed to key issues that will define the Federal State,
including the division of powers, and agreements on
revenue- and resource-sharing between Federal and
state Governments. They also include the structure of
the judiciary, the status of the Banadir region, in which
the national capital is located, and the formalization of
the status of civil Federal member states.

Advancing the review of the provisional Federal
Constitution is therefore a priority. Useful consultations
are taking place to ensure an inclusive review process,
although the respective roles and responsibilities of core
institutions still need to be clarified. The next step is a
national consultative conference, scheduled in October,
that should agree on a two-year master plan. Significant
progress has been made on preparing and adopting
priority laws, such as the telecommunications bill
and the human rights commission act. Completing the
constitutional review is also critical for the successful
holding of the 2020-2021 elections. The legislative
framework and agreement on the electoral model are
urgently needed. Those will help dispel scepticism as
to whether Somalia can move away from the so-called
4.5 model to universal suffrage.

The crisis in relations between Gulf countries has
had an impact on Somalia. Anticipated investments
and revenue streams have not been forthcoming, and
the Federal Government's declaration of neutrality,
while receiving widespread support, has not gone
down well with certain constituencies. The Council's
continued support is needed to protect Somalia from
the potentially destabilizing effects of geopolitical
rivalries. Current political turbulence in Somalia must
be taken seriously, but should not obscure the steady, if
uneven, progress that the country is making.

Somalia has great economic potential, whether
in agro-business, livestock, fisheries, trade or
renewable and other energy sources, as well as highly
entrepreneurial men and women, both in the country
and among the diaspora. Unleashing that potential
depends upon the success of reaching a political
settlement between the Government and the private
sector, and upon Government policies and capacities
to implement them. A critical requirement will be
raising revenues, whether from domestic sources or
by accessing concessional finance. Advancing arrears
clearance and reaching a decision point on the Heavily
lndebted Poor Countries Initiative are essential and
will require both the strengthening of public financial
management and international action. The support of
the Council could make a decisive difference.

In the meantime, Somalia remains heavily
dependent upon aid. Both traditional and non-traditional
donors, including many serving on the Council, have
provided generous assistance. The Prime Minister is
appealing for immediate budget support to allow the
Government to deliver on jobs and security and to
strengthen relations with Federal member states by
means of fiscal transfers. The United Nations and the
World Bank have collaborated closely to devise a surge
support package for public works. I urge partners to
follow the European Union, Norway and Sweden's lead
to use a recurrent cost and reform financing facility to
that end.

Security has improved in Mogadishu as a result of
the Federal Government's Mogadishu stabilization plan.
That deserves more support. However, Al-Shabaab
remains a potent threat and the overall security situation
in the country remains volatile. Addressing insecurity
and the continuing threat from Al-Shabaab require
vigorous implementation of the national security
architecture agreement and of the comprehensive
approach to security. International partners have now
been identified and have begun work on each of the
four strands of the comprehensive approach to security,
namely, enabling the effective operations of the
African Union (AU) Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and implementing the transition from AMISOM;
strengthening Somalia's security sector, including
policing and maritime areas; stabilization; and, lastly,
preventing and countering violent extremism. Securing
predictable funding for AMISOM. is a top priority. The
Council members' own deliberations in Addis Ababa
last week illuminated the key issues. The Secretary-
General's report on funding for AMISOM, due in
November, will provide an opportunity to explore and
propose funding options, while taking into account the
limitations of voluntary contributions.

That should be anchored in a common narrative on
Somalia's security needs in the next five years - one
shared by the Federal Government, the African Union,
the United Nations and the main investors in Somalia's
security, including the European Union (EU) and other
major bilateral partners. That needs to build upon
the recommendations of the joint AU-United Nations
review of AMISOM, the outcome of the operational
readiness assessment of the Somali National Army
currently under way, and progress in implementing the
national security architecture agreement. A successful
transition of responsibility for security from AMISOM
to Somali security institutions requires adequate and
coherent support for both AMISOM. and Somalia's
security forces, as well as clarity about the role of the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia, as transition
gets under way. Sustained transition requires that key
political and operational conditions be met. AMISOM
continues to play an indispensable role in protecting
Somalia's progress and people. Somali security forces
are not yet ready to shoulder full responsibilities.
Funding for AMISOM. and the Somali security forces
must complement one another.

Conflict resolution, local reconciliation and a
reduction in violence are essential to progress and to
reducing both human and financial costs. The United
Nations is working with IGAD, the African Union, the
EU and other partners to strengthen national conflict-
resolution capacities, as well as to facilitate agreements
in specific locations. An example of that has been in
Galkayo, where real progress is being made.

In conclusion, Somalia faces immediate crises, as
well as basic structural problems, some of which are
worrisome in terms of their ability to derail political
progress. Providing practical support and political
encouragement to the Somali leadership, both at the
Federal and state level, will continue to be essential.
Allow me to end by thanking Council members for
their united and steady commitment to Somalia and
continued support to the United Nations, me and
my team.

