Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation would like to thank the
delegation of the United States, which prepared this
resolution - and the other members of the Council that
worked on it - on the detention of persons found guilty
of crimes against humanity, both within and outside
Rwanda.

The resolution is of great importance for Rwanda
and its people, since those who committed genocide and
other crimes against humanity in Rwanda had held sway
in the country for three and a half decades. They
committed several waves of massacres with no one ever
to bother them, since they were carrying out Government
policy. The consequence of this impunity was the
genocide that took place in full view of the world, which
did not lift a finger to stop it.

The resolution will also make it possible to protect
refugees and other citizens of Rwandese origin living in
neighbouring countries, who are right now still falling
victim to the same butchers that are going on killing
without a shred of remorse or repentance for their acts.

The resolution could play a preventive role because,
if the perpetrators of these crimes are not arrested, their
actions are likely to set the subregion ablaze. The
genocide perpetrated in Rwanda - a crime unique in
Africa - has demonstrated to some, particularly
Rwanda's neighbours, that such a thing is possible. The
affluence in which the perpetrators live, the impunity that
they enjoy, are an encouragement to criminals in other
countries to do likewise.

My delegation is sure that you, Mr. President, and
the Office of the Secretary-General, in the context of
preventive diplomacy, increasingly a tool of choice in this
Organization, are closely following everything that
happens in the world. In this context, I should like to
remind the Council that these Rwandese and other
criminals are busy training in the countries of the

 

subregion, with the assistance and support of friendly
countries, with a view to attacking Rwanda. Just in case
this information turns out to be true, my delegation would
urge the Council to check and, in the context of the
aforementioned preventive diplomacy, find an appropriate
solution before it is too late.

This is why the resolution is of concern not only to
Rwanda, but also to the whole of Africa and to the world.
For if impunity should persist and no action is taken, what
happened in Rwanda is very likely to happen again in other
countries of the region, where the situation has been
described as potentially explosive. As we speak, battles are
raging in certain areas of Africa, while elsewhere, some
groups are preparing to eliminate opposing ethnic groups or
factions. This problem is not peculiar to Africa; the same
situation has taken deep root in the heart of Europe.

The resolution sends a clear and firm message to other
political and ethnic organizations that might be tempted to
repeat what has happened in Rwanda, and tells them that
their actions will not go unpunished. That is why we
wanted this resolution to be much stronger and much more
binding than it is in its present form. It did not escape
unscathed from the process of making it acceptable for
adoption.

The Security Council could draw a lesson from what
happened in Rwanda to spare Africa and the world a replay
of that calamity. The Rwandese Government, for its part,
also has a great deal to learn, but it also has a great deal
of experience to share with others.

My delegation would conclude by asking the
Security Council to take care that Rwanda's internal
security is assured so that these same criminals cannot
take advantage of the arms embargo against Rwanda to
disturb the peace in the country. If Rwanda is to be
responsible for its own security and internal peace, the
Security Council must ditch some of the provisions that
are no longer warranted from its previous resolutions.

The resolution would be incomplete if it did not go
hand in hand with legal measures inside Rwanda that will
make it possible to build the country ruled by law of
which the Rwandese people dream.

