Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this wrap-up meeting. We are
particularly gratified that an appropriate theme - the
African dimension in the work of the Security
Council - has been chosen for the wrap-up. Indeed,
this month the focus of the Council's programme of
work has been heavily African, reflecting the desire of
the Council to ensure that peace and security reign
there.

Indonesia is very supportive of this process and
encourages the Council not to relent in its efforts. We
must always be cognizant of the fact that the first
requirement for development is peace. In working hard
for peace in Africa, the Council is also offering a
determined and highly desired investment in its
development. In that connection, we are pleased to
encourage continued cooperation between the Council
and the African Union and subregional organizations in
Africa.

Considering that this month alone the Council
took up agenda items that encompassed the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the Monitoring Group on
Somalia, among other matters - in addition to a large
number of briefings, reports and statements concerning
an assortment of African conflicts - it is easy to see
how heavy the work load is. In that connection, the
Council's efforts to foster peace on the continent
deserve commendation.

The delegation of Indonesia holds it as a strong
principle that the cause of democracy and development
in Africa, which ties in with the Council's focus on
peace and security, must be rigorously pursued. By
focusing on lessons learned concerning conflicts and
the failure of ceasefires and of some peace efforts, the
United Nations can turn challenging situations in
Africa into celebrated successes. Needless to say, by
helping to secure and sustain peace, the Council will be
leading the way in that respect.

In view of the fact that many of the issues that
concern Africa are cross-linked, it is the desire of my
delegation to see that this kind of cooperation exists
also between Africa and other major organs of the
United Nations. It would be recalled that two years ago
in the General Assembly, Member States warmly
welcomed the New Partnership for Africa's
Development with pledges of support for its
development.

Only this month, in his report entitled "In larger
freedom: towards development, security and human
rights for all", Secretary-General Kofi Annan observed
that sub-Saharan Africa was "falling seriously short"
04/59/2005, p. H) on most of the Millennium
Development Goals. It is important that the kind of
focus that the Security Council has dedicated to Africa
this month continue within the international
community, in order to ensure that development
progress picks up throughout the continent.

For its part, Indonesia has been involved with the
development and other dreams of Africa for a long
time. After all these years, we have remained
committed to peace and progress in the continent. That
is reflected in our continuing contribution of
peacekeepers, most recently to MONUC.

Before concluding, I would like to note that
Indonesia treasures the relationship that it has with
Africa. Almost 50 years have passed since the 1955
Asian-African Conference took place in Bandung. As
that expression of cooperation and solidarity among
countries of the developing South matures into its
second half-century, Indonesia will be hosting, next
month in Bandung and Jakarta, a number of
anniversary events. Through those events, we hope to
restate Asia's solidarity with Africa, as well as our
close identification with the problems of African
nations, most of which attained independence after
Bandung.
Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate how
important it is for this wrap-up meeting, if it is to be
meaningful, to be followed up by a short and accurate
report detailing the general and specific concerns of
delegations, and containing recommendations for
action. That would be the only way to prevent it from
turning into a meaningless ritual.

