Mr. Ta'ama (Togo) (interpretation from French): The
Togolese delegation would first of all like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the skill with which you are
conducting the Security Council's deliberations, and to
thank you for giving us this opportunity to speak before the
Council on the situation in Liberia.

We wish particularly to thank the Secretary-General
for his most thorough report on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia, which covers developments in
the situation in Liberia since the report of
18 December 1995 (S/1995/1042), and the implementation
of UNOMIL's new mandate.

As we read the report, there is a temptation to believe
that the hopes born out of the peace process set in motion
by the signing of the Abuja Agreement in August 1995 are
on the road to extinction, and we are tempted to say to
ourselves that once again the rock of Sisyphus has rolled
back down. Indeed, while the international community as
a whole welcomed the signing of the Agreement to the
point of showing its satisfaction in concrete terms by
pledging substantial contributions at the last Conference
on Assistance to Liberia, and while the States Members
of the Economic Community of West African States saw
their tireless efforts to put an end to the violence and
chaos in Liberia as finally being rewarded, were we to be
forced to accept the idea that we had been wrong and that
the dogs of war would again win out over the forces
behind the momentum for peace? Naturally, my
delegation's response is that no, we have not been wrong.

In our view, the hardest part came after the
Agreement had been signed. Six months cannot wipe out
the rancour, the frustrations, the ambitions and the hatred
of a war so rich in atrocity as the one in Liberia.
Confidence cannot be restored as easily as it was once
destroyed. The cease-fire violations that have taken place
here and there are, if I may say so, par for the course.

You can be sure, Mr. President, that it give me no
pleasure to say what I am about to, but I shall do so
because I believe I have to, because I must appeal to the
members of the Security Council and, through them, to
the international community not to yield yet again to the
prevailing mood of afro-pessimism and make Liberia yet
another orphan of peace.

The mandate the Council granted UNOMIL -
which my delegation welcomes - under
resolution 1020 (1995) of 10 November 1995 is a good
and relevant one; what it needs is more effort and more
will to carry it out.

Thus, our efforts in respect of the factions must be
directed towards prevailing on them to respect fully the
commitments they entered into, of their own free will, at
Abuja, and to relearn the reflexes of peace. It is up to the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) and UNOMIL to play their allotted
roles to the full, despite the risks and dangers, in
disarming the troops, in cantoning them in their allotted
areas and in reintegrating the former combatants.

My delegation reaffirms that it is entirely the
responsibility of the Council of State to seek ways and
means, in accordance with the provisions of the
Agreement, to maintain the momentum of the peace

 

process and establish the necessary basic conditions for
genuine national reconciliation in Liberia.

Taking our lead from the Secretary-General, we can
remind the international community as a whole that the
peace process that was set in motion thanks to its
exemplary support is now at a crucial turning-point. The
international community's support is therefore once again
needed to counter the setbacks that have occurred in
implementing the peace Agreement. That being the case,
and if the financial resources are sufficient, there can be no
doubt that the various players will shoulder their
responsibilities, be they ECOMOG, UNOMIL, United
Nations institutions or the non-governmental organizations
working in the fields of human rights, and humanitarian
law, or on the return of refugees or the elections to
establish a democratic regime.

For its part, the Government of Togo, and the
President of the Republic in particular, General Gnassingbe
Eyadema, have on no occasion held back in their efforts to
contribute whatever they could to solving this sad crisis.
They will continue to do so in the full awareness - and
this is something our President never fails to stress - that
Togo cannot go unscathed when it is its neighbour's house
that is on fire. It is this same awareness, moreover, that has
led the President, since the beginning of the crisis, to keep
his door open to any faction that wishes to meet with him.

In conclusion, my delegation once again thanks the
Security Council for its involvement, which has been
crucial to the quest for a solution to the Liberian crisis, and
hopes that the Council will extend UNOMIL's mandate, in
so far as it is quite clear that more time is needed to make
up for the delays in the timetable for implementing the
Abuja Agreement.

In expressing this hope, my delegation would
nevertheless remind the signatories to that Agreement,
specifically, the various factions, that restoring peace
depends first and foremost on no one but themselves, and
that the international community obviously cannot support
a peace process indefinitely if they themselves do not
clearly demonstrate the political will to respect and
implement the commitments they freely entered into. In this
connection, the statement by the Foreign Minister of
Liberia, for which we thank him, gives us hope.

