Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan and Pakistan, Mr. Rangin
Dadfar Spanta and Mr. Shah Mehmood Qureshi
respectively, for their presence and statements here
today.

I also wish to express my gratitude for the
briefings given by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

As was made patently clear only a few days ago
by the horrendous suicide attack on the Indian embassy
in Kabul, and as was underscored in the briefings we
heard today, the gravest problem currently facing
Afghanistan is the lack of security. Panama, on
principle, has always emphasized the role that the
countries of the region must play in the resolution of
conflicts on the Security Council's agenda. We
therefore welcome the efforts of India, Pakistan and
Afghanistan's other neighbours in that regard. Those
countries have recognized that a stable Afghanistan is
in the interest not only of that country itself, but of the
entire region. We believe, however, that more effective
regional action will require those countries to view
their support to their neighbour not in the context of a
race for influence or of regional competition, but rather
as an endeavour that will benefit everyone.

With regard to the Secretary-General's report, we
support its recommendations and would stress two
particular aspects. The first is the responsibility of
Afghan leaders to guide the reconstruction of their
country responsibly and comprehensively. As we heard
today, they have made significant progress, but the
corruption and impunity prevalent in various
Government sectors have a highly destructive impact
on the efforts of those who are working to rebuild the
country and undermine popular support for such
efforts. Corruption and impunity prevent Afghan
society from enjoying the dividends of peace and
increase its frustration with the situation. Such issues
must be resolved with a renewed sense of urgency.

The second aspect is the need for the
international community to maintain its firm
commitment to Afghanistan, in particular with respect
to the harm caused by extremist groups as they seek to
derail progress towards democracy and
institutionalization. We welcome recent multilateral
diplomatic efforts and the improvements made in the
field by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the International Security
Assistance Force in connection with the Afghanistan
Compact. The mission is complex, however, and the
remaining obstacles are vast.

The international community must address the
problems in Afghanistan in a balanced and
comprehensive manner, while ensuring that the
protection of human rights and economic and social
development are not sacrificed to meet short-term
objectives or to impose hasty solutions that may
momentarily seem to be of greater importance. We
hope that the restructuring of UNAMA will reflect
those necessities, some of which have been singled out
today by Special Representative Eide. We must ensure
that UNAMA has all the resources and means
necessary to enhance its capacity to coordinate the
difficult task of rebuilding Afghanistan.

