Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in Spanish):
Honouring the request of my French colleague for
more linguistic diversity, I offer my greetings to you in
Spanish, Madam President.

(spoke in English)

I am pleased to take the floor in my capacity as
the Coordinator of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, a cross-regional
group of 23 States. Respecting your call for brevity,
Madam President, I will read out an abridged version
of my statement, while a copy of the full statement will
be circulated in the Chamber.

Like all the speakers before me, ACT would like to
acknowledge the efforts of your delegation, Argentina,
Madam President, for capably steering the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and for organizing today's debate,
which, I have to say, has been very rich and substantive
so far. Moreover, ACT commends the Working Group
for its work leading to the adoption during the past year
of five presidential notes, all of which build on previous
Council decisions. In particular, ACT welcomes the
commitment to continuing the practice of using wrap-
up meetings and informal briefing sessions.

ACT encourages the Council to monitor and
report consistently on the implementation of measures
on working methods. In particular, ACT calls for the
implementation without delay of the presidential notes
contained in documents S/2014/268 and S/2014/393, on
enhancing the wider participation and inclusiveness
of Council members in the work of the Council and
on ensuring continuity in the work of the subsidiary
bodies, respectively.

ACT therefore welcomes the efforts of the Council
to hold meetings out in the open, especially open debates
allowing the participation of the wider membership.
However, the response of the Council remains in most
cases very limited, and outcomes are adopted before the
Views of the wider membership are even heard. In that
regard, ACT encourages the Council to take note of the
recommendations made by all the States participating
in today's debate and to provide the wider membership
with a summary of those recommendations by the end
of the year. That document could serve as guidance for
the work of the Informal Working Group in the coming
year. Similarly, ACT would encourage the Working
Group to hold a meeting in the open debate format in
2015.

One of the priorities of ACT concerns the use ofthe
veto in the case of mass atrocities. ACT has advocated
a use of the veto consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. Our group is
therefore pleased that France has taken up an idea that
many of us have advocated for years, namely, that the
permanent members of the Council should voluntarily
commit to refraining from using the veto to block
Council action aimed at preventing or ending atrocity
crimes. While we believe that a commitment from all
members of the Council to that end is appropriate, a
special responsibility naturally falls to the permanent
members of the Security Council.

Even such events as the high-level ministerial event
on 25 September have been important milestones. It is
now time to make progress towards concrete measures,
including the early finalization of a code of conduct
that contains a commitment to refraining from the use
of the veto in situations of mass atrocities.

In recent years, the Security Council has made
some progress in improving its interaction with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and in addressing
other related issues. However, the lack of follow-up to
referrals by the Security Council remains a matter of
concern, as has been mentioned by several speakers
before me today. ACT will continue to call for more
consistent follow-up, including through the creation of
a subsidiary body to address issues related to the ICC.

ACT has also advocated a perspective that is
more oriented to conflict prevention in the work of
the Security Council and therefore welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2171 (2014). In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as an advisory body
to the Council, has a strong role to play in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts. Roughly half of all countries
coming out of conflict suffer a relapse into violence.
Therefore, a coordinated and committed approach to
post-conflict peacebuilding is key to preventing such
relapses.

Our group is convinced that the PBC can assume
the role of a forum where critical situations are
discussed early, in an inclusive manner and with all
relevant stakeholders. The upcoming 2015 review of the
peacebuilding architecture is a valuable opportunity to
implement necessary adaptations to further improve
that role of the PBC. Finally, we encourage the Council
to invite the chairs of the various country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission to
participate in Council meetings.

In closing, I would like to mention one topic that
will be crucial for all of us, namely, the appointment
of the next Secretary-General in 2016. Repeated calls
for more transparency and increased involvement of
the General Assembly in the appointment process have
been made in the past and are legitimate, since the
Secretary-General represents the whole United Nations
membership. ACT is therefore of the opinion that the
transparency of the overall process, in accordance
with relevant General Assembly resolutions, should
be enhanced. That will mean listening to the views of
Member States and widening the scope of consultations
beyond the permanent members. ACT intends to embark
in a constructive dialogue with both the Security
Council and the General Assembly in that regard.

The Council acts on our behalf. That is why
accountability, coherence and transparency in its work
and in the implementation of its decisions are so crucial.
To that end, I assure you, Madam President, that the
ACT group will remain committed to continuing to
work constructively with the Security Council and with
the wider membership to increase the involvement of
non-members and the accountability of the Council.

(spoke in French)

To finish in due form, I would add in my national
capacity that Switzerland associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Norway
on behalf of the informal Group of Like-Minded States
on Targeted Sanctions, as well as with the statement to

be made by the representative of Liechtenstein.

