Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

Japan remains committed to supporting a two-
State solution to the Palestinian-Israeli question. The
final status of Jerusalem should be resolved through
negotiations based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the known parameters. We must continue
to encourage the parties to seek a solution through
negotiations. Japan will remain engaged with both
sides and will continue to promote confidence-building
measures. The continued settlement activities and the
demolition of Palestinian-owned structures, which
Mr. Mladenov briefed us about today, undermine the
viability of a two-State solution. Japan once again
urges Israel to cease those activities. We are also deeply
concerned about the continued violence in both Gaza
and the West Bank. We strongly condemn violence and
terrorism against innocent civilians, and call on the
parties concerned to take immediate steps to prevent
all acts of violence, provocations and incitement.

Last month in the General Assembly, President
Abbas of Palestine announced his intention to hold
general elections (see A/74/PV.7). Elections are
fundamental to democracy. We call on all the parties to
take the necessary measures for free and fair elections
and hope that they will contribute to peace and stability
in the region. Japan firmly believes that we can shed
light on the pathway to peace and security by offering
hope to Palestinians for their future and helping them
maintain their dignity. Japan believes that the assistance
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a
crucial role in that regard. We have already disbursed
more than $32 million to UNRWA this year and will
soon provide additional assistance of around $11 million
for education, water and sanitation and food assistance.
Along with other international partners, Japan will
continue to support the Agency in this difficult time
through multidimensional contributions.

We believe that every country can contribute to
creating an environment that is conducive to peace
efforts. In 2013, Japan, together with regional partners,
initiated the Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development in order to
promote Palestine's economic development by utilizing
the resources and experiences of East Asian countries.
An increasing number of countries and partners from
civil society and the private sector have joined the
initiative, and we hope that still more will do so.

Let me conclude by briefly addressing wider
regional issues. Since energy resources and many other
goods are transported from, to and through the Middle
East, peace and security in the region, including securing
the safety of navigation, are extremely important to
international peace and prosperity, including for Japan.
The current high tensions in the region are therefore
of serious concern. Japan believes that continued
diplomatic efforts are needed to decrease the tensions
and stabilize the situation. In cooperation with the
relevant parties, we will make further diplomatic
efforts to that end.

