Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity afforded me to
present to the Security Council the most recent report
(8/2015/626) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Guinea Bissau and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNOGBIS).
His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Jose Mario Vaz, who had planned to
speak at this Council meeting, decided to resign owing
to the recent political events in his country. Just a little
over a year after the restoration of the constitutional
order, Guinea-Bissau is again experiencing political
turbulence, following the President's dismissal of the
Government of Prime Minister Domingos Simoes
Pereira, on 12 August. On August 20, Mr. Baciro Dja,
former Minister of the Presidency of the Council of
Ministers of the dismissed Government, was appointed
Prime Minister by a presidential decree and was sworn
in by the President on the same day. Before removing
the Prime Minister, President Vaz sent a message to the
nation in which he set forth his observations about the
state of the country, the action of the executive power, the
relations among the country's institutions, in general,
and between himself and the Head of Government, in
particular, and on the factors giving rise to a serious
political crisis that, under the Constitution, could lead
to the fall of the Government.

This is an unexpected situation, since the main
institutions of the State, formed after the general
elections of April and May 2014, are all from the same
political family, the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cabo Verde. The party, whose statute
states that, if the party wins the election, its leader
will be the candidate for Prime Minister, now enjoys
an absolute majority in Parliament. Moreover, the party
chose among its leaders and presented as presidential
candidate the current President of the country. The
dismissed Government was inclusive, including almost
all political parties represented in the People's National
Assembly, which guaranteed that it had a comfortable
base of parliamentary support. It therefore seemed that,
a priori, the main conditions had been met to ensure a
framework for political stability that was favourable to
the proper functioning of the State. Upon the initiative
of the Government, and with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme and the European
Union, a round table of Guinea-Bissau's cooperation
partners was held in Brussels last March, the results
of which have opened for the country the prospect
of obtaining significant financial resources for the
realization of its Strategic and Operational Plan 2015-
2020.

In previous reports to the Security Council on
Guinea-Bissau, it was always emphasized that stability
in the country remained fragile because the underlying
causes of the recurrent instability that undermined it
had not been eradicated. Recently, the statements made
in public by the State's highest officials gave rise to an
impression that there was a climate of political tension
that might lead to institutional failure if they did not
seek to overcome their disagreements through dialogue.
The absence of this essential dialogue left the way open
to the heightening of mutual distrust and the deepening
of antagonisms, ensuring that the country would arrive
at the point where it is today.

In the exercise of the good offices mission of the
Secretary-General that I lead locally in Guinea-Bissau
in his name and as his representative, I maintain frequent
contacts with Government entities at the highest levels
and with the political class and the different components
of civil society. Given the unfolding of current events,
these contacts have been intensified in order to urge
the parties concerned to favour dialogue as the most
reliable tool to achieve a lasting solution to the conflict
among them. I am pleased to note that representatives
of the international community in Guinea-Bissau,
both bilaterally and multilaterally, were mobilized and
engaged in the same direction, making their voices heard
in unison and calling for dialogue and an agreement
in order to safeguard political stability and peace, so
that the achievements of the return to democratic order
and constitutional normality would not be called into
question.

It is worth noting here the efforts made personally
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and by the
President Macky Sall of Senegal and President Alpha
Conde of Guinea, in their respective capacities as Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
and that organization's mediator for Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish to commend the positions of solidarity
with the people of Guinea-Bissau expressed by the
African Union, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configuration
for Guinea-Bissau, the presence of whose Chair,
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, I welcome,
as well as the many other organizations and friendly
countries that voiced concern about the current crisis
and expressed their hope that Guinea-Bissau would
rise to the stability challenge and continue without
upheavals on the path towards economic development
and progress. The Council has also closely followed
the situation through briefings, after which it has
made public statements in support of dialogue and
consultation.

Before concluding, I would like to make three
observations about the political situation in Guinea-
Bissau.

First, the political parties and all those who have
a role to play in resolving this crisis are proclaiming
their firm determination to democratically defend
their rights and their legitimacy in the context of strict
respect for the Constitution and the law. Secondly, the
demonstrations that have taken place so far have been
peaceful, orderly and without any clashes or Violence.
Thirdly, during a meeting I had with the Chief of the
General Staff, including the commanders of the three
branches of the armed forces, the military strongly
affirmed that it was determined to remain completely
outside the political scene and observe a republican
attitude of submission to civil authority and obedience
to the Constitution and the democratic institutions of
the State.

The international community, which has always
supported Guinea-Bissau in the course of the various
hardships that the country has faced, remains open
to backing it in its march towards development and
progress, as was recently demonstrated again at the
Brussels round table. But it is clear that, in a scenario
of repeated crises without peace or lasting stability,
support from the international community has not been
able to find fertile ground so that its efforts can fully
achieve the desired objectives. I am convinced that the
leaders of Guinea-Bissau, in whom the people have
placed their hope and trust, are well aware of that fact
and that, in an outpouring of patriotism and sense of
responsibility to history, they will do everything within
their reach not to jeopardize the great opportunity
they have before them to transform their country and
significantly improve the living conditions of their
people.

