Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. Last June, the Security Council adopted resolution 2480 (2019). Its aim was to encourage the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups to show follow- through and progress towards the benchmarks in the Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Six months later, the progress that we had hoped for has yet to materialize - a stark illustration of how little meaningful progress has been made in the peace process. The inaction of the signatories is not without consequence. Malian civilians are being killed, maimed and abducted with impunity. The country's displaced population doubled last year, and today millions suffer from food insecurity, with a full 30 per cent of the population malnourished. Furthermore, physical insecurity and criminality constrain United Nations and non-governmental organization access to vulnerable populations to deliver life-saving assistance. That lack of access raises significant concerns with respect to humanitarian principles, and _ potentially under international humanitarian law. In that environment, terrorist groups are taking advantage of ungoverned spaces, exploiting grievances and fuelling intercommunal conflict. United Nations peacekeepers face extraordinary dangers, as the wounding of 18 last week in Tessalit reminded us, and the Malian armed forces are suffering critical losses. We appreciate Ambassador Konfourou'scountry's continued commitment to achieving peace and security, and we extend our condolences to families for that loss of life. The United States honours those who have made the ultimate sacrifice, and we commend the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and international security forces for their fight against that escalating regional crisis. We also commend and recognize France's unwavering commitment in Mali. Ambassador De Riviere's country's sacrifices do not go unnoticed, and the United States values France's leadership in the region. The Council has, however, spent years asking the signatories to make meaningful progress towards implementing the agreement, even by providing them with achievable benchmarks. Despite our robust support, we continue to witness inaction and a deteriorating security environment. It is therefore time for the Council to begin developing an alternative approach to addressing growing instability in Mali. To that end, I would like to offer a few observations. First, we must recognize that peacekeeping missions are not the answer to growing terrorist threats in Mali. A clear-eyed assessment of MINUSMA is needed to determine how the Mission most effectively complements other security activities in the region. Secondly, we must re-evaluate MINUSMA's role in supporting the implementation of the Algiers agreement. MINUSMA's success is dependent on the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups, but since 2015 both have proven unwilling to implement the agreement. We should consider deprioritizing MINUSMA's support in implementing the agreement and instead focus the Mission on protecting civilians. That would allow MINUSMA to direct its resources to the more densely populated and strategically important centre, where it can have an immediate impact. Additionally, the Mission can reduce its size, allowing Member States to apply resources to more effective efforts in the region. If the signatories are serious about MINUSMA's continued support to the agreement, they can demonstrate their resolve by implementing the benchmarks in resolution 2480 (2019) before 29 June, when MINUSMA's mandate expires. Thirdly, the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, must sanction individuals and entities on all sides of the conflict, including Government officials and armed group members who meet sanction designation criteria. Fourthly, we must ensure that MINUSMA receives high-performing troop and police contingents. The United States is concerned by reports of training and capability shortfalls, undeclared caveats and commanders unwilling to take risks or comply with orders. Those types of challenges, especially in a mission as complex and dangerous as MINUSMA, hinder the Mission, increase the risk of both peacekeeper and civilian casualties and support a narrative of peacekeeping ineffectiveness. We call on the Secretary- General to increase reporting on MINUSMA's troop and police performance, in line with the requirements of resolution 2436 (2018), to ensure that memorandums of understanding accurately reflect the requirements of the Mission and to swiftly hold poor performers accountable. Finally, any changes to MINUSMA's mandate must be considered as part of an integrated and transparent regional security strategy. The United States commends the current initiatives of our European and African partners, including members of the Economic Community of West African States, to coordinate security activities and expand counter-terrorism capacities. We look forward to seeing how those initiatives enhance regional security and complement MINUSMA. The United States desires peace, security and a brighter future for the people of Mali, the Sahel and West Africa. We are committed to that future, which is why we are the largest financial contributor to MINUSMA and the largest supporter of predeployment training for its contingents. But it is past time for Malian citizens to benefit from our commitment and the tireless work of the peacekeepers. I look forward to working with members of the Council between now and June to develop a new approach that disrupts the status quo and prepares the way for a future that the Malian people deserve.
