Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for presiding over this important meeting, which is
even more important to us as a member of the League
of Arab States and adherent of Islam. It comes at a
significant juncture for the situation in the Middle East,
which we can only describe as extremely unfortunate.
Indeed, all we have seen is the absence of any political
solution to this major conflict, along with the expansion
of terrorism's challenge to peace and security.

The negotiations relaunched in June 2013, through
the efforts of the United States and its Secretary of
State, John Kerry - who worked hard to convince the
Palestinian and Israeli parties to return to the negotiating
table to discuss a two-State solution were, however,
doomed to failure thanks to Israel's aggression in
Gaza, which resulted in the death of more than 2,000
Palestinians, including women, children and the elderly,
and in which numerous buildings were destroyed and
many people left homeless. In that regard, we would
like to pay tribute to the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) in supporting the victims of
the aggression, and in view of the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation for Palestinian refugees both
inside and outside Palestine, we would like to call on
the international community to help UNRWA in order
to assist it in providing basic services in these difficult
circumstances and to bridge its financing gaps.

 

His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco has
reiterated in various international forums that we must
end the spread of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories and that we should encourage all key players,
including the Pope, to help in that regard. We would
also like to inform the Council that Morocco chaired a
meeting in Marrakesh in January 2014, focusing on the
issue of Jerusalem and calling for a political solution.
In November of last year in Rabat, we hosted the focal
points of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation with
the goal of conveying a message to the international
community on the importance of defending the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Jerusalem. That is because respect for the
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
the establishment of an independent State, is the only
way to reach a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

On 6 April, Morocco, as a member of the Arab
League, took part in the Arab Summit held in Sharm
el-Sheikh. The Summit was aimed in part at mobilizing
support for the Palestinian cause and putting an end
to the Israeli aggression within the framework of
an independent Palestinian State established on the
borders of 4 June 1967 and a final settlement based
on the Arab Peace Initiative. The only way to resolve
the Palestinian question is through the return of the
two parties to the negotiating table. They must work
towards a just settlement of the conflict based on the
two-State solution and international legitimacy as
well as the agreed terms of reference, with two States
coexisting peacefully side by side. This is the only
formula aimed at putting an end to this aggression that
enjoys international agreement. It is therefore high
time that the international community put an end to
this situation so as to promote cooperation and bring
prosperity to the region as a whole.

The situation in Libya is dire, especially given the
rise of terrorist groups there. I should like also to note
that 21 Egyptians and 28 Ethiopians were beheaded by
Daesh terrorists. Given the number of terrorist groups
in Africa, including Boko Haram, Daesh and others, we
would like to see stronger international efforts made to
uproot terrorism in the region.

We in Morocco are deeply concerned by the situation

in Libya, because the Maghreb is very important to us.
We have a common destiny with Libya as well as with
other members of the Arab Maghreb Union. We also
stress the importance of honouring the commitments
made in the Marrakech treaty aimed at bringing about
peace and security in the region. We are committed to
helping our brothers in Libya to overcome their ordeal
and to establish national unity within the framework of
territorial integrity.

Therefore, based on the request made by the United
Nations last February, His Majesty King Mohammed
agreed to host a meeting of all Libyan factions in
Morocco, under the supervision of Mr. Bernardino
Leon, in order to support the efforts made by the United
Nations and based on our belief that a peaceful political
process is the only solution to the Libyan crisis.
Morocco is honouring its commitments with respect to
all factions in Libya, and our main concern is to find a
solution and look to the future.

The dialogue held today and last week brought
about progress that we warmly welcome. We did not
expect that all Libyan factions would come together
under one umbrella in Morocco in order to establish
a Government of national unity, and we hope that the
meeting of Libyan factions to be held in Libya, under
the supervision of the international envoy, will be
successful.

Let me stress that the Kingdom of Morocco
will make every effort to promote success in all
undertakings regarding Libya. We are working hard in
order to ensure respect for the rule of law in Libya in a
way that preserves its territorial integrity.

We express our concern at the deterioration of
the situation in Yemen, with the ongoing violations
of legitimacy as represented by President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, in violation of resolution
2201 (2015) and other relevant resolutions. Morocco
welcomes resolution 2216 (2015), which calls on all
parties to put an end to the attacks in Yemen and on
the Houthis to implement the resolution and allow
humanitarian access. We also reiterate our call to
preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Yemen.

The Syrian crisis is now in its fourth year, with no
solution in sight. In fact, the situation is deteriorating by
the day, and, as a result, the Syrian people are suffering
a great deal. We in Morocco are taking a dual approach:
supporting all the parties on the one hand, and trying to
help the Syrian refugees on the other. This is being done
through the hospital that was established in 2012 in the
Zaatari refugee camp and provides medical services to
thousands of Syrians.

Morocco also took part in the international
conference for the reconstruction of Syria held on
31 March. We will make every effort to provide support
to our brothers in Syria and to help find a solution to the
Syrian crisis. My delegation deems it very important to
preserve the territorial integrity of Syria and to support
Mr. Staffan de Mistura.

