Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My

delegationjoins in congratulating Kazakhstan on having
fulfilled in earnest the responsibility of presiding over
the Security Council during the month of January,
and for having done so at the highest level in its first
time as a non-permanent member. We commend the
Permanent Mission of Kazakhstan and its team, as well
as Ambassador Umarov.

We highlight President Nursultan Nazarbayev's
participation in the very timely debate (see S/PV.8160)
on the need to build confidence and prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the
participation of Minister Kairat Abdrakhmanov and his
colleagues from Central Asia in the enriching debate on
Afghanistan and the importance ofregional cooperation
for security and development (see S/PV.8162). In both
cases, Kazakhstan made substantive contributions to
international peace and security.

My delegation fully recognizes the need to take
more constructive action in the prevention of conflicts
at the national, regional and global levels in order to
achieve sustainable peace. In that regard, we would like
to share some reflections on the issues addressed by
the Council in January, which has also been Peru's first
month as a non-permanent member.

First, we have reaffirmed our conviction that the
solution to the challenges facing the international
community necessarily involves strengthening
multilateralism, respecting and promoting international
law, and observing the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Chapter VI on the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We believe that today's world requires
a multidimensional and comprehensive approach,
which is the basis of sustainable peace. Sustaining
peace also requires building inclusive and accountable
national institutions aimed at achieving sustainable
development and cooperation, as well as the active
participation of women and young people. In that
regard, we welcome the adoption of the presidential
statement on prevention (S/PRST/2018/1), presented by
the Kazakhstan delegation.

At the same time, we are of the view that it is
appropriate to continue strengthening the ways in which
the Council identifies, evaluates and responds to the
emergence of new risks and threats. The Council must
bear in mind the serious impacts of such phenomena
as poverty, inequality or climate change on security,
especially given that the United Nations system has
the capacity to take action to such ends through a more
coordinated and coherent approach of its three pillars.

Secondly, we welcome the broad consensus in
the Council on many principles, perspectives and
objectives, and we emphasize the need to maintain its
unity. Without prejudice to the interests and differences
that normally exist among its members, we believe that
the unity of the Council leads to the firm commitments
and concrete actions required to promote international
peace and security. One example ofthat is the Council's
unity in its support for the peace process in Colombia.
We highlight, among the agenda items that we have
considered this month, the efforts of that country
to achieve sustainable peace with the support of the
international community. We also note the unity of the
Council in support ofthe peace process in Afghanistan.
We thank the presidency and the Secretariat for the
successful organization of the mission to that country,
and thank the Afghan authorities for their favourable
response. My country has strongly condemned the
recent terrorist attacks and expressed its solidarity with
the Afghan people and Government. We hope that those
responsible will be punished.
This month, we have also recognized the important
work of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in the
fight against complex threats, such as terrorism and
organized crime.

We also agree on the fundamental objective of
achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We are cooperating in the follow-up ofvarious processes
included in the January agenda, inter alia, those of
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya,
Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and Darfur. We must
nevertheless say that, in many cases, there is much
more that can and should be done. We are particularly
concerned, among the issues considered this month, by
the difficulties in reaching a commitment regarding the
non-impunity of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and the lack of dialogue on the question of Palestine.

Thirdly, I would like to briefly refer to the work of
the two subsidiary bodies over which Peru was in charge
in January. The Counter-Terrorism Committee began
the discussion on the annual programme and drew up
the itinerary of visits and meetings throughout 2018.
We are seeking long-term collaboration with the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, including in the
framework of the June meeting of relevant national
authorities. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) also initiated the process of
considering the recommendations made by the Panel of
Experts following the issuing of a substantive report
that will be discussed during the Kuwaiti presidency
in February.

In conclusion, I reiterate our congratulations to you,
Mr. President, and your team for your exemplary work
this month and we welcome the Kuwaiti delegation,
which will assume the presidency tomorrow.

