Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would like to thank
President Guelleh for his briefing. We recognize that
Djibouti has a significant geopolitical and strategic role
to play in the Horn of Africa region. The Government
of Japan has been engaging in anti-piracy activities in
that area, deploying two naval vessels and two P-3C
maritime patrol aircraft from Djibouti in cooperation
with the Government of Djibouti.

Japan also supports building the capacity of the
States neighbouring Somalia, including through the
establishment of the training centre in Djibouti with the
support of the International Maritime Organization
Djibouti Code of Conduct Trust Fund, which was
initiated by Japan. I would like to take this opportunity
to express sincere appreciation to Djibouti for that
country's tremendous support. Japan hopes to continue
to build upon its strong partnership with Djibouti.

I carefully listened to President Guelleh's
statement on the situation in Somalia, in which he
described the highly volatile situation there, as recent
developments attest. Japan commends Djibouti for its
active contribution to bringing about the stabilization
of Somalia. As was expressed in the Security Council
debate last week (see S/PV.6313), it is essential that the
peace process based on the Djibouti Agreement be
promoted in parallel with the improvement of the
security situation and development in Somalia. Japan is
determined to continue to work in cooperation with
Djibouti towards peace and stability in Somalia.
With regard to the border dispute between
Djibouti and Eritrea, it is regrettable that no
substantive progress has been seen in the
implementation of resolution 1862 (2009). It is our
View that Eritrea must cooperate in the search for a
solution through dialogue. In this context, Japan
welcomes the efforts among neighbouring countries to
promote dialogue, including those of Qatar.

The Security Council is expecting to receive a
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1907 (2009), including on the border
issue between Djibouti and Eritrea. Japan intends to
follow up on this matter in the discussion to be
conducted following the publication of the report.

In closing, we would like reiterate our
determination, as a responsible member of the Security
Council, to work towards achieving stability in
Somalia, in the Djibouti-Eritrea situation and in the
Horn ofAfrica as a Whole.

