Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I would like
to thank the representatives of the two Tribunals, Judge
Pocar and Judge Mose, and Prosecutors Del Ponte and
Jallow for their written reports and oral briefings.

Denmark remains a strong supporter of the
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.
They make an invaluable contribution to our common
endeavour to fight impunity. They are instrumental in
the process of national reconciliation, and their impact
goes far beyond the cases under their jurisdiction and
beyond the countries immediately concerned.

The Security Council has called on both
Tribunals to complete all first-instance trial activities
by the end of 2008. Denmark welcomes the hard work
carried out by both Tribunals, and we encourage them
to do their utmost to meet their target dates. While we
note that the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is now
aiming for 2009, we sincerely hope that the Rwanda
Tribunal will be able to meet the deadline, as indicated
by Judge Mose today.

Admittedly, it is not an easy task to predict how
justice will unfold. The Tribunals themselves are best
placed to make the difficult and bold decisions
required to keep the implementation of the completion
strategies on track and to get the job done on time. We
urge the Tribunals to remain vigilant in that regard.

Denmark appreciates the initiative taken by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) to speed up its work. Allow me to
make a few very specific remarks in that regard.

First, on streamlining the pre-trial phase, we
encourage the Tribunal to also make full and active use
of guilty pleas by not presenting evidence regarding
facts that both parties have already agreed to. Secondly,
we believe - as mentioned by Judge Pocar - that a
fourth courtroom would greatly enhance the possibility
of the ICTY finishing its first-instance and appeal
cases by the relevant target dates. And thirdly, for the
fourth courtroom to be put to full use, we would have
to carefully consider increasing the number of judges.
One option could be to increase the number of ad litem
judges from nine to 12. Another would be to allow the
permanent judges to sit in more trials at the same time.

Justice must be served in strict accordance with
international standards of due process. We appreciate
that both Tribunals stress that they are working to
ensure exactly that, including for the cases being
transferred to competent national courts. Such transfers
have great potential for strengthening national
ownership of reconciliation, justice and the rule of law.
But that potential can be realized fully only if
international standards of justice are met. Well
designed and timely national capacity-building will
therefore often have to be an integral part of these
transfers.

I now turn to the obligations of the international
community vis-a-vis the Tribunals. We all agree that
the primary task of the Tribunals is to bring to justice
"the most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible" (resolution 1503 (2003), seventh
preambular para.) for the crimes within their
jurisdiction. The Tribunals cannot make this happen in
a vacuum. To meet our Chapter-VII obligations, it is
incumbent on all of us to do what is within our power
to facilitate the work. That includes close judicial
cooperation and intelligence sharing, but also punctual
payment of assessed contributions.

On the issue of national cooperation with the
Tribunals, we are pleased to see a number of recent
positive developments. The arrest of Ante Gotovina on
7 December is indeed a welcome development, but also
a long overdue one. It is a forceful reminder that other
indictees remain at large, including some whose
apprehension and prosecution is of vital importance to
our pursuit of justice.

We call on Serbia and Montenegro and, in
particular, on Republika Srpska to cooperate fully with
the ICTY and to redouble their efforts to apprehend the
remaining six fugitives within their reach, not least
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. Similarly, we
call on Kenya to assist in the apprehension of
Mr. Felicien Kabuga.

Let me reiterate our full support to the two
Tribunals. We will continue to actively follow their
work, and we look forward to their next reports.

