I thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for his briefing, and I welcome the Permanent Representative of Syria to the meeting. After listening carefully to the briefing and reading through the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/813), I must say that we have many reasons to be worried. The economic situation in Syria is extremely fragile, and the international community should support the Syrian Government in revitalizing the economy. We acknowledge that the Syrian Government has made commendable efforts in order to improve the livelihoods of the Syrian people, including implementing agricultural reform, helping small businesses, facilitating inter-governorate transportation and combating the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The international community should support Syria's efforts with concrete actions and assistance. In addition, it should support Syria in defending its sovereignty and managing its own natural resources. Syria's oil fields belong to the Syrian people and cannot be subject to illegal foreign plundering. Years of unilateral sanctions have caused tremendous hardship to the Syrian people, and such sanctions must be lifted immediately. The unilateral coercive measures are damaging the Syrian economy, destroying the livelihoods of civilians and undermining Syria's capacity to respond to COVID-19. The Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock have repeatedly appealed for the waiver of sanctions. China strongly urges the United States to respond actively to these urgent appeals and lift unilateral sanctions without delay. The Secretariat and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should pay close attention to this issue, strengthen research and analysis in that regard and report to the Security Council. We call on all stakeholders, especially United Nations agencies, to increase their input into and coordination of humanitarian operations in Syria. We welcome the recent progress in cross-line humanitarian operations. There have been missions from Damascus to both the north-east and the north-west. We call on the United Nations to continue to strengthen cooperation with the Syrian Government and to scale up cross-line operations in combination with cross-border deliveries. Donor countries are encouraged to fulfil their assistance commitments to Syria as soon as possible. Such assistance should not come with preconditions, nor should it be used as a tool to further a political agenda or pressure the Syrian Government. It is disturbing that the water supply of Allouk water station was cut off, affecting 460,000 people. The neutrality of civil infrastructure must be guaranteed. The development of the COVID-19 pandemic in Syria cannot be overlooked. Forceful measures, as well as more assistance, must be put in place. The Syrian Government has taken decisive actions in many areas to reduce the risk of public transmission and save lives. The international community needs to support those efforts. We are glad to know that the United Nations has formed 112 rapid response teams and that the World Health Organization has provided dedicated training for 432 persons. China has already delivered two batches of medical supplies to Syria. Last week, we provided specialized medical equipment to children's hospitals in Syria. We will continue to provide necessary assistance to the Syrian people. The security situation in Syria deserves special attention. The international community should continue to support Syria in fighting terrorism, in line with international law and Security Council resolutions. There has been a significant increase in attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria since early 2020. Recently, improvised explosive devices and mine explosions have caused a large number of casualties. Many incidents can be attributed to designated terrorist groups. We are concerned that a gas pipeline in the Damascus suburbs was attacked, causing a blackout throughout Syria on Monday. Counter-terrorism is an ongoing battle and a long-term task. A ceasefire should not mean the unleashing of terrorist activities. The international community must remain alert and adopt unified standards to combat terrorism, including in Syria. With regard to the political process, let me reiterate China's firm support for the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process. The sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria must be upheld. We are glad to learn that the third session of the Constitutional Committee is resuming today. We hope that the meeting is productive. China rejects the groundless accusations of the United States. Such political propaganda and blatant lies have become a cliche in the United States statements. If the United States truly cared about the humanitarian situation in Syria, it could do many things instead of blaming others, including lifting unilateral sanctions. I strongly urge the United States to stop politicizing the Syrian humanitarian issue and to match its words with deeds.
