Mr. Koenigs: First of all, Sir, I wish to thank you
for your kind words.

I am pleased to note that as we come together
today to consider the way forward in Afghanistan,
many of us here do so for the second or even a third
time in a month. There could be no clearer indication
of the priority that the international community rightly
assigns to success in Afghanistan and the enduring
commitment to a better future for all Afghans.

The most recent of these three meetings - the
sixth Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
meeting on 3 October in Kabul - focused on regional
economic cooperation. After frank discussions, it took
decisions on trade and transit, finalization of
commercially viable power purchase agreements and
facilitation of transborder labour movements and of
voluntary repatriation and reintegration of Afghan
refugees, with support from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. The huge importance of
active regional cooperation for stability and economic
development was stressed by all speakers.

However, despite the positive steps taken during
the meeting, discussion of key topics highlighted a
capacity deficit in regional cooperation, which must be
addressed first and foremost within the Government of
Afghanistan by the creation of supporting regional
units in the lead ministries, led by the reinforced
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. For the region, a key target
remains complementing the focus of Afghanistan's
neighbours on their bilateral relationships by
07-54010
furthering, and expanding upon, multilateral
approaches to enduring stability for Afghanistan.

The coordination of international and Afghan
military actors has improved at both the national and
regional levels, and there have been significant tactical
military successes in the south and in the east since I
briefed this Council in March. In the past two months,
the level of violence has subsided. Nonetheless, on a
month-by-month basis, compared with last year, the
number of violent incidents is up by approximately
30 per cent. So far this year, the United Nations has
recorded 606 detonated improvised explosive devices
and 133 suicide attacks, as compared with 88 at this
time last year. That is a significant increase, and a sad
result is the increase in the number of casualties - at
least 1,200 civilians have been killed since January this
yean

The Afghan National Army will be at around
47,000 soldiers strong by the end of this year. The
Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan
hopes to deliver a force of 70,000 by the end of 2008.
At the same time, a programme of focused district
development should begin to address the poor
standards of the Afghan National Police. But numbers
are not a measure of capability, and for the time being
we must recognize that the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) represents the most capable
defence of the Government against the insurgency.

NATO and ISAF must work with the Government
of Afghanistan and with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to ensure that an
integrated political and military strategy and a shared
security plan for Afghanistan that take full account of
military, counter-insurgency, governance, development,
reconstruction and human dimensions are sources of
strength for all in standing against violence and
bringing peace to Afghanistan over the winter months
and throughout 2008. Key to the success of such an
integrated strategy is the greater inclusion of
Afghanistan's civilian and military leaders in the
planning of security operations in regional commands,
International Security Assistance Force headquarters,
and NATO military headquarters.

In the current climate of instability and conflict,
the lack of oversight mechanisms for human rights,
especially with regard to the opacity of the mandate of
the National Directorate for Security, the intelligence
service, and lack of access to its facilities are of
07-54010

particular concern. It should also be added that the lack
of coordination of the National Directorate for Security
with both the justice system and, in some areas, even
with other security organizations is a hindrance to
security within the country. I urge the Government to
investigate allegations of arbitrary detention and
torture of detainees, granting UNAMA and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission unrestricted
access to monitor the National Directorate for Security
detention centres and activities throughout the country.
One recommendation in that sense is to be found in
paragraph 84 of the Secretary-General's report.

I was deeply troubled by the recent decision of
the Afghan Government to execute 15 prisoners on
SOctober. As members are all aware, the United
Nations does not support the imposition of the death
penalty and, specifically with regard to Afghanistan, in
2005 the Commission on Human Rights called on
Afghan authorities to declare a moratorium on the
death penalty in light of procedural and substantive
flaws in the judicial system. I must take this
opportunity to urge the Government to reinstate the
moratorium and to respect the international laws
governing the illegality of the death penalty when a
fair trial cannot be guaranteed.

Although, amid the violence in Afghanistan,
suicide attacks receive the most publicity, perhaps the
biggest threat to the civilian population and overall
stability is the ongoing campaign of intimidation,
abduction and execution being carried out by anti-
Government elements against all those seen to have a
connection with the Afghan Government or the
international community. It is imperative that the
protection of civilians remain at the forefront of
everyone's efforts in Afghanistan, for a failure to
secure the population's support will not only protract
the conflict, causing further devastation, but also hold
the country's development hostage to violence and
undermine the legitimacy of our efforts.

I am pleased to be able to note concrete steps taken
by ISAF and Operation Enduring Freedom on the issue of
civilian casualties. Those include the issuance of orders to
all regional commands to adjust tactics, where possible, to
increase protection of civilians and the improvement of
systems for compensation and information-sharing. The
Security Council has reinforced such efforts to protect
civilians in the new language of the International Security
Assistance Force's recent mandate extension of
19 September in resolution 1776 (2007).
3
I wish to stress that there can be no further delays
in addressing the twin challenges of governance and
outreach, on which progress in Afghanistan depends. In
order to thrive, Afghan communities require security
and opportunity. While internationally supported
military operations or, indeed, the ever-more capable
Afghan National Army can potentially provide
temporary security, opportunity requires a just
institutional framework in which commitment to the
Constitution's precepts - that is, good citizenship -
is rewarded. Along with that, transgression must be
punished. Only good governance, led by senior
leadership within the Government and delivered
through both the civilian and military arms of the State,
will end the culture of corruption and impunity that has
dangerously eroded public confidence.

The focus on shoring up the central Government
has come at the cost of provincial administrations,
which, as a result of being long neglected by both the
Government and its international partners, are weak
and undersupported. The creation last month of the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance (IDLG)
is belated, especially given that its task is undoubtedly
one of the most important and difficult ones facing the
administration today. The strategic framework recently
presented by IDLG, which identifies the need to
achieve transparent, accountable, participatory and
inclusive governance, must be refined into concrete
and manageable tasks, assigned across ministries, and
pursued with determination.

I hope that donors wholeheartedly support
IDLG's work, which should form the backbone of
comprehensive political engagement and dramatically
increase the public's trust in Government. Such a
programme could build on the successful completion of
this summer's sub-national consultations, which
involved 11,000 people participating in the
development of 35 provincial development plans. That
will complement the ongoing work with the sector
strategies and help ensure that the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy, to be finalized by
March next year, will be truly representative. I urge the
international community to work closely with the
Strategy and to support the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board secretariat to ensure that the
Strategy becomes an enduring vehicle for the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the people of Afghanistan.
For the dangers of weak governance, one need
look no further than the 34 per cent increase in opium
production in 2007. A disjointed international
community approach, combined with a lack of Afghan
leadership at the national and sub-national levels, has
allowed drug traffickers to prosper. Where there has
been success - for example in Balkh province, which
was declared poppy free this year - it has been the
direct result of unequivocal Afghan leadership. That
should serve as a model for efforts throughout the
country.

The dangers posed by the record poppy harvest
have gone beyond the societal and health issues, as it
has encouraged an alliance of convenience between the
insurgents and drug lords. Both parties have an interest
in a weak State and are further exploiting that synergy
and fostering corruption among local administrators
and key security officials, most often the police. If
unchecked, those whose financial interests are served
by the drug trade will use their profits to buy political
power ahead of elections, which will in turn sow the
seeds for a self-perpetuating narco-State.

For that reason, I would like to commend the
Government and its international partners for its recent
commitment, through the Policy Action Group on
10 October, to a 12-point action plan on which to base
implementation of the national drug control strategy.
While the actions are quite comprehensive, to be
successful they will require determined leadership and
great political will on the part of the Government,
supported by all the international partners.

Capacity-building remains a key weapon with
which to combat the corrosive power of corruption. In
instances where Government and international efforts
have been aligned and focused on institutional capacity
development - such as in the Afghan National Army
and the ministries of finance, education, health and
rural development - there has been consolidated
progress. Where that has not happened - such as in
the Civil Service Commission, counter-narcotics,
sub-national governance and the Ministry of Interior -
progress has been limited.

The efforts of all those - in particular the
Afghan Government, the United States and the
European Union - whose great commitment to

reforming the Afghan National Police has resulted in
higher quality police chiefs, new standards of vetting
07-54010
and professionalism, merit-based selection of police
officials, improved vehicles and equipment and
growing effectiveness on the part of the uniformed,
border, traffic and civil order police in most parts of
the country are highly appreciated.

Nevertheless, parts of the Ministry of Interior
have proved resistant to principles of accountability
and transparency, thereby hampering the development
of the Afghan National Police. At the same time, the
absence of a unified vision of the police that addresses
the requirements of law enforcement and counter-
insurgency has perpetuated an environment dominated
by a culture of patronage and corruption. In addition,
we cannot ignore the fact that, to date this year, the
violent insurgency has cost more than 1,000 policemen
their lives. The Government of Afghanistan and the
international community must urgently come together
to develop a definitive structure for the National Police
that embraces both gendarmerie and civilian police
functions.

The Government of Afghanistan and its partners
have only belatedly understood the specific role the
police must play, and the additional support they
require, in any successful counter-insurgency strategy.
To that end, the recently formed International Police
Coordination Board, whose mandate is to bring
coherence to police development efforts, should be
structured to function on the basis of Afghan leadership
as the central policy body for police reform.

In the past two months, the President and the
parliament have increasingly expressed the desire to
conduct outreach to insurgents willing to reconcile
with the Government. However, to be effective,
national reconciliation will require a comprehensive
strategy defined by the parameters of the Afghan
constitution. I was told that several Taliban
commanders have expressed the wish to live in peace
under the current constitution - out of fear for their
survival and uncertainty about the sustainability of
their sanctuaries and in response to signals pointing
towards the need for dialogue at many levels, above all
in the wake of the Afghanistan-Pakistan peace jirga
held in early August. The Taliban as an organization
remains, at least in part, determined to continue its
military campaign. There are currently no prospects for
negotiations with the top leadership of the Taliban.

In the past few weeks, the parliament passed
legislation governing political parties, the structure of

the Government and property. Many of those subjects
have provoked discussion and even controversy, none
more so than the Media Law. In the version ultimately
approved by both houses of parliament - which post-
dates the one referred to in paragraph 16 of the report
(S/2007/555) of the Secretary-General - the
independence of Afghan media has been largely
protected. Extensive lobbying by Afghan journalists
and civil society and by the international community,
including UNAMA, appears to have been successful in
many respects.

The President and his supporters responded to the
formation, in May, of the National United Front - a
political opposition party with which several members
of the Cabinet are associated - with the recent
registration of a Republican Party, to which other
Cabinet members belong. That growing political
diversity is the healthiest indicator yet that Afghans are
taking charge of their own destiny and that the
perspectives of key political players in Afghanistan
both within and outside the Government have shifted
from post-electoral to pre-electoral concerns.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
at their meeting in May, the members of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board of the Afghanistan
Compact recommended that the Government and the
National Assembly should ensure the Assembly's
timely adoption of an electoral law that would allow
for cost-effective and secure elections, as called for by
the Afghanistan Compact. At the President's request,
the parliament is currently considering the merits of
harmonizing the presidential and parliamentary
election cycles, which expire in 2009 and 2010,
respectively.

I urge the international community to ensure that
it supports election preparations in a coherent manner,
with the goal of achieving well-prepared, free and fair
presidential and parliamentary elections at the central
and district levels. To that end, I encourage donors to
meet the shortfall from the previous elections and to
provide the necessary resources for a voter registry and
for building the capacity of the Independent Electoral
Commission.

UNAMA will continue to play its central
coordinating role and take new initiatives in the areas
where we can make a meaningful contribution. With its
17 offices in the field, and in the numerous working
groups of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, UNAMA will make its best efforts to deliver
effective coordination throughout the country at the
national and sub-national levels. With a view to
reinforcing regional and provincial offices, in its 2008
budget submission, UNAMA will request a moderate
increase in international posts, including for the police
and military advisory units. It should be stressed that
UNAMA's activities, in particular in the field, must be
carried out with all precautionary measures to protect
our staff. That requires sufficient resources. On all
those issues, the support of Council members is highly
appreciated.

Notwithstanding the serious challenges facing
Afghanistan, it is heartening to be able to report the
involvement of several thousand people in marches and
other activities throughout Afghanistan on the
International Day of Peace, which was observed on
21 September. The UNAMA-led communications
campaign begun in July to mobilize grass-roots voices
for peace culminated in peace debates, spontaneous
gatherings and, perhaps most important, a successful
Government of Afghanistan/UNICEF/World Health
Organization Peace Day polio vaccination campaign in
previously inaccessible areas of the south and east.

We commend the clear resolve of the Afghan
people, who have now been battered by nearly 30 years
of war and conflict, to build on their achievements of
the past six years by contributing to a genuine peace
process that embraces civil society, tribal groups,
elected representatives, the legitimate Government and
opposition groups and that engages all in a common
effort to make national reconciliation a real prospect.

Finally, I would like to thank the Council for its
continuing commitment to the peace process in
Afghanistan and to UNAMA's mission. On a more
personal note, I would like to thank the Council for the
support it has given me - which in many cases went
beyond diplomatic routine - as the leader of
UNAMA, which is one of the most challenging and
fascinating of United Nations missions.

