Mr. Ruiicka (Slovakia): Slovakia would first like
to align itself with the statement delivered earlier on
behalf of the European Union (EU).

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/151) and welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Nicholas Haysom. I thank him for his briefing and
wish him every success in his new appointment. We
are keeping our fingers crossed for his mission, and we
are sure it will be successful. Slovakia will continue
to offer full support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement and for
his ongoing activities to bring about a brighter future
for his country.

Slovakia welcomes the fact that Afghanistan
entered its transformation decade at the beginning of
2015, having assumed full leadership and ownership
of its national affairs. We note with appreciation the
mutually respectful nature of the relations between
Afghan leaders President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah and their teams. That approach is the only
way forward in addressing the country's challenges in
a sustainable, strategic and cohesive manner.

I would like to touch upon the various challenges
that Afghanistan is facing.

Despite the volatile nature of its security situation,
Afghanistan is not alone. There is now the Resolute
Support Mission, which is an entirely new element
based on new foundations. As set forth in Security
Council resolution 2189 (2014), adopted by this body
in December 2014, that non-combat, training, advisory
and assistance operation will work in close coordination
with the Government of Afghanistan. I am proud that
my country is a part of it. We must also recognize
the work done by the civilian EU Police Mission in
Afghanistan, which is focused on police training and
the rule of law and to which Slovakia also contributes.
All of those engagements contribute to a better security-
sector environment and should be fully supported by all
the main stakeholders.

With regard to political developments, Afghan
leaders can fully rely on the support of the international
community, including Slovakia. However, the most
prominent support can and will only come from the
Afghan people, and it is up to their representatives to
earn their trust and credibility by leading by example.
We encourage all steps towards increased internal
stabilization, including sound political leadership in
the parliamentary elections process and the reform
agenda. The process of reconciliation is a fundamental
prerequisite to sustainable development in Afghanistan.
We encourage Afghan leaders to inspire their fellow
politicians and other potential candidates in Kabul,
as well as in other regions, to conduct an ambitious
schedule of elections and reforms.
Economic, financial and budgetary reforms are
perhaps the most challenging area of reform to promote
peaceful development. And I think that the people of
Slovakia have really already confirmed that, because
over the past 20 years, the country has gone through
substantive economic reforms. As I have stressed before,
Afghanistan is not alone and Slovakia, together with
other countries and organizations, wishes to continue
its development assistance programmes. But from our
own national experience, foreign aid can only help to
overcome the difficult problems of the initial phase of
a country's transformation. The most important, and
at the same time challenging and painful, part of the
process is deep structural reform. It is essential in order
to encourage foreign private investors and develop
domestic small and medium enterprises. Again on this
point, Slovakia is ready to offer its own experience with
transformation at any time if requested.

In connection with regional cooperation, we have
taken note, with appreciation, of increased positive
engagement on the part of neighbours of Afghanistan,
complementing Afghan efforts to strengthen regional
relations. Their support is critical and essential,
especially in addressing cross-border threats, like
counter-narcotics efforts and the illicit trafficking of
drugs.

Slovakia fully supports a free and democratic
Afghanistan. We support its economic and social
development in accordance with the traditions and
wishes of its people. Afghan leaders - including
President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah - have
offered their people vision and hope. We are pleased that
the reform plan also tackles the areas of the protection
of civilians, the situation of women and girls, freedom
of expression and accountability based on the rule of
law.

The accent on the necessity of economic reforms in
my statement is not accidental. The growth of the illicit
economy can severely undermine the Government's
efforts, negatively affect the individual and collective
business endeavours of Afghan citizens and ultimately
spoil the momentum of building an unprecedented,
qualitatively better future for Afghanistan. I am
convinced that the Afghan Administration is aware of
that challenge, and we are looking forward to working
closely with Kabul, should our assistance be desired.
I remain positive and encouraged - again thanks to
Special Representative Haysom and the whole UNAMA
team, who continue in their remarkable performance.
And let me wish to all the Afghan people a very
successful year with new hopes and perspectives.
