Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lounceny
Fall and Ms. Ghelani for their informative briefings.

We commend the calm with which the majority of
the electoral processes in Central African countries
took place and encourage all countries in the subregion
to work towards consensus in all areas in order to
build peace and stability. Similarly, we invite them
to develop measures to build trust in those processes
and encourage the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) to continue to support the
holding of inclusive, credible and peaceful elections.
In that regard, we acknowledge the work that UNOCA
conducts in those areas, including mediation, preventive
diplomacy, and the support it provides to regional and
subregional organizations in order to contribute to the
reduction of tensions in the region.

With that in mind, we welcome the Joint Summit
held on 30 July between the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on
peace, security, stability and the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. Similarly, we commend the
work of the UNOCA secretariat at the forty-sixth
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa and look forward to the speedy adoption of a
declaration on confidence-building measures. We
commend the endorsement of the regional action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. We believe that greater women's
participation in the area of decision-making will enable
progress to be made in building peace in the region.
We encourage UNOCA to continue its efforts in that
regard and to continue promoting the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We also appreciate the study
conducted by UNESCO and ECCAS on the status of
youth organizations in seven Central African States in
order to combat violent extremism.

We also welcome the various workshops and
technical meetings that were held in partnership with
subregional organizations. The assistance provided
by cooperating with such organizations should not be
overlooked, but rather, further deepened, under the
principle of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of each of the States in
which UNOCA implements its mandate. Current and
emerging threats should be addressed by working with
those organizations in order to diminish the impact
they could have on stability in the subregion.

In the same vein, we welcome the regional seminar
held in Libreville on the regional integration strategy
paper for Central Africa for 2018-2025, developed by
the African Development Bank, which recommended
accelerating the process ofregional integration in Central
Africa and finalizing the strategy document on regional
integration. Similarly, we praise the endorsement of the
Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the
Lake Chad Basin Region.

In line with the points I have just mentioned,
we reiterate that consideration should be given to
replicating the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel in Central Africa, in order to address security and
counter-terrorism challenges, within an institutional
framework of regional cooperation and coordination.
In that regard, we highlight the progress made by
the Multinational Joint Task Force and regional and
international partners in their fight against Boko Haram
in the Lake Chad basin, as well as the efforts of the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
in line with resolution 2349 (2017). We believe that,
to address those challenges, both the countries of the
region and the international community, as a whole,
must delve into their root causes. One such cause is the
lack of control over the exploitation of natural resources
which, in turn, are used to supply and finance the
illegal activities of armed groups, including the Lord's
Resistance Army - a group that continues to pose a
threat to the security of civilians in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We also urge the international community to
take into account the humanitarian situation in the
subregion. In the Central African Republic, as of
1 October, the number of refugees has increased to
more than 572,000, while approximately 616,000
are internally displaced persons. In the Democratic
Republic of Congo, approximately 13 million people
are in need of protection and humanitarian assistance,
8 million are facing food insecurity and 4.5 million are
internally displaced. In addition, they all face the threat
of diseases, such as Ebola, and lack basic services.

With respect to Cameroon, we echo the sentiments
expressed by the delegation of Ethiopia, with regard to
the Government's primary responsibility of addressing
the challenges faced within the framework of political
dialogue. It is imperative to continue working and
redoubling efforts to mobilize political, technical and
financial support in order to achieve peace, stability
and development in Central Africa. With that in mind,
ongoing support should also be given to the work
of UNOCA which, together with the Multinational
Joint Task Force, the various entities of the United
Nations system, regional offices and country teams,
among others, devote their efforts and commitment to
achieving peace and stability in the subregion.

