Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March and to let you know how
pleased my delegation is to see the friendly country
of France leading the Security Council's deliberations
today. I would like to thank you for organizing
today's meeting on the situation in my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
the Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea, who did an
excellent job in presiding over the Council last month.
And I particularly want to thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his determination and commitment to my
country's cause and for his report on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/218), which
is the subject of our discussions today.

My delegation has taken note of the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), just introduced by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of MONUSCO, whose presence here today I
welcome. I would now like to explain my Government's
position on all the issues raised in the report and on the
concerns raised by the members of the Council.

After the holding of presidential, legislative and
provincial elections on 30 December, the main focus
of the political situation in my country has been
the establishment of new institutions, as the report
emphasizes. In that context, on 24 January we held
a ceremony to celebrate our country's historic first
peaceful transfer of power to a new Head of State, from
former President Joseph Kabila Kabange to the newly
elected President of the Republic, Mr. Felix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, followed by the installation of
Assemblies at both the national and provincial levels.

The political situation has also featured the
preparation of the elections that were postponed in
the Beni and Butembo areas of North Kivu province
in order to prevent the spread of Ebola virus disease,
and in the Yumbi district, in Mai-Ndombe province,
following bloody clashes that had resulted in the loss
of human lives. I need hardly say that those elections
are scheduled for 31 March, in accordance with
the revised timetable of the Commission electorale
nationale independante.

In order to emphasize his desire to strengthen good-
neighbourly relations, work in harmony and cooperate
with the leaders of the region right from the start of his
term of office, President Tshisekedi undertook a tour
that took him in turn to Angola, Kenya, the Republic
of the Congo, Namibia and then to Nairobi for a second
time. On 10 and 11 February, in Addis Ababa, he also
participated in the thirty-second ordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
at which he was elected Second Vice-President of the
African Union by his peers.

With a view to reducing tensions in the political
climate, the President has authorized the return of those
who had been exiled for their political and philosophical
views, as well as the release of political prisoners,
particularly those whose cases were considered
symbolic. Before concluding this part, I should point
out that negotiations on forming a Government are
continuing between the parties concerned. In the
meantime, the President has appointed the members of
his Cabinet and published his programme of priorities
for the first 100 days of his term.

I would like to respond briefly to the Ambassador of
Germany by saying that the issues raised by Ms. Anny
Tenga Modi are important and the Government is
taking them into account. The fact is that gender parity
is enshrined in the Democratic Republic of the Congo's

legislation, and women are therefore an integral part
of all the country's institutions. The lower numbers of
women in some State institutions has more to do with
their lack of initiative and determination, owing mainly
to the barriers presented by our civic education and
traditional culture, as Ms. Modi herself acknowledged.
We therefore want to point to the Government's efforts
to establish programmes to encourage such initiatives
and combat our traditional barriers.

The security situation continues to be a concern for
the Government, which is why the President has made
it a priority of his programme, as he stressed in his
inauguration address. It is true that the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to be
a focus for the activities of both domestic and foreign
armed groups, the most deadly of which is currently
the Allied Democratic Forces, as is well known. These
criminals are known for their murderous attacks on
civilian populations in the region of Beni and Butembo
and on positions held by MONUSCO and the Forces
armees de la Republique Democratique du Congo
(FARDC). As we have told the Council before, the
modus operandi of this hostile force, whose strongholds
have already been dismantled, however, will force the
FARDC and MONUSCO to review their strategies
and combine their efforts to neutralize it and achieve
sustainable security for the people in this part of the
country and end the suffering they have endured for
many years. The Government remains committed to
continuing the efforts it has already undertaken in this
fight, which is why we have increased the military
strength of five of the 12 regiments operating in the
Sokola 1 operational sector in the Beni region by 2,500
men and appropriate equipment.

The current report also mentions the changes that
have occurred since the President took office, with
members of armed groups surrendering en masse,
particularly in the Kasais, the two Kivus, Ituri and
Haut-Katanga. This trend should be fostered so as to
encourage armed groups that are still active to renounce
their hostile activity and lay down their weapons.
My country urges the international community to
support this process of voluntary disarmament so
that combatants who surrender by laying down their
arms can benefit from the support they need for social
reintegration. In View of that, we advocate including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as the
second strategic priority in MONUSCO's new mandate,
after the protection of civilians.

With regard to the Forces democratiques de
libe'ration du Rwanda (FDLR) and former combatants
ofthe Mouvement du 23 mars (M23), in order to comply
with the decision of the Heads of State taken at the
eighth High-level Meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, held in Brazzaville on 19 October
2017, demanding the simultaneous and unconditional
repatriation of former F DLR and M23 combatants held
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and Uganda, my country has closed the transit sites
in Kisangani, Walungu and Kanyobagonga that had
sheltered FDLR elements, who have been repatriated
to Rwanda along with their dependents and with the
assistance of MONUSCO. A similar measure was taken
for some former M23s based in Uganda who have now
been returned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With respect to the sad events that occurred in the
Yumbi district on 17 and 18 December, on the President's
instructions, a tripartite commission, consisting of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
the Congo and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, has been set up to identify
and deal with our compatriots who took refuge in
Congo-Brazzaville and to facilitate their return home.
Police forces, supported by operational units, have been
deployed in the area. In the next few days the President
will appoint local authorities in order to restore State
authority. He has decided to use military engineers
to rebuild the schools and other basic infrastructure
destroyed during the events.

With regard to the future of MONUSCO, the
President made the following statement in his address
to the diplomatic corps on 15 February.

"[W]e will assist the planned MONUSCO
drawdown process, taking into account the
evolving security situation, by fully participating
in the development of a joint exit strategy and its
gradual transformation within the framework of
the strategic dialogue. During the discussions
of the renewal of its mandate in March, we will
ask for a reconfiguration through a qualitative
reorganization of the troops, which should be
fewer in number but better equipped and more
experienced in dealing with asymmetric warfare
in order to collaborate with the national army in
tracking down armed groups, which are the main
threat to civilians".

In the light of the guidelines drawn up by the Head
of State, my Government requests the Security Council
to take the following proposals into account in the draft
resolution that it will adopt in a few days' time: renew
the mandate of MONUSCO for a period of one year,
until March 2020; qualitatively resize the troops that
must be trained and the number of which should be
reduced - in my Government's view, that reduction
should not include the Intervention Brigade; and provide
the troops with the appropriate means and equipment
to enhance their operational capabilities to combat
asymmetrical threats on the ground. Priority in that
allocation should be given to the Intervention Brigade.

Moreover, given that the elections are now behind
us, my Government requests that the mandate be
readjusted and reflect the post-electoral configuration.
In that context, troop deployment should take into
account areas where the threat is known and the
Mission can still play a role. Disengagement should
therefore be considered in areas where the threat is no
longer documented.

As I have already mentioned, the priorities of the
mandate should now focus on the protection of civilians.
With that in mind, my Government would therefore
like to see the Council take into account, as one of
the strategic priorities of the mandate, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration so as to enable, as we
have already said with regard to voluntary surrenders,
support for the social reintegration of the combatants
who lay down their arms. The Council should also
include the issue of dealing with the plundering of
natural resources, which is one of the main causes of the
conflict in the eastern part of my country, and take the
regional dimension of the crisis into account in order to
ask the neighbouring countries that are the sources of
the foreign armed groups to engage in political dialogue
with those groups in the context of resolving the crisis.

With regard to the upcoming discussions on the
development of a j oint exit strategy within the framework
of the strategic dialogue, my country underscores
the need to start at once the process of transferring
MONUSCO's tasks to the Government, the United
Nations country team and other relevant stakeholders,
following an explicit and jointly established timeline,
with a view to safeguarding the achievements already
made and a responsible withdrawal of MONUSCO,
thereby ensuring sustainable progress towards the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the consolidation of State authority and the elimination
of the threat posed by armed groups.

The humanitarian situation in my country is due
mainly to the activity of armed groups and the conflicts
that are also racking neighbouring countries, whose
people seek refuge in our territory. In addition, there
are natural disasters and the resurgence of certain
epidemics, such as cholera and the Ebola virus disease.
My country continues to address that situation with the
means at its disposal. The Government would highly
appreciate any additional assistance that our partners
could provide to the distressed populations.

To return to the situation of Ebola haemorrhagic
fever, it is important to inform the Council that the
Government's efforts to control that disease, with the
support of the World Health Organization, the African
Union and other partners, are ongoing. Since the first
outbreak of the epidemic, the cumulative number of
cases as of 15 March is 936, with 871 confirmed cases
and 65 likely cases. Of those cases, the number of
people cured stands at 310.

Members of the Council will agree with us that the
issue of human rights remains an ideal that all States
in the world seek to achieve. My country is firmly
committed to that ideal and will continue to work to
entrench the rule of law, which our young democracy
sorely needs. My delegation can therefore reassure
those present that the fight against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms is at the very heart
of the action of the President of the Republic, who has
committed to working for the promotion of the rule of
law. With that in mind, he is determined to humanize
the security services, fight abuses and close down
detention centres that do not comply with the law. In the
same vein, he is also committed to tackling impunity
within the ranks of the army and police and improving
the living and working conditions of the troops. He has
also resolved to open access to the public media to all
in order to promote freedom of expression, assembly
and protest.

As report S/20l9/218 points out, the recurrent
armed conflicts in my country are at the root of sexual
violence and the use and recruitment of children. The
Government of my country is determined to continue
the efforts undertaken, in cooperation with the United
Nations and other partners to put an end to that situation.
It is true that despite those efforts and the significant
progress already made by the Government in that fight,

challenges remain.

My delegation believes that to meet those
challenges, we must eradicate the armed groups. To
that end, MONUSCO, in support of the Forces armees
de la Republique Democratique du Congo, should first
and foremost carry out the missions entrusted to it by
its mandate, namely, the protection of civilians and the
fight against armed groups; apply the sanctions regime
to armed groups to cut off their financing and supply of
arms and ammunition; oblige all entities involved in the
illicit flow of activities of armed groups - countries of
transit and destination and multinationals - to comply
fully with the sanctions regime; and apply sanctions to
all such entities that will not comply with the existing
sanctions regime.

As for the investigation into the assassination of
the two United Nations experts, the case is still under
investigation before the Kananga garrison military
tribunal, in Kasai Central province. In addition to
the various people who have already been arrested
and charged in the case, the ongoing work on the case
has allowed the tribunal to place in pretrial detention
Colonel Jean de Dieu Mambweni for having put the
experts in contact with the interpreter Betu Tshintela
and suggested that they travel to Kananga-Bukonde to
verify the information concerning a Kamwina Nsapu
militia training camp in the vicinity of the town of
Ngombe, near Bukonde. The hearings, which had been
suspended, will resume during this month.

I cannot conclude my statement without
congratulating Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MONUSCO, on her reappointment and expressing my
Government's deep appreciation for the high quality
of the work she has done during her mandate in my
country at a particularly sensitive time. My Government
expresses its deep appreciation to her and assures her
of its full cooperation for the success of her mission.
I must also thank all the troops of MONUSCO, and
especially Force Intervention Brigade, for the ongoing
sacrifices that they make to ensure the restoration of
peace in my country.

Lastly, I would like to express the gratitude of the
Congolese people and their Government to the United
Nations, in particular the members of the Security
Council, for their commitment to and engagement in
the cause of my country.

