Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The British
Government has read with care the Secretary-General's
report dated 21 May on the situation in Liberia. It makes
sombre reading indeed. Its account of the complete
breakdown of law and order in Monrovia, the complete
disregard of the faction leaders for the commitments they
freely entered into in the Abuja Agreement and the
continuing suffering of ordinary Liberians reflect the
precarious situation in Liberia which we are all facing. We
agree with the Secretary-General that, in these
circumstances, his recommendation that the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) be
continued for a further three months on a "care and
maintenance" basis is the right one. We are therefore in
favour of the Security Council adopting a resolution to this
effect.

 

The faction leaders' responsibility for the plight of
their own people is clear. So is their responsibility to
abide by the Abuja Agreement. We endorse the
conclusions of the Accra meeting of Foreign Ministers of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) that the Abuja Agreement must be put back
on track. Full implementation of the Agreement remains
the best framework for solving Liberia's problems. And
the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) remains the
most viable option for progress on the ground.
Reinforcement of ECOMOG is still badly needed, not
least to ensure adequate security for UN OMIL personnel.
We hope the donor community will carefully consider
what help can most usefully be given.

We would welcome in particular the deployment of
the second Ghanaian battalion to ECOMOG. But we note
the Ghanaian Government's concern about the faction
leaders' failure to implement the Abuja Agreement and
the possibility that the extra battalion might be used to
facilitate the withdrawal of all Ghanaian troops in Liberia.

The Secretary-General's report emphasizes that
UN OMIL's presence would be untenable in the event of
an ECOMOG withdrawal from Liberia. The ECOWAS
Foreign Ministers have made it clear that time is running
out for the faction leaders. The international community
is running out of patience. An immediate cease-fire must
be agreed and adhered to. Monrovia must be returned to
its former status as a place of safety. ECOMOG must be
permitted to deploy in accordance with its mandate.
Humanitarian aid must be allowed to get through to those
in the most need. Without these basic steps, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants cannot
go ahead.

The message for the faction leaders cannot be
clearer: stop fighting, lay down your weapons, listen to
the pleas of your suffering people. That is the only way
forward for Liberia.

