Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on an
issue to which Portugal attaches the utmost
importance. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/579), as well as Ms. Valerie
Amos, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Navanethem Pillay and
Mr. Yves Daccord for their very useful briefings.

We meet here today one year after the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009), which is rightly considered to
be a benchmark of the United Nations normative
system and the best reflection of the Security Council's
long commitment to the issue of civilian protection in
armed conflict. That resolution is also an essential
development because it underlines the importance of
addressing the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operation mandates in a proper way. The United
Nations is now endowed with the necessary tools with
which to act in an effective and accountable manner in
protecting civilians in situations of armed conflict
wherever they are called on to take action throughout
the world.

The main responsibility to protect civilians lies
obviously with States, but it is also clear that, in some
cases, States need international support to carry out

that responsibility. United Nations peacekeeping
operations and United Nations missions, as well as
United Nations agencies in general, are crucial to
strengthening and helping national capacities to
exercise that fundamental responsibility.

We are aware that the very nature of armed
conflicts has changed. Armed groups roam
unchallenged within the borders of often vast
countries, sowing violence and death, and avail
themselves of the porosity of borders to further their
criminal intentions. This new reality adds significantly
to the complexity of the tasks of peacekeepers and
strains their capacity to enforce compliance with
international humanitarian law and uphold respect for
fundamental human rights.

Despite all the difficulties, the protection of
civilians - whether directly targeted or accidental
victims of conflict - must be of paramount concern,
and we strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for its enhancement. Civilians continue
to account for the majority of conflict-related casualties
and are constantly exposed and fall victim to serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. It goes
without saying that we acknowledge the huge scale and
complexity of the task facing peacekeepers and United
Nations agencies and missions. Nevertheless, we must
strive to increase their effectiveness in protecting
civilians in conflict situations.

Allow me to mention, in this context, what we
believe to be three important issues: impunity and the
lack of accountability, the need to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping operations and missions, and,
finally, the need for an increasingly integrated
approach to peacekeeping.

Portugal believes that the lack of accountability
and the impunity that benefit many parties to armed
conflict throughout the world are extremely disturbing.
This situation obviously encourages perpetrators even
as it discourages victims from denouncing violations
and seeking redress. Furthermore, it renders the tasks
of peacekeepers even more difficult in protecting
civilians in situations of conflict. We believe that the
United Nations and the Security Council must show
their strong resolve as far as impunity is concerned,
addressing ways and means by which its action can be
more effective in bringing to justice those guilty of
deliberately targeting civilians and violating their
fundamental rights.

The report of the Secretary General points to
some improvements that have been made in this regard
through the actions of international institutions, such as
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and by national
institutions. Concerning the ICC and its specific role in
addressing the most serious crimes, we encourage
every effort to strengthen the Court and to reinforce its
credibility through enhanced cooperation among
parties and the promotion of the universal ratification
of the Rome Statute, especially now that the Kampala
Review Conference successfully contributed to a larger
international consensus around it through the
agreement on the crime of aggression.

Nevertheless, as the Secretary-General
underlines, much more must still be done in this area.
That will require, of course, a much more effective
translation of rules and principles into applied actions
on the ground by those rightfully entrusted to do so. It
is clear that the normative framework we currently
have is adequate; what seems often to be lacking is the
political will to implement it effectively.

My second point concerns the need to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping operations and missions.
This requires clear, specific, situation- or country-
oriented mandates, as well as training and resources, so
as to successfully fulfil our responsibilities to those
who suffer the most. Allow me to stress training. If
they are to carry out their tasks in an efficient way,
peacekeepers should be well acquainted with the
origins and reasons underlying a conflict as well as the
social, economic, ethnic and cultural patterns of the
country in which they serve. Recent experiences show
the importance and usefulness of engaging with local
communities and benefiting from their wealth of
knowledge of specific situations and conditions, as
well as the extent to which such engagement can
reinforce the sense of ownership by the people. One
must also bear in mind, however, that those
communities might be singled out as objects of reprisal
by warring factions, and act accordingly.

Finally, the growing complexity and diversity of
mission-mandated tasks demand an integrated
approach to United Nations peacekeeping. There is a
growing understanding of the concept of the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, and in this sense the
guidance given to United Nations missions on how to
effectively protect civilians is particularly important.
We commend the work that has been conducted within
the United Nations towards achieving a shared

understanding of this concept and developing a
strategic framework for mission-wide strategies on the
protection of civilians. Training modules and the
identification of resources and capacities required to
perform the tasks are also of the utmost importance, as
are scenario-based exercises for senior mission
leadership, as described in the progress report on the
New Horizon initiative. However, if missions are to
perform efficiently, adequate capacities have to be
deployed on the ground, with clearly defined and
achievable tasks and objectives, so as to avoid
capability gaps that would hamper missions.

To conclude, let me assure the Council that
Portugal will stay fully committed and actively
engaged in all efforts pertaining to strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. We look
forward to working closely with members of the
Council on this endeavour from the outset of our tenure
next January.

