Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting and
the briefing by Mr. Michel Kafando.

We take note of some positive developments since
the referendum, such as the decrease in Violence and
the announcement by President Pierre Nkurunziza that
he will not stand in the 2020 elections. However, we
note with concern that there continues to be a climate
of instability, confrontation and a lack of dialogue, as
well as ongoing reports of human rights violations and
restrictions on the fundamental freedoms of expression,
association and the press. The Government's action,
or rather inaction, in the area of human rights and the
actions of associated groups such as the Imbonerakure
are of particular concern. We therefore believe that
the Security Council must remain attentive to the
developments in the country with a view to promoting
the peace and stability required to overcome the
humanitarian crisis and to address the root causes of
the conflict.

In that regard, we stress the need for the country
to remain committed to implementing the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, as well as to
upholding the delicate balance that it has established
among the Burundian communities since the civil
war. To that end, we believe that it is vital to restore
and to move forward in the intra-Burundian dialogue
facilitated by the East African Community. We hope
that it can become the inclusive and representative
mechanism necessary to overcome the political crisis
and to improve the security situation in the country. We
also believe that the difficult situation suffered by the
almost 400,000 Burundian refugees in neighbouring
countries, in particular women and children, must be
urgently addressed.

On the other hand, we believe that it is essential
to promote accountability for human rights violations
committed in the country and to build the necessary
institutional framework for that purpose. It is important
that the Government and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights decide
on and agree the memorandum of understanding so that
they can resume their activities on the ground.

Finally, we would like to highlight the important role
of regional organizations and neighbouring countries in
support of stability in the country. Breaking the Vicious
cycle of conflict and poverty is the main task of the
Burundian people, but it also requires the support ofthe
international community.

