Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): The
signing in Lome on 7 July 1999 of a peace agreement
between the legitimate Government of Sierra Leone and
the rebels of the Revolutionary United Front set in motion
a dynamic for a return to peace after nine years of a
particularly cruel civil conflict. We all remember the
testimony of those who visited Sierra Leone and who
called for an effort by the international community to
restore peace to a terribly stricken region. In this regard,
I would like to thank Mr. Otunnu for his appeals to us in
the past, which he renewed today for his efforts have
helped us to support the actions of those, above all the
Africans, who have been striving to restore peace and
concord to a region that has been so painfully afflicted.

Clearly, we must not miss this opportunity of laying
the foundations for lasting peace in Sierra Leone, of
finally guaranteeing its people free access to all public
social services, and of helping to strengthen national
reconciliation and the development of the country.

Of course, as new prospects are opening up, we
must today thank those who have made this development
possible, and express our deep gratitude to the members
of the Economic Community of West African States for

 

the actions they have taken and the sacrifices they have
made. We especially thank Nigeria, which throughout this
crisis has been a driving force in restoring peace to Sierra
Leone.

Now the return to Freetown of Foday Sankoh and
Johnny Paul Koroma and the appointment to the
Government of rebel representatives are obviously
encouraging developments. We invite all the parties, but
particularly the rebel groups, to respect in good faith the
commitments made at Lome.

In this regard, we are grateful, of course, for the spirit
of conciliation and tolerance displayed by the Government
of President Kabbah, once again attested to by the
statement here of the representative of Sierra Leone, for
which we are also grateful.

While the Lome Agreement represents a positive
development for peace and security in West Africa, the
Security Council must clearly have the means to implement
it. This is why we have always been in favour of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General calling for the
creation of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), with significant levels of military personnel
and robust rules of engagement so that it can defend itself
and within its mandate - as was rightly the wish of the
representative of Canada, a wish shared by all the members
of the Council - be able to guarantee the protection of
threatened civilian populations.

Today, as we adopt a draft resolution relating to
UNAMSIL, and at the same time envisage prolonging the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic, we can conclude that these new
developments are an encouraging sign for the African
continent, which will take note of the extent of the sincere
receptiveness of the members of the Security Council to its
aspirations.

We believe that when there are serious prospects of
resolving conflicts, the international community, and above
all the Security Council, must stand side by side with the
leaders and people of Africa to facilitate a peaceful
solution. We hope that the commitment we are making
today to Sierra Leone, in the very tangible form of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, can be pursued in other
regions of Africa, particularly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

