Mr. Djinnit: I would like to introduce the ninth
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa (S/2012/510),
covering the period from 1 January to 30 June. In my
most recent briefing to the Security Council, on ll May,
I noted that West Africa was confronted with a new wave
of challenges to governance, peace consolidation and
conflict prevention, as illustrated by the ongoing crises
in the Sahel, and especially in Mali and Guinea-Bissau,
as well as the overall threat posed by international
organized crime and terrorism.

In Mali, the Islamist militant group Ansar Dine
and other terrorist groups have taken control of the
northern part of the country, with attendant security
and humanitarian consequences, including alleged
gross human rights violations. This, coupled with
the destruction of endangered historical Muslim
sites in Timbuktu, is a matter of grave concern to the
region and the international community as a whole.
Meanwhile, in Bamako, despite the laudable mediation
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), under the leadership of President
Ouattara of Cote d'Ivoire and President Compaore of
Burkina Faso, the transitional arrangements, including
the adoption of a road map for the election and the
restoration of Mali's territorial integrity, have yet to be
consolidated.

This situation prompted ECOWAS leaders at their
forty-first ordinary session in Yamoussoukro, on
29 June, to fast-track the deployment of the ECOWAS
Standby Force Mission in Mali (MICEMA), without
prior request or authorization from the Malian
authorities. That decision was taken in line with article
25 of the ECOWAS Protocol relating to the Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security. The ECOWAS Summit also
decided to dispatch a technical assessment mission to
Mali to liaise with the transitional authorities to prepare
the ground for the deployment of MICEMA. The
Summit further called on the transitional authorities to
broaden their Government base.

In this connection, I would like to recall that
resolution 2056 (2012) of 5 July emphasizes the need
to strengthen the legitimacy and security of the Malian
transitional institutions. As members of Council
are aware, the Malian Prime Minister expressed his
opposition to the deployment of an ECOWAS force
in Bamako to ensure the security of the transitional
institutions. He also expressed reservations regarding
the ECOWAS demand for including political and social
forces in the Government, while expressing the View
that ECOWAS should focus its efforts on assisting Mali
to recover its territorial integrity.

The return of interim President Dioncounda Traore
to Mali and the need to ensure his security remain
critical to providing constitutional legitimacy to the
ongoing efforts to find a way out of the multifaceted
crisis faced by the country though the mobilization ofan
already polarized political class and civil society. These
conditions are demanded by the ECOWAS Summit and
are echoed in the Security Council resolution.

It is against this background that the ECOWAS
Contact Group of Heads of State convened a meeting
in Ouagadougou on 7 July with representatives of the
Malian political and social forces opposed to the coup
d'etat, in the presence of a representative of the Malian
Government. In my interactions with the ECOWAS
leaders on the occasion of these consultations, they
expressed their satisfaction with resolution 2056
(2012), which provided an appropriate framework for
their deliberations. Indeed, the consultations offered
a unique opportunity to the Malian stakeholders to
engage with the ECOWAS leadership on the way
forward in the transition. They also helped confirm that
some of the decisions taken at the level of ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government at their most recent
ordinary session in Yamoussoukro, on 29 June, enjoyed
broad support among Malian political and civil society
actors. That was indeed the case of the need to form
a more inclusive and representative Government; the
need for ECOWAS military assistance to secure State
institutions, reorganize the army and recover territorial
integrity; and the need to pave the way for a consensual
road map for the transition.

In the course of the discussions, the ECOWAS
mediator, President Compaore, encouraged the
participants to give dialogue a chance to achieve
territorial integrity. He also disclosed that he had had
initial contacts with rebel groups in preparation for
talks he intends to facilitate between these groups and
a Malian national body that is yet to be established.
The leaders seized the opportunity to reiterate their
commitment to deploying the ECOWAS Standby Force
in Mali.

It is important that the outstanding divergences
with the current Government of Mali be resolved
in earnest, as they continue to delay the adoption
of tangible measures by the Malian stakeholders to
address the core issues related to the effective and full
restoration of constitutional order, as well as the critical
situation prevailing in the north. In moving forward,
it is important to remain respectful of the centrality
of the Malian institutions and stakeholders and of the
leading role played so far by ECOWAS. At the same
time, it is equally crucial to stress that the collective
dimension further exemplifies the concrete risks to
which the region is currently exposed and constitutes
a prime demonstration of the deep vulnerability of the
Sahel region.

I am confident that the forthcoming African Union
summit meetings in Addis Ababa will help in reaching
a consolidated African position on the way forward
for resolving the crises in Mali and in addressing the
situation in the Sahel. Such a common position would
inform the much-needed concerted and coordinated
efforts on the Sahel, with the support of ECOWAS,
the African Union, the United Nations and the broader
international community to overcome this complex
security, humanitarian and development crisis in the
short, medium and long terms.

In this connection, I am pleased to inform the
Council that a Dakar-based regional United Nations
inter-agency task force has been set up and is currently
finalizing the development of an action plan to
strengthen the resilience of the countries of the Sahel at
the local, national and regional levels. In addition, the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
the Dakar-based United Nations agencies will support
the development of a comprehensive regional strategy
articulating key priorities in the security, political,
human rights, humanitarian and development realms in
support of the countries of the region, consistent with
the Council's demand in resolution 2056 (2012).

Besides the crises in Mali and the Sahel, West Africa
continues to face the rapidly evolving phenomenon of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea,
which has the potential to significantly impede the
economic development of the coastal countries and
their landlocked neighbours, as well as to disrupt
international maritime routes.

Since the adoption of resolution 2039 (2012),
UNOWA has facilitated, together with the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
the convening of a meeting in Libreville, on 31 May,
that brought together the chief executives of ECOWAS,
the Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission. The Libreville meeting
launched a planning process for the holding ofa summit
of the States of the Gulf of Guinea and of a regional
anti-piracy strategy. The meeting proved productive
in that it confirmed the willingness of the subregional
organizations to move forward expeditiously not only
to tackle the rise of maritime piracy, but also to act in
a joint and coordinated fashion, with the support of
the United Nations and other interested international
partners. Since then, the first meeting of the technical
group in charge of the preparation of a road map and
composed of representatives of ECOWAS, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, UNOWA and UNOCA took place
in Abuja on 20 and 21 June to pave the way for the
preparatory process for the regional summit.

The recent upsurge of violence at the border
between Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, which has caused
many civilian deaths as well as the death of seven United
Nations peacekeepers from the Niger contingent, also
underlines the continued vulnerability of the Mano
River Union. I wish to commend the four-party meeting
of representatives of the Governments of Liberia and
cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) and the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire, held in Abidjan on 13 June. The meeting
resulted in a series of decisions, reflecting the need
for the Governments of Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire to
work closely together to stabilize the common border
areas with a view to creating conditions conducive to
economic development.

At the same time, efforts need to reach beyond
the Cote d'Ivoire-Liberia border nexus and encompass
efforts to ensure the lasting stabilization of the Mano
River basin as a whole. I would like in this regard to
recall the continued commitment of the United Nations
to assisting the Governments of the Mano River
basin in preserving the hard-won achievements and
peace gains of the recent years. In close cooperation
with the United Nations peace missions in the region,
ECOWAS and the Mano River Union, UNOWA has
initiated a process aimed at improving coordination
and reinforcing initiatives already under way to face the
threats posed by mercenaries, the movement of armed
groups and weapons, and their impact on population
movements, which continue to undermine the already
fragile security of border areas of the subregion.

Regional actors will also need to redouble their
efforts to tackle the scourge of drug trafficking and
organized crime, which, if not addressed in a timely
and effective manner, has the potential to seriously
undermine governance and security in the region,
as illustrated by the reported growing activities
and influence of drug-trafficking networks in
Guinea-Bissau, especially since the recent coup in that
country.

Following my early engagement with the new
leadership of the ECOWAS Commission, we undertook
to revitalize the implementation of the 2008-2011
ECOWAS Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing
Problem of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime
and Drug Abuse in West Africa, including through
the West Africa Coast Initiative. In that connection,
the recent decision by ECOWAS heads of State, at the
Summit in Yamoussoukro, to renew their commitment
and reactivate and expedite the implementation of
the 2009 ECOWAS regional plan of action is an
encouraging step that should be commended. I was
also encouraged by the great concern shown and
commitment demonstrated by the African heads of
security whom I addressed on 25 June at their regular
meeting in Algiers on the challenge for security posed
by drug trafficking and organized crime.

Greater coordination of strategies, as well as the
provision of adequate technical and financial resources,
will continue to be required to assist the countries
and organizations of West Africa in eradicating the
activities of drug cartels and other criminal networks.
Together with my colleague Mr. Fedotov, I will continue
to advocate with major partners, such as the European
Union and the United States, for more timely and
substantive efforts to help overcome this threat, which
has a direct impact on law enforcement agencies and, in
the end, undermines State institutions, as demonstrated
by the ongoing situations in Guinea-Bissau and Mali.

Finally, I wish to emphasize the importance
of continuing to spare no efforts to prevent
elections-related tension and violence in West Africa.
The consolidation of Senegal's democratic experiment
provides reasons for hope and continues to resonate in
the subregion and beyond. At the same time, a number
of worrying signs are emanating from some countries
in West Africa where elections are soon to be held. In
that context, it will be key to continue to impress upon
the leadership of those countries the need to create the
conditions conducive to peaceful and credible elections
through genuine dialogue between the Government, the
opposition and civil society.

Allow me to conclude by stressing that significant
progress has been made over the past years towards
the promotion and consolidation of peace, thanks to
the initiatives undertaken by the leaders of the region
with the support of the continent and the international
community, in particular the United Nations. Despite
that progress, the security situation in West Africa
remains precarious and reversible, as the root causes of
instability are yet to be fully addressed. The continued
attention and support of the United Nations remains
critical.

