I am honoured to brief the Council today on the latest report of the Secretary- General on the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2020/585). This briefing is being held against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has, regrettably, led to a significant loss of life across the globe and is severely impacting our way of life and livelihoods. In that regard, I would like to extend my heartfelt condolences to all those who have lost loved ones and to wish a speedy recovery to those undergoing treatment while also enjoining everyone to stay safe and healthy. Since my most recent briefing to the Council, in January (see S/PV.8698), attacks by violent extremists and intercommunal violence have continued to undermine peace and security in the region, particularly in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. Despite intense and sustained efforts by concerned countries, violent extremists have continued to attack security forces and civilians, with dire implications for the humanitarian and human rights situation in the region. Terrorist attacks have been accompanied by the forced recruitment of children and abductions in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. In addition, school closures in the affected areas due to the extremely volatile security situation have denied thousands of children their right to education. The fragile security situation has also caused an increase in the number of internally displaced persons and refugees in the region. In Burkina Faso, as of June, 921,000 people had been forced to flee their homes, an increase of 92 per cent compared to late 2019. In Mali, close to 240,000 people are internally displaced, of whom 54 per cent are women. In the Niger, as of June, 489,000 people had been forced to flee their homes. This includes internally displaced persons, Nigerian and Malian refugees. In Nigeria, an estimated 7.7 million people will need emergency assistance in 2020. In Adamawa, Borno and Yobe states, more than 1.8 million people, more than half of them women, still live in makeshift camps or are hosted in communities that are themselves extremely vulnerable. While national and multinational forces have intensified counter-terrorism operations, some communities have resorted to organized volunteer groups and self-defence militias for protection. Human rights groups have raised concerns over alleged abuses by self-defence militias and by security and defence forces. The growing linkages between terrorism, organized crime and intercommunal violence cannot be overemphasized. Terrorists have continued to exploit latent ethnic animosities and the absence of the State in peripheral areas to advance their agenda. The United Nations must remain committed to working with all partners in order to enhance a more holistic and sustainable approach to these challenges by building national and institutional capacity; improving community resilience; and encouraging, supporting and advocating for good governance, political inclusion, respect for human rights and adherence to the rule of law. In that regard, the United Nations should support the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the implementation of its 2020-2024 action plan for the eradication of terrorism in the subregion. The international community also needs to increase its support for the full operationalization of the African Union- Lake Chad Basin Commission Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, while accelerating the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. Coordination among the various initiatives aimed at addressing security, humanitarian and development challenges in the region is crucial. In that regard, the call by the Group of Five for the Sahel summit of 30 June for enhanced coordination and cohesion among Member States is commendable. I also welcome the commitment to the strict respect of human rights expressed at the summit. We are ready to work in partnership with Member States to address this challenge together. As reiterated by the meeting of the steering committee of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, on 30 June, the United Nations should continue adopting a cross-pillar approach that emphasizes the importance of national ownership while also aiming to create synergies with other initiatives. In that connection, on 4 March I facilitated a meeting between the Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Head of the Multinational Joint Task Force, Ambassador Mamman Nuhu, and the Regional United Nations Sustainable Development Group, in Dakar, to develop a common understanding of the role of United Nations agencies in the implementation of the Lake Chad Basin Commission Regional Stabilization Strategy and to ensure coherence with existing regional programmes, including those implemented within the framework of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. Furthermore, as part of our efforts to support the Mano River Union's cross- border security and confidence-building measures, in February UNOWAS signed a cooperation agreement with the Mano River Union on peace and security issues and support for youth and women on cross-border cooperation. Climate change is reinforcing security risks in the region by exacerbating farmer-herder conflicts - which remain a major security concern - increasing social tensions and contributing to rural-urban migration, violence, delinquency and food insecurity. Through its convening role and in line with its new mandate, UNOWAS is conducting analysis and research to elicit a greater understanding and mitigation options on the adverse implications of climate change on peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel in collaboration with the relevant United Nations mechanisms and in partnership with ECOWAS, the World Bank and international, regional and national think tanks. The COVID-19 pandemic is amplifying and exacerbating pre-existing conflict drivers, with grave implications for peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel. The pandemic is having a negative impact on human rights and the rule of law and is disproportionately affecting women and girls, including with respect to their role in informal trade and due to a reported increase in femicide, sexual and gender-based violence. Heavy-handed responses by some security services to enforce restrictions have been reported, even in countries with more solid human rights records. We are also observing the impact of the pandemic on governance structures and systems; electoral and political dialogue processes, the humanitarian situation, the socioeconomic situation, and regional and multilateral engagements. Terrorists and violent extremist groups are also exploiting the situation to further launch attacks in the region, in disregard of the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Conscious of this, various countries of the subregion have developed national COVID-19 response plans with support from United Nations country teams. At the regional level, on 23 April the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government held an extraordinary summit and appointed President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria as Champion to lead regional COVID-19 response efforts. The Authority also established ministerial coordination committees on health, finance and transport to coordinate regional efforts to address the pandemic. To promote a whole-of-United Nations approach in response to the pandemic, I have held virtual consultations with United Nations Resident Coordinators and their teams in all countries in the region to assess the impact of COVID-19 in each country, identify ways to strengthen United Nations collaboration with national and regional stakeholders in support of Governments' response efforts, and mobilize, where applicable, support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. The Resident Coordinators noted that while Governments' COVID-19 responses have largely been consensus-driven in most countries, there have also been situations where the response faced serious criticisms from national actors. UNOWAS will continue to engage national authorities to ensure a holistic approach and work towards broadening social support, inclusivity and national cohesion. We will also continue our advocacy to ensure a human rights-based approach in the response by States in the region, with focus on the most vulnerable and marginalized segment of the population as well as on community involvement. It is worth highlighting that despite the COVID-19 pandemic, the region has witnessed a number of positive developments, including the relatively peaceful conduct of the presidential elections in Togo, local elections in Benin and the completion of the work of the Constitutional Review Commission in the Gambia. Five high-stakes presidential elections are planned in the second half of the year in Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and the Niger. These elections present an opportunity for democratic consolidation in those countries. However, to ensure that these processes are credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful, consensus will be needed to address underlying challenges and any disruptions, including those linked to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is worth noting that the pandemic led to the suspension or postponement of preparations for the elections, including voter registration, in some of those countries. Preparations have, however, resumed, and stakeholders in the majority of those countries have maintained their determination to hold elections as scheduled. I have held joint virtual consultations with the ECOWAS Commission President, Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, United Nations Resident Coordinators and heads of the election management bodies in countries preparing for elections to assess the situation on the ground, the level of preparation, the challenges faced and ways in which the United Nations could better support the various processes. The heads of the election management bodies all expressed confidence and provided assurances of their readiness to successfully organize the elections. During those consultations, I insisted that the stakeholders ensure that solutions to challenges or disruptions caused by the pandemic are consensual, inclusive and respect human rights and the rule of law. I also insisted on the involvement of women, youth and persons living with disabilities in the entire electoral process in each country. Ahead of the elections, which could be major flashpoints for crises, UNOWAS will continue to work with the relevant partners to support the efforts of the five countries in organizing inclusive, transparent and credible elections, which are crucial to the stability and development of the region. I would like to recognize the unflinching support of the Council for the implementation of the mandate of UNOWAS while reiterating our commitment to continue accompanying national and regional actors to enhance peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.
