Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate, and I also thank Under-Secretary-General J ean-
Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. China would like to
congratulate Peru on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for April. Your delegation can count
on our support in its work. We are also grateful to the
Netherlands for the enormous amount of work it did
during its presidency in March.

At the moment, Haiti is largely stable. Its security
situation is steadily improving, and the Haitian
National Police (HNP) is gradually assuming the
responsibility for keeping the country safe, secure,
and stable. China looks forward to seeing Haiti's
various internal stakeholders maintaining the positive
development momentum by intensifying their efforts
to develop the economy, improve people's livelihoods,
comprehensively implement the HNP's strategic
development plan and create conditions conducive to
improving the country's situation once and for all.

We are keen to see the international community,
including the other countries in the region, continue
to help improve the situation in Haiti, provide more
development and humanitarian assistance and support
Haiti in cementing peace and stability and implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and Special Representative Susan
Page to ensure the new Mission's smooth deployment
and functioning. We hope to see the Secretariat and
MINUJUSTH improving their communication with
the Haitian Government, helping it to build a stronger
HNP and supporting it in assuming responsibility for
maintaining national security and stability in earnest.

Much has been achieved in the United Nations
support for Haiti's response to the cholera epidemic.
China has contributed to the United Nations Haiti
Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund.
We call on the international community to respond
positively to the new United Nations cholera response
initiative and to help Haiti wipe out the epidemic once
and for all. China stands ready to do its part, together
with other members of the Council, to help Haiti achieve
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development.

