The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia, in which he requests that
the President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Security Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic
of Serbia.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

The Council is meeting in response to the
requests contained in the letters dated 17 February
2008 from the Permanent Representative of Serbia to
the United Nations, contained in document S/2008/ 103,
and from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
2
Federation to the United Nations, contained in
document S/2008/104.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of a letter dated
18 February 2008 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting a letter from the European Union High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy, which will be issued as document 8/2008/106.

I should also like to draw the attention of
members to photocopies of a letter dated 18 February
2008 from the Permanent Representative of Slovenia,
transmitting the conclusions of the Council of the
European Union, which will be published as document
S/2008/ 105.

I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and I invite him to take the floor.


