Ms. Power (United States of America): In looking
at North Korea, it can at times feel as though one is
seeing two entirely different realities. One is the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea that is expending
tremendous resources in pursuing advanced technology
to build an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of
carrying out a nuclear strike a continent away. The other
is the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in which,
according to ajoint assessment conducted by the World
Food Programme and the North Korean Government,
25 per cent of children under the age of 5 suffer from
stunted growth as a result of chronic malnutrition. One
is the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in which
the Government brags about carrying out nuclear tests
proscribed by the Security Council, such as the test
carried out on 6 January. The other is the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in which individuals must
endure the searing pain of seeing generations of their
loved ones starve to death, such as the North Korean
defector who joined us in the Council Chamber just
a few months ago, whose grandmother, father and
two brothers had all died because they could not find
enough food.

On the surface, it can seem as though those distinct
North Korean realities have nothing to do with one
another; yet, as we all know, they have everything to
do with one another - part of the perverse reality that
has no equal in this world. The chronic suffering of the
people of North Korea is the direct result of the choices
made by the Government of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, a Government that has consistently
prioritized its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
programmes over providing for the most basic needs
of its own people. As underscored in resolution 2270
(2016), which we have adopted today, virtually all of
the resources of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea are channelled into its reckless and relentless
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction. The North
Korean Government would rather grow its nuclear
weapons programme than grow its own children. That
is the reality that we are facing.

Of course, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's obsessive pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction not only causes profound suffering
for the people of North Korea, but also poses an
extraordinary and growing threat to peace and security
on the peninsula and in the region and the world. With
each nuclear test and launch using ballistic-missile
technology, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
improves its capability to carry out a nuclear-missile
attack not only in the region, but also a continent away.
That means having the ability to strike most of the
countries represented in the Council. Think about that.

North Korea is the only country in the entire world
that has conducted a nuclear test in the twenty-first
century. In fact, it has conducted not one nuclear test
but four - in 2006, 2009, 2013 and now 2016. It is also
the only United Nations Member State that routinely
threatens other countries with nuclear annihilation,
including multiple members of the Council on
different occasions.

Our collective security demands that we stop
North Korea from continuing along this destructive
and destabilizing course. Yet we have to be honest that
while previous multilateral efforts, including the four
previous sanctions resolutions adopted by the Council,
have undoubtedly made it more difficult for North
Korea to advance its weapons programmes, the regime
continues to plough ahead, as it has demonstrated over
the past two months. That is why the resolution we have
just adopted is so much tougher than any prior North
Korea resolution and why it goes further than any
sanctions regime in two decades. We have studied the
ways that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has been able to exploit gaps and evade measures aimed
at impeding its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile
programmes, and we have put in place new measures
to fill those gaps, one by one. Let me give just a few
of many examples of how the resolution adopted today
does this.

North Korea generates a significant share of
the money it uses to fuel its nuclear and ballistic-
missile programmes by mining natural resources,
often exploiting workers in slave-like conditions and
selling those resources abroad. For example, it is
estimated that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea brings in approximately $1 billion a year in coal
exports - roughly one-third of the revenue it earns
from exports - and at least $200 million a year in iron
ore exports. That is why the resolution we have adopted
today limits and, in some instances, bans outright North
Korea's exports of specific natural resources, making it
tougher for the Government to get the money it needs to
keep funding its illicit weapons programmes.

Until today, in many countries around the world
inspectors required information providing reasonable
grounds to inspect cargo coming into and going out
of North Korea. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea therefore took the ballistic-missile parts, nuclear
technology and other illicit items it needed to build
weapons of mass destruction and buried them deep
in otherwise unsuspicious loads on airplanes, ships
and trucks coming into the country. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea used similar tactics to hide
the illegal items it was exporting, such as weapons,
drugs and counterfeit goods, which it used to generate
a significant amount of additional income. That is why,
under resolution 2270 (2016), cargo going into and
coming out ofNorth Korea will be treated as suspicious,
and countries will be required to inspect it whether it
goes by air, land or sea. This is hugely significant.

North Korea used to be able to import aviation fuel,
which included rocket fuel used to launch proscribed
ballistic missiles. It can no longer do so. The resolution
adopted today bans all imports of aviation fuel, including
rocket fuel. For years, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea deployed arms dealers, smugglers, financiers
and other enablers of its illicit weapons programmes,
and claimed that they were diplomats and Government
representatives around the world. Abusing diplomatic
protections, these individuals cut illicit deals, set up
shell companies and procured banned items to aid
North Korea's weapons programme. The resolution
adopted today obligates countries to expel any North
Korean who carries out such acts, including diplomats
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Despite previous financial sanctions that constrain
North Korea's access to the international financial
system, North Korean banks were still able to do
business on foreign territory, allowing the Government
to fund its illicit programmes. Under the resolution
adopted today, States around the world will have to
shut down the financial institutions of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in their territory.

North Korean scientists have used specialized
trainings at academic institutions and international
research centres to obtain technical expertise that
they then put to use to advance the nuclear-weapons
and ballistic-missile programmes of the Government
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
resolution adopted today prohibits the specialized
training of any Democratic People's Republic of Korea
national in fields that could be used to advance these
programmes, including nuclear- and space-related
technical exchanges.

As these measures make abundantly clear, the
purpose of the resolution is not to inflict greater
hardship on the people of North Korea, who endure
immeasurable suffering under one of the most repressive
Governments the modern world has ever seen. The
United States has repeatedly urged the Council to
address the human rights Violations committed by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which
the United Nations commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
in its comprehensive 2014 report, concluded were
widespread and systematic and had been committed
"pursuant to policies established at the highest level of
the State" (A/HRC/25/63, para. 75). These violations
include detaining between 80,000 and 120,000 people
in prison camps where, according to the commission's
report, they have for generations been

"gradually eliminated through deliberate starvation,
forced labour, executions, torture, rape and the
denial of reproductive rights" (ibid., para. 60).

The Government has carried out enforced
disappearances for decades with no accountability,
including of citizens from neighbouring countries,
whose families continue to suffer from not knowing the
fate of their loved ones.

The scale and gravity of such abuses are what led

us to push, along with our partners, to make the human
rights situation in North Korea a permanent item on the
Security Council's agenda, as it now is. North Korea
continues to show, as we have repeatedly said in the
Council, that Governments that flagrantly violate the
human rights of their own people almost always show
similar disdain for the international norms that help
ensure our shared security. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's abysmal human rights record is
another reason why we have taken steps to ensure that
the sanctions laid out in the resolution specifically
target the Government, which carries out these grave
abuses with impunity.

It is deeply important that today's resolution and
all the tough measures it includes have been adopted
with the support of all 15 members of the Security
Council. In particular, the United States would like to
recognize the leadership of China, which has worked
closely with us in negotiating this extremely rigorous
resolution. Beyond the Council, it is worth noting
the unanimity among and leadership of the countries
of the region - China, Japan and the Republic of
Korea - which understand so clearly the threat to
our shared security posed by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's actions. The fact that the resolution
has been sponsored by 50 Member States, drawn
from every region of the world, demonstrates both the
recognition of the global threat posed by North Korea
and the international community's commitment to
working together to address that threat.

We are clear-eyed about the nature of this regime.
We are under no illusions that, following the adoption
of resolution 2270 (2016), the Government of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea will abruptly
abandon its prohibited weapons programme due to a
sudden realization that the international community
is united in its determination to stop North Korea's
dangerous pursuit of nuclear weapons. Were that to be
the case, North Korea would have given up its nuclear-
weapons and ballistic-missile programmes long ago.
On the contrary, the North Korean Government has
shown that it is determined to evade every obstacle put
in the way of its singular pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction, no matter the consequences for its people.

Yet, at the same time, we have seen how the strategy
of increasing multilateral pressure can be effective,
and that is what we are doing here. Even as we find
new ways to impede North Korea's efforts to advance
its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile programmes,
as our collective security and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's track record demand that we do,
we must not lose sight of the ultimate goal of bringing
North Korea back to the table for serious and credible
diplomatic negotiations on denuclearization. Achieving
that goal will require sustained unity on the part of the
Council and the unwavering commitment of all Member
States to implementing in full the comprehensive,
robust and unprecedented sanctions that we have put
in place today.

