Mr. Ghobash (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the United
Arab Emirates, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. We wish you every success in
your functions. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
for her excellent guidance of our work last month. We
also thank you, Sir, for convening this special open
debate on the current state of affairs in the Middle East
and North Africa - especially because, at present, the
security challenges pose a real, serious threat to peace
and security in the world.

Extremism and terrorist activities have increased
over the past five years, as have the barbaric crimes
committedby extremist andterrorist organizations-led
by Daesh and Al-Qaida - which have taken advantage
of the political vacuum and instability in countries in the
region, such as Yemen, Libya, Syria and Iraq, in order
to impose their domination, expand their activities and
attract and mobilize marginalized elements of societies,
with a View to implement their plan to implement a
programme of sabotage within and beyond the region.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates believes that
restoring peace and security in the region could be
accomplished by the following steps.

First, there is a need to resolve the major problems
that have persisted for far too long in the region.
To that end, the United Nations should assume its
responsibility to achieve a final, lasting, comprehensive
and just settlement of the Palestinian question. The
continued occupation and flagrant violations of human
rights on the part of the occupying Power are among
the major threats to peace and security in the region.
That affords terrorist groups a substantial opportunity
to take advantage of serious humanitarian situations
to influence frustrated young people and recruit them
into their destructive programme. We emphasize the
importance ofthe Security Council intervening to put an
end to the aggression of extremist Jewish groups aimed
at desacratig the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We need to do this in
order to avert a dangerous conflagration in the region.
The Emirates also stress the need to step up the pace in
the settlement of this conflict, which has lasted for far
too long, so as to establish an independent Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its
capital.

We also call upon the Security Council to heed
the calls and initiatives of the Arab Group, which has,
since last year, been inviting the Council to adopt an
effective resolution for the relaunching of the peace
process. We also stress the importance of the Security
Council's shouldering its responsibilities in the area
of international peace and security. We therefore call
on the Council to take action to settle the Syrian crisis
through a political transition process and the creation
of a national Government in Syria, while providing
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people, refugees,
displaced persons and the countries that host them. We
hope that the creation of four working groups, at the
initiative of the Secretary-General, will represent a
positive step towards a political solution and putting an
end to the suffering of the Syrian people.

Secondly, we need to support the legitimate
Government in conflict-affected countries so that they
can face the challenges posed by terrorist groups. In
Yemen, the support provided by the coalition ofregional
and international countries helped the legitimate
Government to deal with the Houthi coup d'etat, which
led to military and humanitarian successes that made it
possible to retake Aden and reinstate the Government
of Yemen. We deem it vital to comply with resolution
2216 (2015), and we are working in cooperation with
the United Nations to meet the humanitarian needs of
our brotherly countries.

We call also for support for the elected Libyan
Government. We must lift the embargo, which is tying
the Government's hands with respect to Daesh and
other terrorist groups. We also commend the work
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative in
Libya, and we welcome the political agreement that
has been finalized. We call for the establishment of a
Government of national accord.

Thirdly, we must to respect the principles
of the Charter on respect for sovereignty and
non-interference, and refrain from any ctions that
could undermine the security and stability of countries.
Foreign interventions, even under the pretext of settling
conflicts, only create more violence and instability. The
United Arab Emirates believes that the agreement on
the Iranian nuclear programme is a good opportunity
to begin a new chapter in regional cooperation. We
call upon Iran fully to comply with its commitments
under the Joint Plan of Action and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as
United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution
2231 (2015).

Fourthly, we must devise more effective joint action
in order to face the challenges in the region. We also
need to include countries and regional organizations
in the decision-making processes in the region that
concerns them.

Fifthly, we must coordinate global efforts and
shoulder our common responsibilities in the face of
these challenges and threats. We must do this through
cooperation in order to put an end to the root causes of
extremism and terrorism, which means that we must
also have lasting solutions, through education or media
programmes, the empowerment of women and taking
advantage of the full potential of young people. We
must channel these energies in a peaceful way. We also
must provide social assistance to marginalized sectors
of society.

We believe that we need to have a national model.
My country has a national plan for tolerance and
moderation to combat extremism and that condemns
the barbaric message of extremists. To that end, we
have created the international Hedayah centre to fight
extremism. Along with the United States, we have
created a call centre to counter extremist propaganda
and incitation to violence. We have passed a law against
anti-discrimination in all its forms, and we are ready to
cooperate with the United Nations and the international
community to strengthen our efforts in the service of
peace and security in our country, in our region and
the world.

