Mr. Muraleedharan (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate. We also
appreciate the circulation of the very useful concept
note (S/2019/742, annex), outlining the contours of
today's discussion.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the heads of the regional security organizations for
their comprehensive and insightful briefings.

Today's security problems are not constrained
by physical or political boundaries. Terrorism, drug
trafficking, transnational crime and the security
implications of new technologies are transnational
challenges that cannot be viewed in compartmentalized
terms. Our response to them therefore also has to be
coordinated across borders.

Terrorism is the single most significant threat to
peace and stability today. We are confronted by groups
that have linkages across regions and continents in
terms of recruitment, financing and operation. We are
committed to combating that menace in all its forms
and manifestations. There can be no justification for
acts of terror on any grounds whatsoever.

We believe that our fight against terrorism should
not only to seek eliminate terrorists and disrupt terror
organizations and networks; it should also identify,
hold accountable and take strong measures against
States that encourage, support and finance terrorism
or provide sanctuary to terrorists and terror groups.
We call upon all countries to work together to expedite
the adoption of the draft comprehensive convention
on international terrorism in the General Assembly
without any further delay.

Regional and subregional groups can play an
important role in fostering the cooperation and
coordination needed to effectively combat terrorist
networks. In recent years, India has put in place several
practical cooperation mechanisms with a number
of countries and groups. It is a careful and sensitive
process, as it involves building trust and common
working habits and methodologies. We have several
counter-terrorism and security dialogues, which bring
together experts from all relevant fields in regular
bilateral and multilateral interactions.

We also engage constructively with the work
of such forums as the Financial Action Task Force
and United Nations counter-terrorism bodies to deny
terrorists financing and other forms of support. Of the
organizations being discussed today, India has been
a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) since 2017. We joined the SCO to secure peace,
progress and prosperity for the region and to create new
opportunities for economic engagement in the region.
In his visit to Bishkek earlier this year to participate
in the 2019 SCO Summit, Prime Minister Narendra
Modi urged all humanist forces to come together and
called for an international conference to combat the
scourge of terrorism. He also reiterated that a united,
peaceful, safe and prosperous Afghanistan is crucial
for the stability and security of the SCO region and
acknowledged the work of the SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group in this regard.

We welcome the clarity shown by the SCO on
terrorism from its inception. We are determined to
strengthen cooperation within the SCO framework for
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security.
SCO members should also explore how the SCO
Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure can provide a more
effective platform for cooperation through exchange of
information, capacity-building, mutual legal assistance,
the sharing of best practices and cooperating in
multilateral forums such as the United Nations.

