Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate. It shows the special interest that
Mexico attaches to the issue of children in armed
conflicts, as does your greatly appreciated chairing of
the Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/ 158), as well
as the Special Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Le Roy, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, for their
briefings. I would particularly like to say how much we
appreciated Grace Akallo's very poignant testimony
this morning.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement that my
Czech colleague delivered on behalf of the European
Union. On behalf of Belgium, I would like to highlight
three elements for today's debate and then to share
some thoughts as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission's country-specific configuration on the
Central African Republic.

First of all, Belgium fully supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to broaden
and strengthen the mechanism of resolution 1612
(2005) so as also to include in the annexes of the
reports of the Secretary-General parties in conflicts
responsible for systematic sexual violence. The scourge
of sexual violence is well known. The Council, through
resolution 1820 (2008), has recognized that such
violence, in some conflicts, is used as a weapon of war.
We believe that broadening the mechanism should, first
and foremost, take into consideration the criteria of
sexual violence, without however prejudicing
additional future broadening. That would serve as a
significant step towards eradicating that most hateful
violence.

Secondly, during its recent mandate in the
Council, Belgium consistently emphasized the fight
against impunity, whether through national or
international mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court. Today, that Court is the appropriate
legal instrument for prosecuting those suspected of
having committed the gravest crimes, in particular
against children. I wish to recall that the Court is an
adjunct to national criminal justice systems and that it
is first and foremost up to those jurisdictions to act.
The fight against impunity is a fundamental element
for reconciliation and peace, without which children
will remain the victims of serious violations. We
therefore support the plea of the Secretary-General to
extend the action and responsibility of the Security
Council and of its sanctions regimes in order to adopt
appropriate sanctions against individuals or groups that
persist in recruiting and using children.

Thirdly, Belgium would like to underscore the
critical importance of reintegration programmes for
former child soldiers. My country therefore fully
subscribed to the Paris Principles in 2007. The
principal message of those guiding principles is that
preventing the recruitment of child soldiers and
facilitating their reintegration must be envisaged over
the long term, that is through programmes spread over
several years. In that regard, the international
community, together with national authorities, must
fulfil their responsibilities.

That prompts me to say that the issue on our
agenda today exceeds the scope of the Security
Council. The Peacebuilding Commission also has a
very important role to play, in particular in
coordinating disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and in sensitizing public
opinion on the issue of child soldiers. I would like here
to refer to the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which, together with
the Government of that country, has recently renewed
commitments to the issue in its strategy to build peace.
The Central African Republic Government now needs
to ratify and to incorporate into law the relevant
international conventions and protocols to prevent
recruitment, but also to protect and re-integrate
released children. The Central African Republic
configuration is committed to heightening the
awareness of national parties and international partners
in order to launch appropriate programmes and
mobilize long-term financial support for the children
concerned.

In the process of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups, UNICEF is
currently implementing a demobilization programme
for child soldiers, which, under the agreement with one
of the rebel groups, the Armee Populaire pour la
Restauration de la Republique et la Democratie, should
soon lead to the demobilization of 105 children. The
Central African Republic configuration ensures
coordination between those efforts and other
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

Finally, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her consistent
and resolute action for children in conflicts. Belgium
particularly appreciates her field visits, such as
recently in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or in
the Central African Republic. Her presence has a real
impact on the attitude of the parties to the conflict and
undoubtedly contributes to stemming the suffering of
children in conflicts. We greatly admire her strong
ongoing commitment for the cause of children in areas
of conflict.
