Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We welcome today's
unanimous adoption of a landmark resolution on
performance in peacekeeping (resolution 2436 (2018)). As the penholder, the United States deserves
our appreciation for all its efforts in facilitating the
negotiations on the draft text. We know that it was not
an easy process, but in the end we are very pleased that
we managed to achieve the necessary consensus. We
want to commend the flexibility that all the delegations
concerned have shown and that made it possible for this
important resolution to be adopted unanimously. It will
undoubtedly define future discussions on peacekeeping,
particularly at a time when efforts are geared to
enhancing its overall efficiency and effectiveness.

It is no secret that, as a major troop-contributing
country (TCC), we had our concerns, and we
participated actively in the negotiations in order
to make sure that those concerns were adequately
addressed in the text, working closely with other
troop- and police-contributing countries (PCCs) and
reflecting their interests and concerns in the negotiation
process. As a result, the resolution recognizes that
realistic mandates, adequately resourced missions,
capable and well-equipped personnel and strong
leadership at all levels are essential to peacekeeping
performance. It also urges the uniformed and civilian
components of missions, as well as the Secretariat
staff supporting peacekeeping operations, to meet
performance standards. It ensures that missions have
capable and accountable leadership by underscoring
the importance of improving the transparency of a
selection process based on merit and competence, with
due regard for the consideration of recruitment on a
wide geographical basis.

The resolution determines that special
investigations should be initiated whenever instances
of significant failure in performance are alleged, While
also underlining the importance of improving the
methodology and transparency of such investigations,
including through engagement with TCCs and PCCs.
It requests that special investigation reports include all
factors that lead to performance failure and emphasizes
that their findings should inform the design of operation
mandates, while stressing that performance failure by
a few should not tarnish the achievements of many.
It therefore contains a fair balance of references to
indicators of both performance failure and excellence,
accountability measures for performance failure
and recognition and incentives for outstandingly
high performance. It also indicates that decisions
on accountability measures and on recognition and
incentives must be based on objective facts and data,
thereby ruling out any chance of the decision-making
process being influenced by political considerations.

Finally, we want to recognize what the United
States has done by reaching out informally to TCCs and
PCCs and consulting extensively with them. We also
appreciate the efforts made to accommodate most, if
not all, of their concerns, thereby enabling us to strike
the right balance in trying to achieve the necessary
consensus. That is an exemplary practice that should
become part of future negotiations on peacekeeping.

