Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and expressing our confidence in your able leadership in steering the Council's agenda during September. I also thank the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, Ambassador Sven Jiirgenson, for his quarterly briefing on the Committee's work. There have been major positive developments in Darfur since my last statement before the Committee in June (see S/2020/528). On Monday, 31 August, the Government of the Sudan and the armed groups in Darfur, Blue Nile and eastern Sudan agreed on a peace deal to end 17 years of conflict. The agreement covers key issues around security arrangements, land ownership, transitional justice, power- sharing, civilian protection and the voluntary return of internally displaced persons. It also provides for the disarming of armed combatants and the integration of their fighters into the national army or civilian life. From 3 to 5 September, the Sudan's Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, met in Addis Ababa with Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, the leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North in South Kordofan. Together, they signed a declaration of principles, in which an agreement has been reached to establish negotiation workshops to resolve outstanding issues. These two agreements are considered to be a significant step in the transitional Government's goal of resolving the root causes of the civil conflicts in the Sudan. My Government is committed to and will continue its quest to achieve sustainable, inclusive and lasting peace in the country. It is noteworthy that the Secretary- General has "congratulated the people of the Sudan for this historic achievement" and commended the parties to the negotiations for their "political will and determination in working towards the common objective of peace". In this regard, the Security Council is called upon to positively react to these developments by lifting the measures it imposed pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) in 2005, because these measures have become completely irrelevant, counterproductive, outdated and surpassed by developments. A positive gesture in that direction would be the delisting of the four individuals who are currently sanctioned by the Committee. Earlier this month, we submitted a delisting request, supported by the relevant information from our own investigations and from the reports of the Committee's Panel of Experts; however, the request was put on hold. We call on those countries that requested the technical hold measure to quickly reach the same conclusion, which motivated us to make the request in the first place. Since circumstances have fundamentally changed, not only in Darfur but in the whole country, the Sudan expects nothing less than to be treated with fairness by the Security Council. My Government reaffirms its full commitment to improving the overall protection of its citizens in Darfur, in particular, and other parts of the country in general. When some unfortunate intercommunal incidents occurred a couple of months back in Darfur, the Government took robust measures to prevent their recurrence. These measures included, but were not limited to, the deployment of 15,000 law enforcement personnel, the collection of unregulated small arms and light weapons, and encouragement of the traditional conflict-prevention mechanisms to resolve intercommunal clashes. Even though these measures have proven to be successful, a comprehensive peace would be the only solution to address any lingering challenges in Darfur. My Government submitted to the Security Council yesterday its first quarterly report on the implementation of the national plan of the Sudan for protecting civilians and requested the quarterly report to be circulated as an official document of the Security Council. Since the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid remains the only armed group that is still not a party to the agreements I mentioned earlier, we reiterate our appeal to the Council member in which he resides to encourage him to join the peace and mitigate the suffering of the people around the Jebel Marra area. The Sudan looks forward to engaging constructively with the Committee in the spirit of partnership that is essential to achieving the goal of preserving the peace in Darfur, which ultimately leads to the lifting of the sanction measures. I commend the Chair of the Committee for reiterating that the sanctions are not intended to punish the Sudan.
