Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to express
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
his briefing on the sixth report ofthe Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2018/80). We
found the report very comprehensive and informative.
We also thank the Secretary-General for making
counter-terrorism one of his highest priorities. This
is indeed very appropriate, and we wish to urge the
Secretary-General never to relent and continue to
prioritize counter-terrorism, more so now than ever
because the temptation might be too great to lessen the
focus on efforts to address the challenge.

The analysis of the threat contained in the report
indicates that military pressure has resulted in strategic
setbacks for ISIL in the main battleground. As a result,
ISIL has lost its focus on conquering and holding
territory, and its global propaganda machinery continues
to deteriorate. Its revenues have fallen considerably
since 2015, and new recruitment and travel of foreign
terrorist fighters have now diminished. All this is very
much welcomed, and the matter has been underlined
by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. We believe,
nonetheless, that it is only wise not to go overboard
and declare victory over terrorism. Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov is right in saying that complacency
should be avoided.

In this regard, what should be of serious concern is
the fact that ISIL and affiliated groups continue to inspire
a range of attacks outside the conflict zone. Foreign
terrorist fighters, ISIL members and sympathizers are
still able to use social media, including encryption
technology and communication tools within the Dark
Web, to communicate and coordinate and facilitate
attacks. Of particular concern is the willingness of
some members of the ISIL and Al-Qaida networks to
support each other.

Returnees and fighters relocated from conflict
zones to other regions now present a considerable
threat to international security. All of this shows that
although notable progress has been made in defeating
ISIL on the battlefield, significant challenges remain to
counter the threats that persist, all of which require the
proper implementation of United Nations resolutions
and, more importantly, collaboration and cooperation
at all levels among States and non-State entities.

We note from the report the ever-growing
threat posed by ISIL, foreign terrorist fighters and
sympathizers in the Middle East, Africa, Europe,
Central and South Asia and South-East Asia. In
that context, the response by States Members of the
United Nations and other stakeholders in the areas of
countering the financing of terrorism; law enforcement
and judicial cooperation; the protection of refugees
and asylum-seekers; prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration; managing the spread ofviolent extremism
in prisons; and countering terrorist narratives are all
very important.

Africa remains highly affected by terrorism and
violent extremism. In fact, according to the African
Union, 2017 witnessed devastating terrorist attacks
in different parts of Africa. We are seeing what is
happening in North and West Africa, the Sahel region
and East Africa, where ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates
and sympathizers continue to pose serious threats to
peace and security.

With regard to East Africa, Al-Qaida-affiliated
Al-Shabaab remains an important threat to peace and
security in Somalia, in the Horn. But we are also seeing
the emergence of ISIL affiliates operating in Somalia
that are controlled and directed from the central
command in Puntland, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General. ISIL continues to recruit through
facilitators based in Libya, Europe and Somalia. There
are also interesting reports by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development that reinforce these findings
and provide useful insights.

Although ISIL in Libya is said to have been
weakened after losing a significant portion of the
territory it controlled, its threat persists in the country
and the wider region. More concerning is the fact that
other ISIL affiliates in Africa are reported to have sent
fighters to Libya to support and gain cooperation from
ISIL cells located in the country, as well as the potential
movement of Boko Haram members to other States of
the region across Libya's western and south-eastern
borders, all of which require that greater attention be
paid to the situation in Libya.

In West Africa, Boko Haram and ISIL are active,
and the threat posed by ISIL-related groups and
Al-Qaida affiliates continues to spread into the States
of the region. Restoring peace and stability in Libya,
Mali and the Lake Chad basin is indeed critical to
deny ISIL and other terrorist groups safe haven. That
is why enhancing the capacities of the countries of
the region, the Group of Five for the Sahel and Lake
Chad, continue to be very important in countering ISIL
and its affiliates operating in the wider region. That is
also why it is so critical that we get the management
of security in Somalia right as we embark on the
transition from the African Union Mission in Somalia
to the Somalia security forces.

The enormous challenge we face in the fight
against terrorism should compel us to forge meaningful
cooperation at all levels. The full implementation of
existing international legal frameworks against ISIL
and foreign terrorist fighters by all Member States
is vital to strengthening international cooperation.
However, developing countries will continue to face
huge difficulties in properly implementing those
legal frameworks because of limitations in various
areas related to capacity. Any shortcomings that
might be observed are not, by and large, the result
of a lack of commitment, but are due to a lack of the
resources required and of technical and other related
capacities - too many to list here.

Therefore, in addition to forging the necessary
bilateral, regional and international cooperation, the
delivery of capacity-building and technical assistance
will be critical for the effective implementation of
those legal frameworks. We also agree on the need for
enhanced coordination between the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate as well as among all
relevant Security Council- and General Assembly-
mandated bodies in their efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threats posed by terrorism and
violent extremism.

But, and this is what I wish to underline before
I conclude, it is our view that there is still a lack of
the necessary level of cooperation and coordination,
commensurate with the magnitude of the challenge we
face in this area, among States that are in a position to
make a huge difference in this fight, which we continue
to believe should continue to be regarded as of the
highest priority for us all.

