Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. J can-Marie Guehenno, Chair of the Senior
Advisory Group, and Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra for their briefings, as well as Ambassador
Gasana for his comments.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is an important part
of the United Nations work that is of great significance
not only for realizing sustained peace and development
in the countries concerned, but also for strengthening
the existing collective security system and promoting
the common development of humankind. Professional
and efficient civilian capacity represents an important
foundation and prerequisite for the smooth conduct of
the work of the United Nations.

The Senior Advisory Group led by Mr. Guehenno
has submitted its report (see S/2011/85), which
contains concrete proposals highlighting ownership,
partnership, expertise and nimbleness. China welcomes
this. We hope that the Steering Group to be led by
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra will seriously study
and follow up on the plans so as to formulate workable
recommendations for the United Nations.

I wish to elaborate on a number of points. First,
full use should be made of the resources of host
countries, which would promote ownership by host
countries of peacebuilding processes. Given their more
in-depth knowledge of their own societies,
professionals from host countries can play a unique
role in United Nations peacebuilding activities. More
important, after the withdrawal of peacebuilders, a
group of professionals will be left behind in host
countries, thus reinforcing national capacities and
sustaining peace and development.

Secondly, the targeted selection of personnel
should be strengthened. Security sector reform, the rule
of law, human rights and economic and social
development are the priorities for peacebuilding. The
United Nations and the international community
should, in line with the conditions and needs of the
host country, focus on recruiting, selecting and training
professionals in these areas, thus contributing to the
capacity-building of the host countries.

Thirdly, personnel management should be
strengthened. We must focus on taking advantage of
the expertise to be found in developing countries and
regional organizations, and step up efforts to recruit
civilian experts from developing countries. Members
of the United Nations should be encouraged to actively
train and recommend talent to the United Nations, and
to work with the United Nations in building and
replenishing talent pools. In recruiting civilian experts,
the Secretariat should continue to implement the
principles of openness, equity and transparency,
improve its vetting procedures, and seek in advance
opinions of Member States relating to mechanisms,
criteria and guiding principles.

Fourthly, reliable financial resources and security
must be provided. We hope that countries in a position
to do so will continue to provide practical support and
that the United Nations will further optimize its
management mechanisms and make rational use of
existing resources so as to achieve the maximum
possible benefits.

