Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for their comprehensive
and sobering briefings.

Kazakhstan welcomed the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2401 (2018). That document should be
urgently implemented to ensure a comprehensive
ceasefire in Syria. The ceasefire regime should be
implemented fully, especially in the areas of eastern
Ghouta, southern Idlib and northern Hama, to resolve
their long-accumulated acute humanitarian problems,
deliver aid to the most difficult regions and evacuate
the wounded and sick.

Turning to the situation on the ground in the
country, according to our humanitarian colleagues,
over the past 78 hours and to our deep regret, military
operations continued to be reported in besieged eastern
Ghouta, resulting in deaths, including women and
children. Attacks on Damascus from eastern Ghouta
are also continuing. To our great disappointment, a
Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse in a Damascus
suburb was reportedly struck by shelling. During the
same period, attacks on the city of Damascus and the
governorate resulted in 14 deaths and 214 injured.

We are glad to know that the United Nations
has mobilized and is ready to immediately support
life-saving aid convoys in several areas in eastern
Ghouta. We therefore call on the Council members
and the wider United Nations membership to assist
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in operationalizing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in eastern Ghouta, as well
as in carrying out hundreds of medical evacuations.
We echo the United Nations calls on all parties to
facilitate unconditional, unimpeded and sustained
access to all people in need throughout the country
and take all measures to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including schools and medical facilities,
as required by international law. It is equally important
to ensure, in close coordination with OCHA, the
protection of medical and humanitarian workers. We
must also insist that parties support United Nation
agencies in the fulfilment of their mandates. In that
context, Kazakhstan proposes that all-round assistance
be provided to the inter-Syrian negotiations through the
Astana process and that positive developments be taken
advantage of to improve the humanitarian situation.

My country stands for a solution in Syria based
on resolution 2254 (2015), the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and agreements on the de-escalation
zones reached through the Astana process. We regret
the lack of full agreement and close coordination
among the key stakeholders in managing the Syrian
crisis. We also attach great importance to strengthening
the inter-Syrian political dialogue with greater support
from the world community. Lastly, Kazakhstan notes
the need to establish closer interaction among the
leading stakeholders in Syria, in particular between the
Russian Federation and the United States, to improve
the political process and ensure positive changes on the
humanitarian track.

