Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to express my delegation's
appreciation to you, Madam President, for organizing
this open debate under the frustrating and precarious
circumstances that prevail in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which are felt in the whole region, especially
under the daily practices of the Israeli Government and
its evasion of negotiations. We also wish to express our
thanks and appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing.

In addition to the statement delivered by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and those to be delivered by Tajikistan on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and by Tunisia on behalf of the Arab Group, my
delegation wishes to focus its statement on the serious
circumstances and the grave results of the increased
pace of Israeli actions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in East Jerusalem, and the
obstacles it continues to place in the road to peace
negotiations, as the entire international community has
agreed on.

We wish to stress that it is important to maintain
the momentum that resulted following the resumption of
direct talks in Washington, D. C. on 2 September 2010
under the auspices of the United States of America,
when the Palestinian side, backed by undivided Arab
support, stated its readiness to continue along the path
towards peace and stability, as reflected in the American
and other international parties' efforts. We wish to
express our appreciation to President Obama for his
efforts to relaunch a genuine peace process, including
the commitments that he mentioned in his statement
before the General Assembly on 23 September 2010
with regard to the rights of the Palestinian people and
the establishment of an independent State within a set
timeframe (see A/65/PV.11). We also take this
opportunity to express our wish that the American
Administration continue its robust efforts, pursuant to
the established principles of the peace process,
resolutions of international legitimacy, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.

Alongside those American and international
efforts, the Palestinian leadership has fulfilled all its
international commitments under the Road Map.
Moreover, it has also taken concrete steps towards
establishing the foundations of an independent
Palestinian State, for which the Palestinian people
yearn, with the support of the international community.

In contrast to that firm Palestinian determination,
Israel has continued its unilateral measures by
implementing an expedited settlement policy in order
to curtail all signs of Palestinian presence on their own
land and to undermine the two-State solution, which
Israel has repeatedly avowed and committed itself to.
Israel is thus fully responsible for stalling the peace
process. In the short period since the cessation of direct
negotiations, the Israeli Government has continued to
seize more land, to build more housing units and to
demolish more Palestinian homes and expel its
legitimate owners, all the while enacting new
legislation limiting the conditions for its withdrawal
from East Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian Golan.

With regard to the occupied city of Jerusalem and
its environs, Israel continues its illegal policy of
Judaizing the Holy City through the destruction of its
main original features and the recent demolition of a
historic hotel in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of
East Jerusalem in order to build 20 housing units in the
centre of the city. Israel also declared that it will build
1,400 additional housing units for settlers in the
southern part of Jerusalem. This will entail the
expulsion of Palestinian owners, the demolition of their
homes and the cancelling of their residency rights, in
clear violation of international humanitarian law and
Security Council resolutions. That is in addition to
provocative measures targeting religious sites and
aimed at inflaming religious sensitivities.

The Kingdom of Morocco and His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, who is the current Chairman of the
Al-Quds Committee, set up by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC), express their grave concern
and condemn all Israeli practices seeking to change the
legal status of Jerusalem. The international community
and the Security Council are requested to put an end to
such practices. The Palestinian side, supported by the
League of Arab States, the OIC, the Non-Aligned
Movement and other States, opted to come to the
Security Council on the matter of Israeli settlements to
affirm the illegality of settlement activities and to urge
the Council to shoulder its responsibility so as to
restore hope in those who chose peaceful negotiations
as a civil means to achieve peace. That initiative was
based on the belief that peace in the Middle East is not
only the concern of the opposing parties and the region
itself, but is also a legitimate and immediate
requirement of the international community, as the
stability of the Middle East has a strong and direct
impact on international peace and security.

We wish to send the message that the settlements
and the construction of new housing units are rejected
and that they impede direct negotiations and undermine
all substantive efforts for peace. Based on our resolute
choice for peace and our international legitimacy, we
wish to reiterate that the two-State solution, which
guarantees the establishment of an independent and
Viable Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security, as well as Israel's withdrawal from the Golan
Heights and the remaining Lebanese lands, remain the
only way to end decades of conflict in the Middle East.

In order to reach that ultimate strategic goal, all
efforts to continue direct negotiations and to put an end
to all unilateral measures by any side should be
strengthened in order to create an environment
conducive to relaunching negotiations and to avoid
extremism and violence and their dire consequences
for all the peoples and States of the region.

