Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate of great importance to us.
(spoke in Spanish)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
as well as the representatives of UNICEF and all the
non-governmental organizations for the testimonies we
have heard here.

The importance ofthis debate, organized by France,
is evident from having heard the moving statements of
the speakers who have preceded me, which illustrate
the turbulent times in which we live and that affects the
most vulnerable segments of the population, including
children, as pointed out by France in its concept note
(S/2015/168, annex). The year 2014 was the worst year
for children.

Unfortunately, my country has not been an
exception, because we must recognize that for more
than five decades ofinternal conflict, minors have been
victims of forced recruitment and abuse by non-State
armed groups. However, today there is a glimmer of
hope to end this phenomenon, because we have been
holding peace talks, which are currently under way
in Havana between the national Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC).

The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005) provides a good opportunity
to reiterate the commitment of the Colombian State
to the protection of all victims, particularly children.
I would like to share five key points that demonstrate
that commitment:

First, the 1991 Constitution of Colombia guarantees
in its spirit that the rights of children take precedence
over all other rights.

Secondly, Colombia ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child in the year 1992 and expanded the
definition of a child from under 15 to under 18 years
of age.

Thirdly, for almost two decades now, the ranks of
the armed forces of Colombia do not include minors
under the age of 18.

Fourthly, the Colombian Ministry for Foreign
Affairs has implemented a comprehensive programme
for children and adolescents aimed at preventing
forced recruitment by creating gateways to promote
educational, cultural and sporting activities.

Fifthly and finally, the Government established a
multi-sectoral commission in which 23 different State
agencies work in tandem. Thanks to that, between 2002
and 2014, we have been able to recover 4,067 minors
who had been recruited by the illegal armed groups,
both from the FARC and the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional.

As I have mentioned, Colombia is working
diligently to resolve the internal armed conflict with
the FARC. We are continuing negotiations on an overall
agreement on ending the conflict and building stable
and lasting peace. That agreement is being negotiated
in Havana, with the support of the United Nations and
a large part of the international community and with
Cuba and Norway acting as guarantors and Chile and
Venezuela as supporters. The FARC has begun to take
steps in the direction that Colombian society and the
international community demand, as expressed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In
the past month, the FARC announced its decision to
cease its recruitment of children under 17 years. That
is a significant development, but it is insufficient if we
consider that the FARC is responsible for 66 per cent of
the victims of child recruitment in our country - almost
3,000 children. We hope that step will be expanded to
cover all minors under the age of 18.

As part of the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2015), Colombia
believes this is the right time to review whether the
measures requested of States, such as the action plans,
have the same result when attempting to implement such
measures for non-State actors. Even today, when we
live in a world where conflict dynamics have changed,
illegal armed groups still constitute the bulk of the
armed groups that threaten the legitimacy of the State
and that of its citizens. In our View, the role of States to
bear the primary responsibility is indisputable, but we
must not lose sight of the specific contexts, nature and
modus operandi of the armed groups outside the law, as
well as the strategies that States implement to achieve
solutions to the grave situations that affect them.

In conclusion, all those points serve to bring to
the fore the fact that the support of the international
community will be essential, given that we are
immersed in in the most important undertaking in
50 years: to build peace.

