Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all,
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you formally
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
should also like to thank France for its chairmanship
during the month of January.

I should like to thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, for his briefing. We have a long-
standing and positive experience of cooperating with
him, and we are impressed by the leadership that he
has provided for the comprehensive and innovative
approach the United Nations has chosen for its
presence in Sierra Leone.

Like others, we believe that the progressive
movement of a peacekeeping effort towards a
comprehensive peacebuilding and reconstruction effort
can serve as a model for United Nations operations
elsewhere. Bringing together various branches of the
United Nations family under one roof has very many
advantages. Given the challenges that Sierra Leone
faces in areas such as corruption and organized crime,
we welcome in particular the direct inclusion of the
expertise of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and we hope that the UNODC's
contribution can be further enhanced.

At the same time, cooperation with the work of
the country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone, under the able leadership
of Ambassador Frank Majoor of the Netherlands, is
essential. Though peacebuilding as such has not yet
been completed, we believe that the success achieved
so far can again serve as an example for efforts of this
kind in other countries of the region. Nonetheless, a
number of challenges remain to be faced by Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the donor
community. I would focus on three.

First, if the strategy of the international donor
community is to succeed, it is essential that the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund gradually
put more emphasis on poverty reduction. Sierra
Leone's Agenda for Change reflects the major
challenges in this regard, but good progress in

economic performance could be jeopardized by the
high level of youth unemployment. It is against this
background that initiatives like the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) project
addressing youth unemployment in the Mano River
region are of particular importance and need to be
strengthened.

In this context, I should also like to mention that
the fight against youth unemployment was a major
component of the resolution adopted at the end of the
2007 Ouagadougou Conference on Peace and Security
in West Africa, organized by Burkina Faso and Austria.
We continue to support the aforementioned UNIDO
effort.

Secondly, organized crime and related challenges
such as drug trafficking, corruption and the proliferation
of small arms must remain high on our agenda. As
these problems have cross-border implications, as the
representative of Costa Rica has just stated, we believe
that they should be addressed through regional
approaches. In this context, I should first of all like to
commend Sierra Leone for having already ratified the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We believe that it is very important for this
ratification process to continue and to be concluded
successfully. I should also like to mention, as other
speakers have done, the ECOWAS Action Plan against
Drug Trafficking, which is another excellent example
of successful regional cooperation. UNODC's input to
the United Nations Joint Vision document forms a
sound basis for a long-term, comprehensive and
coordinated response to illicit drug trafficking and the
serious threat that drug abuse poses to the economic
and social integration of youth in Sierra Leone.

Thirdly, we believe that two activities are crucial
with regard to reconciliation: the follow-up to the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the proceedings of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. The report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission contains not only an
impartial historical record of the conflict in the
country, but also far-reaching and comprehensive
recommendations for addressing the root causes of the
conflict and promoting reconciliation. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, as some speakers have
already mentioned, also proposed a reparations
programme, with particular emphasis on the needs of
amputees, war-wounded and the Victims of sexual
Violence. We call on the Government of Sierra Leone
to intensify its efforts to systematically follow up and
implement these very important recommendations.

The Special Court made important progress in
2008 and plans to complete its activities by 2010.
Besides its importance as a symbol of justice and
accountability, it has also provided capacity-building
opportunities to national professionals, who have
gained skills in the field of the rule of law. From our
point of view, it would be important to preserve and
use those skills in Sierra Leone. To that end, incentives
should be created to avoid a brain drain.

I should like to conclude by noting that Austria is
encouraged by the consistent trend towards respect for
civil and political rights in Sierra Leone and by the
initiatives of the Sierra Leone Government in favour of
the promotion of the rights of women.

