Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We join other Council
members in welcoming the Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres.
We thank him for his statement. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Atul Khare, for his briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/504)
and the statement we just heard from the Deputy Prime
Minister show that positive progress is being made in
Timor-Leste. However, it is clear that, despite the
progress, there is a need to continue to focus on key
strategic areas.

We are pleased to note that the process of security
sector reform in Timor-Leste is progressing well,
especially with the commencement of the gradual
transfer of policing responsibilities to Timorese police.
We remain hopeful that further progress will be made
to facilitate completion of the transfer, as per the
agreed criteria. Every effort should be made to support
the Timorese police in achieving the key criteria,
especially in terms of operational and logistical
requirements.
We also note that, while efforts to enhance the
development of the Timorese military continue, not
much progress has been made. We therefore share the
observation of the Secretary-General that finding a
meaningful role for the Timorese military in a
peacetime setting and clarifying its relationship with
the Timorese police and establishing accountability
mechanisms remain key challenges for the
Government.

These are issues that will have to be resolved in
order to ensure that the long-term stability of the
country is achieved.

Internal displacement is a matter of concern and
interest to Uganda. We are happy to note that the
improved security situation has contributed to the
progress that has been made in addressing the situation
of internally displaced persons, especially in Dili and
Baucau. However, there is need to address potentially
destabilizing recovery issues, such as those relating to
housing conditions and land and property.

On the administration of justice, we note the
potential repercussions of the release of Martenus
Bere. The fact that a vote of no confidence motion was
submitted against the Government points to how
politically sensitive this matter is considered to be by
sectors of the Timorese people. It is critical that
deliberate efforts be made to ensure that impunity is
not condoned.

It is important that the Government of Timor-
Leste take primary responsibility for the economic
recovery, security and development of the country,
with the support of the international community. The
international community should support and facilitate
national institutional development, with a view to
ensuring that there is local capacity to play a leadership
role on all aspects of national development. That is key
to the sustainable national development of the country.
We welcome, therefore, the Timorese people's
increased leadership in and ownership of the national
development process.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Khare, and the entire
staff of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the efforts they have made
in delivering on UNMIT's mandate.

This being Mr. Atul Khare's last appearance
before the Council in his capacity as head of UNMIT,
Uganda pays special tribute to him for his dedication
and commitment in support of the people of Timor-
Leste. Mr. Khare has made an important contribution,
and we wish him all the very best in his future
endeavours.

