Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I join others
in congratulating you, Mr. President, for holding this
debate and for giving us the opportunity to hear so
many valuable contributions in the Chamber today.

It is now seven months since the Peacebuilding
Commission was established, and it is appropriate that
we in its parent body take stock. In this vein, we, along
with others, very much look forward to the debate in
the General Assembly next week. We are optimistic
about the value the Commission can add. It is a new
body and is still feeling its way, but we believe the
Commission membership is committed to practical
steps to improve peacebuilding across key aspects of
the work of the United Nations.

The Commission was created, as many speakers
have noted, because there was in a gap in the market.
Countries emerging from conflict had no natural home
at the United Nations, and several slipped back into
conflict when international scrutiny was diverted
elsewhere. This has cost too many lives. So the
Commission ensures that countries emerging from
conflict remain on our agenda - the joint agenda of
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly, that these countries benefit
from the respective scrutiny we can provide and that
they align countries, troop-contributing countries,
donors, international financial institutions and other
actors in a coordinated set of priorities across the
social, security, economic and rule of law areas.

I should like to align myself with the statement to
be made soon by Germany on behalf of the European
Union and will therefore confine my intervention to
concentrating on some core elements of the
Commission's work on which we hope we can all focus
in the coming months. By the time of the
Commission's first anniversary, we should be proud of
the positive impact this new body is having on the
ground.

First, we believe that the core mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission is its country-specific work
with strong national leadership. When the Commission
reviews a country, there are six fundamental things we
believe it should do.

First, the Commission should take a
comprehensive look at peacebuilding to identify the
most pressing priorities and make recommendations
covering governance, human rights and aid, as well as
peace and security. Second, it should involve a wide
range of actors, including civil society and the private
sector, to agree upon a common vision of how to build
peace and promote exchanges of information,
coordination and best practice. Third, it should provide
scrutiny and honest assessment of progress and
problems. Fourth, it should, through frank dialogue
with the Government concerned, provide
recommendations for action to be followed up on by
the Security Council, the international financial
institutions, United Nations agencies and other
partners. Fifth, it should ensure follow-up to those
recommendations through regular progress reviews.
Sixth, it should ensure that lessons learned are
compiled and disseminated.

The United Kingdom believes that within this
framework and with the establishing resolution serving
as a foundation, there are three key areas where the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
can develop an effective working relationship. I note
from the important contributions we have heard today
that there seems to be a wide measure of agreement on
how this partnership might work.

First, the Security Council can use the
Peacebuilding Commission for advice. The timing of
the request for advice is important - for example,
before a mandate renewal, or before the establishment
of a new peacekeeping operation. But the nature of the
request is also important. The Council could ask for an
overview of the situation or advice on a specific issue.

Secondly, the Security Council receives the
advice and acts on it appropriately. Sometimes the
Council might simply take note of the advice. At
others, the advice or recommendation for action will
need further evaluation and action by the Council.

Thirdly, the Commission provides early warning
to the Council, for instance, drawing the attention of
the Security Council to setbacks and risk factors in
countries on the Council's agenda.

We see this particular area is one where the
Security Council can add value. I am also sure that
there is complementarity in the value on the economic
and social side that the Economic and Social Council
will be able to add.

I want to stress that there is no exclusivity here.
We look forward to discussion in other bodies of the
United Nations. All contributions are equally valid.

Finally, I cannot mention the development of the
Peacebuilding Commission's work without mentioning
the Peacebuilding Support Office. I would like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for all her efforts so far
in bringing this office to life. The Support Office has a
number of critical roles. It acts as a secretariat to the
Commission, it supports the United Nations country
teams in their work with the Commission, and it is a
repository for relevant lessons learned so that we can
all benefit from best practices.

We hope that by the time of the Commission's
first anniversary it will have an important impact on
the ground. That means that the peacebuilding
priorities identified by the Commission are being
implemented in Sierra Leone and Burundi, it means
that the United Nations and international actors are
being more joined up in support of these priorities, and
it means that by July we would hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission has an annual calendar of
meetings agreed, that there should be well-established
in-country consultation mechanisms with national
Governments taking the leading role, and that the
Peacebuilding Support Office should be working at full
strength. With the help of all the colleagues on the
Peacebuilding Commission, we believe that we can
reach these goals.

