Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to begin by thanking the Peruvian presidency for
convening this very timely open debate on youth, peace
and security.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank Mr. Graeme Simpson, who
did a tremendous job as lead author of the progress
study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86). I
also thank all the other briefers who today gave us very
insightful and thorough presentations, starting with
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, whose work we
enthusiastically support.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, as well as with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Romania on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
wish to add a few remarks in my national capacity.

My country firmly believes that in today's
world young people are vital drivers of peace,
change and prosperity. Their specific sensibility and
forward-looking approach, as well as their idealism,
creativity and energy, can meaningfully contribute to
building and sustaining peace, providing long-term
sustainable solutions and fostering conflict prevention
and reconciliation.

Italy is strongly committed to the implementation
of the youth, peace and security agenda. We were the
first Member State to provide support to the Office
of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth after her
appointment as the new Envoy.

In our vision, youth policies represent the best
link between the peace and security agenda and
Agenda 2030, in accordance with Secretary-General
Guterres' view on sustaining peace. In that spirit, I am
glad to announce today that the Government of Italy
has decided to finance a major initiative for bridging
the two agendas and supporting their joint youth-
led implementation. Through an initial allocation of
$500,000 to the Department of Social and Economic
Affairs (DESA), Italy is contributing to the development
of a new project entitled "Young People's Contributions
to Sustainable Peace in the Framework of the 2030
Agenda", devised by DESA in cooperation with
several other United Nations agencies, including the
Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the United Nations
Development Programme.

This broad project is aimed at strengthening the
capacities of Government officials, youth organizations
and civil -society partners in the formulation and
implementation of national policies and programmes
promoting sustainable peace and security. Through an
open and inclusive participatory process, the project
will design and test key instruments for promoting the
participation of young women and men in processes
geared at preventing violent conflict and sustaining
peace in their societies. The outcomes of the project
will first be implemented in pilot countries in Africa
and the Middle East and North Africa region.

We are also committed to building networks of
young peacebuilders and activists in our own country.
Through an inclusive selection process involving civil
society, the Italian Government has for the first time
appointed two youth delegates who, through nationwide
advocacy activities as well as participation in meetings
at United Nations Headquarters, are helping to
promote the culture of active participation by youth in
peacebuilding and reconciliation processes.
Finally, the role of the Security Council is pivotal
in promoting the role of youth in peace and security.
To that end, as recommended in the progress study,
we would encourage the establishment of an informal
working group on youth, peace and security, akin to the
one on women and peace and security. We must continue
to tirelessly promote this agenda in the interests of all.
The Council can count on Italy's full support and long-
term commitment in that regard.

