Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and the
Secretary-General for his briefing. We fully share his
concern about the situation of the International Criminal
Court. I would like to thank our briefers, Mr. Nikolai
Bordyuzha, Mr. Rashid Alimov and Mr. Sergey Ivanov,
for their statements and for the activities of their
respective organizations.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
state of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations (S/2016/621)
identifies some progress in this area, including those
linked to the maintenance of international peace and
security, humanitarian assistance and development.
The international situation has undergone profound and
swift changes that require coordinated responses by the
international community. The increase in transnational
threats, terrorism and the spread of violent extremism,
technological advances in war, cyberweapons and
organized crime, among other factors, pose serious
dangers and challenges to civilians and demand greater
efforts at all levels.

I come from a region with a long tradition of
regional and subregional organizations, from the
Organization of American States and the Agency for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, which was established by the
Tlatelolco Treaty, as well as more recent organizations,
such as the Union of South American Nations and the
Caribbean Community, both of which made important
contributions to the peace process that is taking place
today in Colombia.

We acknowledge that there is broad potential
for cooperation and complementarity between the
efforts of the United Nations and those of regional
and subregional organizations. In this framework,
regional and subregional organizations devoted to the
maintenance of peace and security are particularly
important and share responsibilities with the Security
Council with regard to international peace and security.
Given the knowledge that these organizations have of
the history, culture and geographical proximity, they
bring a specific added value when it comes to prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

With respect to cooperation between the United
Nations system and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the report of the Secretary-General mentions
progress, including the periodic consultation
mechanism between the CSTO and the United Nations
on issues of mutual interest in the area of global and
regional peace and security and on the consideration
of more information with respect to prevention, early
warning and peacekeeping; the consultations between
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization; cooperation with the Regional Office
for the Caucasus, Central Asia and Ukraine of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
and the exchange of information between the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the head of the Commonwealth of Independent States
Anti-Terrorism Centre, which seek to control the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters in that region. Lastly, the
willingness of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
to cooperate with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre is another example of this progress.

Allow me to close my statement by welcoming
the decision of the Secretary-General to further
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations
through stronger partnerships in formulating specific
approaches to cooperation depending on the context
and taking fully into account the particularities and
requirements of every region, as well as the mandate of
the institution concerned.

