Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the delegation of Panama for having organized
this year's important open debate on children and
armed conflict. Switzerland takes notes with
satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/757) and welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and of UNICEF to prevent abuses
and to protect children.

Despite certain encouraging developments
described in the report, much remains to be done to
make the system for the protection of children in armed
conflict truly effective. In that context, the Secretary-
General's proposals and recommendations deserve our
full attention: we need to obtain tangible results on the
ground.

Switzerland, which fully endorses the
recommendations set out in the report, considers that
the Security Council should give particular priority to
the following areas. First, consideration should be
given to expanding the scope of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to include the six categories of
grave violations, in particular rape and other grave
forms of sexual violence.

Secondly, a series of specific targeted measures
should be taken against parties to armed conflict that
are responsible for grave and persistent violations
against children. The Security Council should refer to
the International Criminal Court all cases on which
national courts either have not exercised their
jurisdiction or have not done so in accordance with
their obligations under international law.

Thirdly, although some progress has been made

in this regard, it is imperative to remind all parties to

armed conflict listed in the annexes to the report of the

Secretary-General that they must prepare and
implement concrete action plans.

Fourthly, child protection advisers should be
included in both peacekeeping and political missions
whenever appropriate. Furthermore, Switzerland calls
upon all the parties to armed conflict mentioned in the
annexes to the report of the Secretary-General to
continue the dialogue that the Security Council has
begun with the Governments concerned, the United
Nations agencies as well as national and international
civil society actors. Only through enhanced
coordination and cooperation among all concerned
parties will it be possible to improve the protection of
children in armed conflict.

Armed conflict leads to an increase in all forms
of violence. Among them, trafficking in small arms
increases the vulnerability of children in situations of
conflict and of post-conflict transition. Switzerland
would like the Secretary-General to formulate, in his
next report, specific recommendations on the
protection of children in armed conflicts in relation to
the use of small arms and light weapons.

As a general rule, the gender dimension needs to
be taken into consideration more systematically in the
international community's response. The Security
Council may want to consider the problem of children
and armed conflict in conjunction with resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, and
resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm
Switzerland's support for the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and to
encourage it to pursue its work to achieve concrete
results so that we may combat more effectively the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
violations of the rights of children, as well as the
impunity enjoyed by those responsible for grave abuses
and violations against children in armed conflict.
