Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa): South Africa
thanks the Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Nestor
Osorio of Colombia, for his 90-day report. We pledge
our full support for the work of the Committee. We
congratulate the Panel of Experts on the extension
of its mandate and thank it for the submission of its
programme of work to the Committee.

We reiterate that it is imperative for Iran to comply
with relevant decisions of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and with its obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions.
While attaching importance to the work of the 1737
Committee, we are also conscious that sanctions cannot
be an end in themselves, but rather should be aimed at
encouraging progress towards a peaceful resolution of
the concerns over Iran's nuclear activities. The Security
Council must be cognizant that the 1737 Committee
operates within the larger international framework of
the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
regime. A sustainable solution will be one that restores
international confidence in the peaceful nature of
the Islamic Republic of Iran's nuclear programme,
while respecting Iran's right to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy consistent with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

South Africa attaches great importance to the
central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in trying to resolve the outstanding issues regarding
Iran's nuclear activities. We maintain that the IAEA
remains the sole competent technical authority to
verify the nature of the nuclear programme of Iran.
We therefore welcome the high-level discussions held
in June and August this year between the Agency and
Iran with a view to finalizing the structured approach.
Even though differences remain, we are encouraged
that both the Agency and Iran remain committed to
further engagement. We remain optimistic that those
discussions could lead to an agreement that will allow
the Agency to undertake the necessary activities in
order to clarify any outstanding matters.

With regard to Iran's implementation of its
Safeguards Agreement, it is important that the
Director General of the IAEA has been able to draw
the conclusion that all the declared nuclear material
in Iran is being used for peaceful activities. We note,
however, that the Director General is unable to provide
credible assurances about the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities thereon. South Africa
therefore encourages Iran to continue its cooperation
with the Agency because it is the clarification of those
outstanding issues that will enable the international
community to have full confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. We note
that Iran has previously cooperated with the Agency to
resolve other differences, and we believe that a renewed
dedication on the participation of Iran in that regard is
important.

South Africa calls upon all parties concerned to
avoid any antagonistic actions that could derail the
peaceful process towards finding a sustainable solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue. Continued dialogue is the
only option. We therefore strongly support all processes
to that end.

In conclusion, South Africa looks forward to the
active participation in the 1737 Committee with the
objective of contributing towards a sustainable solution.

