Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing the Netherlands to take the
floor in this important debate on the situation in

Afghanistan. We fully align ourselves with the
statement made by our colleague from the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union. In the light
of our longstanding commitment to Afghanistan, allow
me to make a few additional remarks, in particular on
the international conference on Afghanistan to be held
in The Hague on 31 March, to which many have
referred in this debate.

Before turning to the conference, let me
re-emphasize our appreciation of and continued
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) under the able leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kai Eide. We welcome his presence here and his
comprehensive and inspiring briefing today. We cannot
overemphasize our collective responsibility to provide
the Special Representative with the support that he
needs to enable UNAMA to fulfil its broad mandate as
defined by the Security Council.

We are particularly pleased that UNAMA has
established a presence in Uruzgan province, where the
Netherlands, together with other partners, is providing
significant assistance and cooperation, both
development and military. We see UNAMA's presence
in Uruzgan as recognition of the progress achieved by
the Afghan authorities together with international
partners and hope it will further contribute to the
development of stronger civilian structures in the south
and to increased capacity of the Afghan authorities in
that area. In Uruzgan and elsewhere in Afghanistan, the
Netherlands is guided by the principle that
development, diplomacy and defence must go hand in
hand.
In our view, the Afghan authorities and the
international community, with a central role for the
United Nations, are all set in place to make progress
towards our common objectives of security and
development, increasingly under Afghan ownership
and leadership. But we are also mindful that the
security situation, economic development, governance,
the rule of law and the humanitarian situation all
continue to pose challenges. And we recognize that the
regional dimension needs to be addressed. In that
respect, we welcome the initiative of the Pakistani and
Japanese Governments regarding the conference on
Pakistan to be held in Tokyo next month.

Many speakers have referred to the upcoming
elections and the crucial importance of the coming
years for Afghanistan. It is against this background that
the Netherlands has agreed, after consultations with
Afghanistan and the United Nations, to host the
"International Conference on Afghanistan: A
comprehensive strategy in a regional context", to be
held in The Hague on 31 March 2009. We are truly
honoured that President Karzai and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon will address the conference, together
with Prime Minister Balkenende of the Netherlands,
and that subsequently Special Representative Eide,
Afghan Foreign Minister Spanta and Dutch Foreign
Minister Verhagen will co-chair the ensuing ministerial
discussions.

The Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations are closely involved in the preparations, which
are ongoing as we speak. It is our hope that the
conference will reaffirm the solid and long-term
commitment of the international community, as defined
during the Bonn, London, and Paris conferences, to
shaping a better future for Afghanistan and its people.
We share the view of Special Representative Eide that
the conference will provide a timely opportunity to
take a comprehensive look at the current political,
security and development situation in Afghanistan and
will thereby give new impetus to our common efforts.

