Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the European Union, and
we thank Peru for this timely open debate a day prior
to the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We also thank the
briefers for their valuable input. I would like to make
three brief points.

First, on the participation of young people in peace
and security, peace agreements fail when they are not
inclusive, in particular when leaders, mostly male,
conclude power-sharing agreements without taking
into account the interests of the entire population. That
must change. In some cases, it is already changing. One
example of where Germany is working to effect such
change is in South Sudan. In the framework of the peace
negotiations led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), we emphasize a complementary,
bottom-up approach that includes youth. Specifically,
the Berghof Foundation, a mediation partner for
Germany, has repeatedly involved representatives
and organizations of youth and women in Kampala to
channel their concerns and visions for a peaceful South
Sudan into the IGAD-led High-Level Revitalization
Forum peace talks in Addis Ababa.

As another example, as just mentioned by the
representative of Romania, we were also very pleased to
hear directly from young people from Burundi, Liberia,
Kyrgyzstan or Solomon Islands in the Peacebuilding
Commission. As a final example, Germany also
supports the African Women Leaders Initiative, led
by the African Union, which has a specific mentoring
component for young women.

Secondly, with respect to preventing violent
extremism, we must gain a better understanding of
why young people drift towards extremist groups and
what the triggers are. One excellent study on this topic,
entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa, was published
by the United Nations Development Programme late
last year. While the report identifies several triggers
for youth involvement in extremism, I would like to
highlight one observation in particular. Some 71 per
cent of the study's respondents indicated that they had
been driven to join extremism by Government action,
including the killing of a family member or friend or the
arrest of a family member or friend. Therefore, while
structural factors play a role in radicalization, it is also
clear that the actions of Governments and their security
forces are another major, sometimes preventable cause.
For Germany, that means that when we counter violent
extremism and engage in counter-terrorism activities
as Member States, we must ensure that all our actions
comply with our international human rights obligations.
Only this can ensure their effectiveness in the long term.

Thirdly and finally, with respect to seeing the
positive potential of youth, we have to do more to
highlight the overwhelmingly positive influence of
young people on our societies, and we can promote
this positive influence by focusing on youth training
and employment. Employment is a fundamental driver
of economic development, and it is the best method
of poverty reduction. Decent work is the basis for
socioeconomic participation and enables young people
to have independent lives.

But more private-sector dynamism is needed
to create new jobs. Germany has launched a number
of initiatives in cooperation with the private sector
worldwide. In this regard, we work on employment-
effective business and cooperation models, demand-
oriented training and further education, as well as
upscaling and learning initiatives. In the same vein,
during Germany's 2017 presidency of the Group of 20
(G-20), members developed the G-20 Initiative for Rural
Youth Employment. Allow me to take this opportunity
to call upon members of the business community to do
their part to harness the positive potential of youth.

In conclusion, it is clear that young people's role
in sustaining peace is paramount. We must do more to
include them at the United Nations, and we must do
more to put issues that are relevant to young people on
the agenda of the United Nations. Allow me to assure
the Security Council that if elected as a non-permanent
member of the Council for the 2019-2020 term,
Germany would do its utmost to implement the youth,
peace and security agenda and continue to work with
young peacebuilders to secure sustainable peace.

