Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by expressing
the gratitude of my delegation to you, Sir, for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council today and to the
delegation of Malaysia for the initiative to consider issues
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in an
open debate of the Security Council.

The topic of our discussion today relates to some of
the most sensitive and difficult aspects of the work of the

 

Security Council and of the United Nations system as a
whole. The present period of history is characterized by a
large diversity of military conflicts, many of which take
place within States, albeit with varying degrees of
involvement by other States. Ending such military conflicts
represents a major challenge in the maintenance of
international peace and security today. The demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of combatants belonging to
a variety of armed formations and groups are among the
essential conditions for the transition from a state of war to
a situation of peace. It is timely for the Security Council to
take up these issues and to address them in a
comprehensive and thematic manner. Furthermore, it is
useful to hear the views of all interested Member States and
from the Deputy Secretary- General, whose presence today
we particularly appreciate. Given the fact that the
conceptual discussion in which we are engaged today is
new in some respects, it would be useful to envisage the
areas in which further work, including further study, is
necessary.

Experience has shown that progress towards
disarmament and demobilization has been quicker and more
far-reaching in situations where a comprehensive peace
agreement has been concluded. On the other hand,
experience has also shown that peace agreements
sometimes leave much to be desired. Consequently, the
implementation becomes more complex and difficult.
Making peace usually implies difficult choices, a fact of
which the United Nations is intensely aware today, at the
conclusion of the peace agreement in Sierra Leone.
However, we should keep in mind the wisdom of the great
European philosopher Erasmus, who explained in 1508 that
"the most disadvantageous peace is better than the most just
war". This maxim is relevant to many contemporary
conflicts and has a specific meaning: peace is a challenge.
It can be disadvantageous from the standpoint of the basic
values of humanity, but the real struggle for those values is

given a chance when the war is ended.

Since comprehensive peace agreements are not always
possible, post-conflict activities often begin on the basis of
an imperfect peace or of a mere ceasefire agreement. Even
in those situations, the activities of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, especially those related to
the fate of child soldiers, should be pursued.

In the right conditions, the United Nations has been
able to accomplish successfully several large-scale projects
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The
success in Mozambique in 1993 and 1994 - at a time that
has been described as an otherwise difficult year for the
United Nations - is most often cited as a United Nations
success. The total number of government and RENAMO
soldiers demobilized was over 70,000. The work was
done within the reintegration support scheme, which was
largely implemented by United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). The scheme included cash
payments, vocational training, the promotion of
small-scale economic activities and credit facilities for the
demobilized soldiers and was essential for the successful
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life. This
example demonstrates the importance of the involvement
of UNDP and, more generally, the need to establish a link
between the process of demobilization and post-conflict
development. All the relevant parts of the United Nations
system must come into the picture. Mozambique is a
classic example of both the success and the inherent
importance of disarmament in post-conflict situations.

The disarmament of combatants is also important as
an indicator of progress towards political normalization.
The continued existence of parallel or competing armed
forces or of widespread banditry is a formidable obstacle
to political normalization and should be overcome.

A set of tasks closely related to disarmament issues
are defined with the words "mine action". Although mine
action has a separate identity, it needs to be mentioned
today in view of its overall importance for post-conflict
normalization. Mine action is more than only demining;
it also includes assistance to mine victims and the
creation of mine awareness in the public at large.

The implementation of provisions of international
instruments regarding demining and the destruction of
landmines must be among the highest priorities after a
conflict. This is necessary not only to prevent the
recurrence of a given conflict, but also to minimize the
amount of land restricted by mine infestation and to
expedite the return of refugees, internally displaced
persons and demobilized soldiers to their zones and their
livelihoods. Rehabilitation of mine victims is an important
condition of normalization after a conflict and, perhaps
most important, the way to restore both the productivity
and the human dignity of those most severely affected.
Mine awareness needs to be created and supported as a
part of the effort to mobilize the population for post-
conflict activities. Peace cannot be sustained and
development cannot thrive in an atmosphere where an
explosion could wound anyone at any time. Successful
mine action strengthens both peace and development.

 

For all these reasons, mine action must be considered
as early as possible in the peace settlement process. Short-
term priorities should be carefully designed to reinforce the
process of long-term mine action. These lessons have been
learned and re-learned in many conflicts around the globe,
and are important in post-conflict situations today, including
that of Kosovo.

Demobilization and disarmament are essential, but
they are not ends in themselves. The objective is the
restoration of normality and the reintegration of all
segments of society. All combatants should be reintegrated,
except persons responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Peace with impunity is unstable peace. It
may not always be possible to prosecute the perpetrators
immediately after a conflict. However, let me recall that in
cases of war crimes and crimes against humanity, statutory
limitations do not apply, and bringing the perpetrators to
justice remains an essential if sometimes long-term task for
guaranteeing the durability of peace.

A particular priority in the process of reintegration
must be given to children, in particular to child soldiers.
Many contemporary armed conflicts take place over a
protracted period of time. The consequences are devastating
for children. In addition to the immediate effects of
violence, such conflicts deprive entire generations of the
benefits of security, health care and, above all, education.
Entire generations are being victimized and their prospects
for normal life destroyed.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict has done much useful
work to help us understand the extent and importance of
this problem. The Deputy Secretary-General also spoke
extensively about this problem today. The Special
Representative has done some country-specific preparatory
work, including in Sierra Leone. With the advent of peace
in that war-torn country, the task of reintegration of child
soldiers and other affected children will be among the basic
priorities. We hope that in a future debate focused on the
problems of children in armed conflict the Council will
thoroughly consider the fate of children in Sierra Leone and
in other post-conflict situations.

In its discussion today the Security Council must be
aware of the general need to curb illicit arms trafficking,
including the spread of small arms. The Council must be
grateful to the Disarmament Commission for the adoption
of guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and
disarmament with particular emphasis on consolidation of
peace. The regional efforts pursued by the Organization of
American States, the European Union and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) merit the Security
Council's support. We particularly welcome the efforts in
Africa, a region most tragically exposed to arms
trafficking. The decision of the OAU to strengthen the
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Togo and
to intensify work on practical measures of disarmament
are among the important developments in this domain.

This Security Council debate and the follow-up
activities should give due attention to wider disarmament
and arms limitation as a factor for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Let me conclude by saying that we support the draft
presidential statement that was prepared for the
conclusion of today's discussion, including the follow-up
envisaged in that statement.

