I would like to start by commending the work of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn Chambas. Mr. Chambas's cooperation is a prime example of the holistic approach needed for the stability of the entire region. We expressly welcome the good offices of the Special Representative and the continuous support for inclusive dialogue. Dialogue is indeed essential, especially in the light of upcoming elections in the region. Both the regional office and the Special Representative of the Secretary- General enjoy full German support. We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General's comprehensive report (S/2020/585) and all of its recommendations, particularly on the climate-security nexus. We look forward to the UNOWAS study on the security implications of climate change. We also thank Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim for her passionate briefing. Through her plea for the many concrete things that she spoke of, she made very tangible for us what we in the Security Council often discuss in more abstract terms. We thank her for that. In reviewing the report of the Secretary-General and hearing the statements made today, I would like to address four issues. First of all, on climate and security, today's briefings made clear again what United Nations institutions have documented time and again, namely, the considerable impact of climate change on security and stability in West Africa and the Sahel. The effects of climate change have caused an increased number of conflicts and are exacerbating existing ones between herders and farmers. In addition, the effects of climate change are leading to disputes over scarce resources and contributing to increased food insecurity in the region. All of this creates a breeding ground for violence, violent extremism and terrorism, and is often the starting point for people to migrate to other regions. For this reason, it was vital to include the climate- security nexus in the UNOWAS mandate at the beginning of this year. We feel this is absolutely crucial, and we cannot ignore the reality any longer. Secondly, much was also said today on women and peace and security. Gender inequality is obviously prevalent. Women and girls continue to be the main target of sexual and gender-based violence. We therefore commend the integration of the gender dimension in the work of UNOWAS. We welcome efforts to increase women's meaningful participation in political and security processes. Much more needs to be done; although gender equality is not a goal unto itself, the full, effective and equal participation of women substantially increases the chances for sustainable peace and stability in the region. Thirdly, with regard to regional cooperation, all of the challenges the region faces can be overcome only through regional cooperation. Many previous speakers alluded to this fact. UNOWAS is successfully collaborating with regional partners, and coordination with such other United Nations entities as the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, respective country offices, United Nations agencies and the Peacebuilding Commission remains important. Germany commends existing regional cooperation, including the engagement of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the work of the Economic Community of West African States. At the same time, any international engagement must go hand in hand with the principles of national ownership. It is the primary responsibility of Governments to build trust in State institutions, ensure the rule of law, guarantee respect for human rights, engage with civil society and integrate women and youth. In this context, it is encouraging to learn about such positive developments as the further progress made in the Gambia. However, we remain concerned about tensions and violence in the context of electoral processes in Guinea and Guinea- Bissau, for example. We remain deeply worried about the deteriorating security situation in West Africa and the Sahel, in particular in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Lake Chad basin. An increase in terrorist activities and organized crime, intercommunal violence, continued political tensions, human rights violations and abuses and the exacerbated humanitarian crises are alarming and often mutually reinforcing. Before concluding, I would like to say a final word on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The ongoing COVID-19 crisis and its humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences are aggravating the already challenging situation in the region. The call for a global ceasefire by the Secretary-General, which the Security Council endorsed in resolution 2532 (2020) last week, has an essential, literally vital, importance for West Africa and the Sahel. Germany commends the efforts of many Governments to contain the spread of the pandemic. At the same time, we urge all actors to fully respect human rights. Preserving the freedom of opinion and expression as well as access to information remains even more important in these difficult times.
