Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada is
seriously concerned over the situation in Sierra Leone,
because of both the grave danger to many of the people of
Sierra Leone and the repugnant image of hundreds of
troops of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) being detained by a signatory of the Lome
Peace Agreement.

As UNAMSIL consolidates its positions, the
international community must expedite and revive its efforts
to support the mission. On the ground, the United Nations
is maintaining its position, and its Members must do the
same. We must remain firm in our commitment not to
abandon Sierra Leone or the people that the Council has put
in a dangerous situation and has mandated to carry out its
orders on behalf of all the Members of the Organization.

Canada was proud to announce yesterday that it would
offer an air lift for rapid deployment of troops from India
and Bangladesh. We are now considering increasing our
assistance to UNAMSIL troops, who are without sufficient
equipment. That decision supplements earlier contributions
by Canada, which has sent military observers and which
continues to provide significant humanitarian-assistance
support to Sierra Leone. We have also made a significant
contribution to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme and are ready to renew our
support when the situation in Sierra Leone becomes stable.

We have seen how the rapid deployment of a highly
professional contingent from the United Kingdom to
Freetown and to Lungi helped stabilize the situation. We
hope that when the international military presence is
stepped up, those charged with maintaining the peace, along
with civilians, will be threatened less, and that conditions
will be met for resuming the peace process. We must show
true and strong determination, and must ensure that
civilians will not be left to face the rebel terror, as they
were in January 1999.

(spoke in English)

Canada is encouraged by the results of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) summit
held at Abuja on 9 May and by the continued
commitment of West African States to a peaceful and
stable Sierra Leone. ECOWAS has demonstrated its
capacity to make a difference in Sierra Leone in the past,
at great cost in money and in lives. Specifically, the West
African force - the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) - has amply demonstrated its ability to
constrain violence by the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). ECOWAS member States, and most particularly
Nigeria, are already playing a key role in UNAMSIL and
will, we fervently hope, agree to make an even larger
contribution to deterring further aggression on the part of
the RUF.

It is imperative that the peacekeeping effort in Sierra
Leone be truly multilateral and under the United Nations
flag, and that the burden associated with fielding and
deploying that force be shared among Member States.
Canada encourages Member States to work towards the
creation of a strong, united and cohesive force to restore
a climate of confidence and order in Sierra Leone. That
force, we believe, should take the form of an expanded
UNAMSIL and should respect the fundamental military
principle of unity of command, in this case the command
of Major-General Jetley.

The Security Council agreed in October 1999, when
the UNAMSIL mandate was approved, that a hybrid force
for Sierra Leone was undesirable, dangerous, unjust and
unworkable, and could lead to further instability and
confusion. The Council must recommit itself to
establishing a strong, united and credible force in the face
of appalling provocation on the part of the RUF. We,
should also be prepared to revisit UNAMSIL's mandate
in the light of the fundamental changes in the situation on
the ground and to re-examine, on a regular basis,
UNAMSIL's requirements in personnel and capabilities.

UNAMSIL has a strong mandate with provisions for
the protection of civilians. What we need now are
appropriate resources to prevent further slippage. Canada
is extremely troubled by reports by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) that more than half of the
children who have participated in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme are at risk of
being re-recruited by rebel forces, or of being punished
by them for desertion. Ensuring the safety of those 900
children must be an immediate priority of UNAMSIL
once it regains the upper hand in its areas of deployment.

 

The threat of sliding back into civil war in Sierra
Leone demonstrates yet again the need for a radically
improved capacity for rapid reaction by the United Nations.
Specifically, Canada encourages Member States to commit
themselves to improving the capability of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in the areas of military
planning services, Headquarters oversight, access to reliable
field-level intelligence, effective communications and longer
term contingency planning. Earlier today, the Canadian
Foreign Affairs Minister, Lloyd Axworthy, called a special
meeting in Luceme of representatives of the 13 members of
the Human Security Network at which the topic of United
Nations peacekeeping capacity was discussed. The members
agreed to work together and examine steps for possible
action.

While we should continue to direct our efforts towards
reinforcing the contingents already in the field, we cannot
lose sight of the unfulfilled requirements of effective
peacekeeping. We must address these if we are to
consolidate peace and security in Sierra Leone and put an
end to eight years of needless suffering. As we work to
strengthen UNAMSIL and the ability of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to plan for and assist the mission
as it adapts to changing circumstances, Council members
must also take a strong and clear-eyed stand in addressing
the roots of this crisis, and indeed of the conflict in Sierra
Leone.

In addition to condemning in the strongest terms the
illegal detention of UNAMSIL civilian and military
personnel, we must undertake to hold accountable the
parties responsible for these breaches of the Lome Peace
Agreement, including RUF leader Foday Sankoh. The
Council should examine all avenues at its disposal for
ensuring that the violence perpetrated in the name of greed
in Sierra Leone does not go unpunished. We wish to stress
that we do not consider the United Nations to be bound by
the Lome amnesty provisions as they apply to genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious
violations of international law.

We must also undertake to address the role of both the
illicit diamond trade and small-arms trafficking in fuelling
and sustaining this conflict. Specifically, Council members
should consider a range of targeted measures to ensure that
diamond revenues are used exclusively for the purposes
specified in the Lome Peace Agreement, that is for the
benefit of the people of Sierra Leone. Canada looks forward
to the report of the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Miyet,
tomorrow, and will give sympathetic consideration to any
recommendations from the Secretary-General for further
Council action in support of UNAMSIL.

