Mr. Terzic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; English text provided by the delegation): Two
years since my last Visit, I have the special pleasure of
once again addressing the Security Council, together
with the new - but I am certain, the last - High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling.

I believe that the very fact that continuity now
lies with the Prime Minister and not the High
Representative sends a good signal regarding the
stability and the relationships achieved within Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

As the Council knows, during the last three and a
half years Bosnia and Herzegovina has passed from a
country focused on implementing a peace agreement to
one that is today negotiating with the European
Commission with a View to signing the Stabilization
and Accession Agreement. We managed to do this by
surviving very forceful reform for the purpose of
strengthening the State's capacity. At the same time,
together with all the needed reforms, for the last two
years, we have marked continuous growth in direct
foreign investment. Our stable currency, low inflation,
increased exports, growth in the gross domestic
product - which was 6 per cent in 2004, and the same
level is expected in 2005 - all of these elements
clearly demonstrate that Bosnia and Herzegovina is on
the right path.

Because of this, I want to stress that we support
the High Representative in the directions and policy he
set forth for the fullest transfer of ownership to Bosnia
and Herzegovina institutions. Our clear goal is the
achievement of full integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Euro-Atlantic and European
communities.

I am confident that the Council will agree with
my remark that Bosnia and Herzegovina's experience
makes it a successful example of peacebuilding in
which the international community also played a
significant role. Ten years after the conflict, Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be a relevant example for the United
Nations for other post-conflict areas and a model of
principles for resolving such situations.

The key reason behind this success is that the
international community's single voice was joined by
the local leadership on the reforms and changes needed
to create a society with better opportunities for all.
This attitude and policy can stabilize the most complex
situations. We know this from our own experience. It is
exactly this experience that gives us the right to ask for
the support of the Member States of the United Nations
for our membership in the newly established United
Nations body, the Peacebuilding Commission.

I want to especially emphasize that the main
reason for my address to this body is a problem that
was not fully resolved in the right manner. It relates to
the process of police reform that was conducted by the
United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There should be no doubt whatsoever that the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), as well as the
overall United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), has made an unprecedented
contribution to the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Accords and, even more, laid a foundation for the
modern reformed police structures in my country.
Therefore, I want once again to express our gratitude
for that extraordinary work and participation in
securing prosperity in so many areas of life in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
As I am sure the Council knows, the IPTF, which
was under the umbrella of the UNMIBH, was in
charge, among other things, of the certification process
for the police forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During this process, decisions were made to decertify
598 former policemen. A direct consequence was that
all of those persons were prohibited from working in
law enforcement agencies for the rest of their lives.
The main problem now lies in the fact that during the
mandate of the IPTF those individuals had no
opportunity to see any documentation, nor were they
given any reason for their decertification. Moreover,
for 150 people, the established complaint procedure
was withheld because the decision to decertify them
was taken on the last day of the IPTF mandate.

During my last Visit to New York, in November
2005, I presented this problem to the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, and the Secretary-General's then Chef de
Cabinet, Mr. Mark Malloch Brown. In the meantime,
pressure has been increasing, not only from the
decertified policemen, but also from the general public
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, because of their conviction
that the situation presents a clear violation of basic
human rights. This dissatisfaction is compounded by
the fact these policemen had been screened by the
United Nations, an organization dedicated to protecting
and promoting human rights all over the world.

Based on the Security Council presidential
statement of 25 June 2004 (S/PRST/2004/22), the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
believes that the Security Council is the only relevant
place in which we could find a mutually satisfactory
solution. With this in mind, the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
United Nations sent an official letter (S/2006/64) in
which he requests, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, consideration of possible options for
securing rights of appeal and review of decertification
decisions that were previously found to be appropriate.

I am taking this opportunity to address the
Council to reiterate our request to look into this
problem as soon as possible and take a decision that
would uphold the fundamental values of the United
Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

