The President: At the outset of the meeting, I should
like, on behalf of the Council, to express deep sorrow in
connection with the tragic air accident which occurred on
2 September 1998 with respect to Swissair flight 111 and
which claimed the lives of more than 200 persons,
including seven personnel of the United Nations system.
The members of the Council express heartfelt sympathy to
the families of all the victims, and in particular to the
relatives of those who lost their lives in the service of the
ideals of the United Nations. I request the representatives
of Switzerland and the United States of America, as well as
the representatives of all other countries whose nationals
were aboard the flight, to convey to their Governments and
to the bereaved families our deepest condolences.

I now request members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence in memory of those who so
tragically lost their lives.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of September, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Danilo Tiirk, Permanent
Representative of Slovenia to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of August 1998. I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Security Council in expressing our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Turk for the great diplomatic skill with which
he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Consideration of the draft report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly


The President: The Security Council will now
proceed to the consideration of its annual report to the
General Assembly, the draft of which has been prepared by
the Secretariat. Members of the Council have before them
the draft report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly for the period from 16 June 1997 to 15 June
1998, as circulated by the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs on 24 August 1998, and a corrigendum
thereto.

I should like to express appreciation to the
Secretariat for the work it has undertaken in preparing
this factual report.

I now call on the Director of the Security Council
Affairs Division to make an explanatory statement.


