Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the important roles that New Zealand
and Nigeria played during their presidencies of the
Security Council in July and August, respectively.

With regard to the work of the Security Council, I
would like to focus on three points.

First, on South Sudan, thanks to joint efforts
by all parties, the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan signed a peace agreement earlier this month,
laying a solid foundation for the restoration of peace
and stability in the country. As a member of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development-plus
configuration, China undertook efforts to advance the
peace talks by multiple means and pushed the parties
concerned to meet each other half way. China sincerely
hopes that the parties to the conflict in South Sudan
will honour their commitments, achieve a ceasefire,
stop the violence and fully implement the agreement.
China stands ready to work with all sides to actively
support the South Sudan peace process and continue to
make unremitting efforts for lasting peace and stability
in South Sudan.

Secondly, with regard to Syria, the Security
Council recently adopted resolution 2235 (2015), on the
question of chemical weapons in Syria (see S/PV.7501),
as well as a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/15)
on the Syrian political process (see S/PV.7504). China
welcomes those developments. China consistently
believes that on the Syrian question the international
community must adhere to an approach towards a
political solution, respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, honour the
Syrian people's right to decide on the future of their
own country, and support the Syrian people's efforts
to advance an inclusive political process on the basis
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). China
will continue to vigorously support the Syrian political
process and the mediation efforts by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and his Special Envoy, Mr. De Mistura,
and actively contribute to an early, comprehensive,
lasting and proper solution of the Syrian question.

Thirdly, on relevant African questions, the
Security Council has recently held multiple rounds of
deliberations on hotspot issues and thematic agenda
items on Africa. China believes that the international
community should respect the wishes of the countries
of Africa and fully support the peace efforts of the
African Union (AU) and other regional organizations.
The Security Council should give priority to supporting
the role of the AU in solving regional issues. As always,
China believes that the challenges and difficulties that
some African regions face will not hold back Africa
on its path towards peace, development and progress.
As an unwavering friend and partner of Africa, China
is ready to work with African countries and the
international community in continuing to contribute
actively to the continent's peace, stability, development
and prosperity.

Lastly, China would like to wish the Russian
Federation every success in its presidency of the Council
for next month. We trust that under its leadership the
Security Council's work will achieve positive results.

