Mr. O'Brien: 1 thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council
following my visit to South Sudan from 22 to 25 July.
It was my first visit to South Sudan as the Emergency
Relief Coordinator. My objective was to evaluate the
humanitarian situation first-hand and to address critical
concerns affecting our operations in South Sudan.

During my visit, I had the opportunity to meet
with President Salva Kiir and the Minister for Cabinet
Affairs, Mr. Elias Lomuro. I also met with Ambassadors
from the region and with donor Member States. I also
was able to Visit civilians directly affected by the
conflict in the Juba protection-of-civilians site, as well
as those in Bentiu and Nyal in southern Unity state. I
witnessed the consequences of over 20 months of brutal
conflict on the lives of men, women and children. It
was a very deeply harrowing experience.

The overall humanitarian situation continues to
sharply deteriorate. As oftoday, over 2.2 million people
have been displaced due to the conflict, an increase of
200,000 since the beginning of this year. More than
1.6 million are displaced internally and over 616,000
people have fled to neighbouring States. Almost
200,000 internally displaced persons (lDPs) are now
seeking refuge in United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) bases, as compared to 121,000 just
four months ago. Severe food insecurity is affecting
4.6 million people this year, as compared to 3.8 million
at the height of the lean season last year. While the
World Food Programme (WFP) and its partners
have reached more than 2.3 million in 2015, severe
hunger will be a threat well into next year, especially
if fighting continues. There is no doubt that we will
continue to see higher than usual food insecurity in the
conflict-affected states. In those states, displacement,
the inability to plant crops now and the destruction
of livelihoods has just been too severe and has left
people unable to meet their own most basic needs.
Host communities, such as those in Nyal as I saw, are
generously giving up their own resilience to those to
whom they are giving sanctuary as they flee or die
and wade through the currently saturated chest-high
swamps to safety, however temporary, before the
fighting again catches up with them.

The lives of more than a quarter million children
are at risk from rapidly worsening malnutrition. ln half
of South Sudan's states, one in three children suffers
acute malnutrition. The situation for children in the
protection-of-civilians sites is particularly concerning.
UNICEF reports that global acute malnutrition is
higher inside the Bentiu protection-of-civilians site,
at 12.9 per cent, than for new arrivals, at 1.6 per
cent, which could be attributed to overstretched basic
services and outbreaks of disease that can contribute
to malnutrition. Large spikes in malaria across South
Sudan have also raised the possibility of a second
consecutive season with exceptionally high numbers
of malaria cases and preventable deaths, which, as we
know, particular affect children under 5 and pregnant
mothers.

The situation is particularly alarming in areas
directly affected by armed conflict, in particular in
Unity and the Upper Nile states. I was able to see that
for myself during my visit to Bentiu and Nyal. I am
very concerned about the atrocities that continue to
be reported. The scope and level of cruelty that has
characterized the attacks against civilians suggests
a depth of antipathy that goes beyond political
differences. Allegations include rampant killing, rape,
abduction, looting, arson and forced displacement, and
even such horrific acts as burning of people inside
their own homes. There is evidence of deliberate ethnic
targeting of, and reprisals against, women and girls.
According to information received from Unity state,
hundreds of women and girls have been abducted, and
hundreds more have been subjected to sexual Violence,
including gang rape. For example, a survivor from
Koch county reported how she was dragged out of
her tukul and gang-raped alongside her neighbour by
Government soldiers in front of her 3-year-old child. In
another instance, a witness from Rubkona county said
that she saw Government forces gang-raping a breast-
feeding mother after tossing her baby aside.

Those who can flee from the unspeakable violence
hide in the hard-to-reach swamp lands, while some
others make the long journey by foot to the Bentiu
protection-of-civilians site in search of safety. In Nyal, I
met many women and children who had been separated
from their husbands and other family members. One
woman had just arrived after walking for several days
from close to Leer with her seven children to seek
safety among fellow Nuer in Nyal. The host community
in Nyal was very welcoming, but the food and resources
they were sharing with those arriving were running
quite low. While insecurity has made it difficult for
humanitarian staff to maintain a presence in southern
Unity state, we are making all possible efforts to reach
the displaced people, and host communities in urgent
need of assistance. To further boost those efforts, I
recently approved over $5 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund for survival kits that
contain food, seeds, mosquito nets and other essential
items. We have reached over 33,000 people with the kits
so far.

I am concerned about civilians being attacked at
distribution sites in southern Unity state. We have had
to halt the provision of assistance in some instances
where people did not dare to come out of hiding to
receive life-saving aid. The attacks are inhumane
and illegal, and the international community should
reiterate its call on all parties to the conflict to meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law
to protect civilians.

While needs are increasing, our ability to reach
people in a timely manner is hampered by severe
restrictions. During my visit, I was able to discuss
the ban on barge movement on the Nile and the use
of Malakal Airport with President Kiir and Minister
Lomuro. I am pleased that the Government of South
Sudan then moved to lift those restrictions at the
beginning of August, but I remain deeply concerned
about access restrictions to neighbouring Wau Shilluk
from Malakal. More than 16,000 people have arrived in
the Malakal protection-of-civilians site since mid-July,
primarily because humanitarian assistance to Wau
Shilluk has stopped. Humanitarian staff are still being
prevented from delivering aid to Wau Shilluk from
Malakal, but they have at least been able to fly in aid
from Juba, reaching 20,000 so far. That is neither cost-
effective nor the best way to ensure that all needs are
met. We therefore need to continue to call on authorities
to facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded access of
humanitarian organizations and supplies to all persons
in need of assistance within South Sudan, in line with
international humanitarian law.

I am very concerned about the security of
humanitarian workers in South Sudan. At least 29
humanitarian workers have been killed since the
beginning of the conflict, including, sadly, the recent
confirmation of the three WFP workers. Many more
have been wounded or abducted, and they have often
been ethnically targeted. There has also been a worrying
trend of robberies of non-governmental organization
compounds in Juba, with 24 such robberies in July
alone. That is unacceptable. I raised that concern in my
meetings with the Government of South Sudan, but I
again wish to recall parties' obligations to protect and
respect humanitarian personnel and supplies.

Despite the increasingly difficult operating
environment, I am glad to report that in 2015
humanitarian workers have so far reached more than
2.3 million people with food and livelihood assistance,
and more than 1.6 million people with water, sanitation
and hygiene services. Health workers have seen more
than 1.1 million patients in conflict-affected states, and
more than half a million people have received critical
items, such as tarpaulins, blankets and cooking sets,
while more than 200,000 children have been provided
with child-friendly spaces. The cholera outbreak,
which resulted in 1,644 cases and 45 deaths, has been
largely contained. Challenges remain, including the
need to scale up the response fast enough to meet the
ever-increasing needs, especially in places such as the
Bentiu and Malakal protection-of-civilian sites, where
people continue to arrive by the hundreds on a daily
basis.

To help address the humanitarian challenges I
have mentioned, I believe the international community
should address the following four priority areas.

First and foremost, the people of South Sudan
are looking for lasting peace. A first step would
be a credible cessation of hostilities, which would
give people breathing space and allow humanitarian
workers to deliver assistance to those currently cut
off from life-saving aid by insecurity. As a second
step, a durable peace agreement would allow people
to consider returning home and rebuilding their lives.
But we must be realistic: a peace agreement that is not
inclusive and does not bring an end to the fighting will
ultimately fail the people of South Sudan.

Secondly, the call on the parties to the conflict to
protect civilians must be reinforced. Over the past four
months alone, and despite the best efforts of UNMISS
and humanitarians, an untold number of civilians,
among them many women and children, have died cruel
deaths, were wounded or lost their livelihoods. The
Government needs to do more to protect civilians and
prevent or stop violations of international humanitarian
law. While we work towards peace, we must ensure
that, even if current developments lead to a political
change, the United Nations continues to put protection
at the centre of its focus as well. We also need to put
an end to the prevailing impunity for violations of
international humanitarian law committed by all
parties to the conflict and for violations and abuses of
human rights law.

Thirdly, anyone with influence on the parties
should ensure that humanitarian response efforts are
not impeded and that all South Sudanese in need of
assistance can be reached in a principled and cost-
effective manner. Continued pressure and action on the
parties to the conflict to abide by their commitments is
crucial.

Finally, we need adequate funding for the
humanitarian operation. Only half of the requirements
of the 2015 Humanitarian Response Plan have so far
been met. I am concerned that, without timely and
sustainable funding, we will not be able to deliver
on our promise to enable the people of South Sudan
to realize their basic right to be safe and to live with
dignity and free from want.

