Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
Allow me to welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste. Xanana Gusmao has long represented
the struggle of Timor-Leste for self-determination and
independence. He is a man who has shown unrelenting
courage and determination in face of the most
tremendous odds, who has led his young country, first
as President of the Republic and today as Prime
Minister. In welcoming Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmao, I also welcome the leader of a sister nation, a
member of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), a Community united by indelible
links. It is indeed symbolic that today, both Timor-
Leste and Portugal are sitting at this table in a meeting
chaired by Brazil. Welcome, Prime Minister - your
words inspire our trust in the future of Timor-Leste.

(spoke in English)

I also wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her very comprehensive
briefing and to assure her once again of Portugal's full
support for the work of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Today, Timor-Leste is at a very special juncture.
In roughly one year's time, ten years after her
independence, very important elections will be held,
thus respecting once again the democratic path that the
Timorese people have charted for themselves.

Next year, the Security Council, acting on the
advice of the authorities of Timor-Leste and the High-
Level Committee on Transition, will be working on
ways in which the United Nations will continue to
contribute to the consolidation of democratic
institutions, of the rule of law and of economic and
social development in the country upon the conclusion
of UNMIT's mandate. But we will have the
opportunity to discuss those issues at the appropriate
time; today, I wish to underline the encouraging
achievements that took place in 2010 in several areas,
despite the enduring problems still facing the country.

Parallel to the further development of democratic
institutions, democratic culture and practices are
consolidating their imprint in Timorese society.
Political dialogue on matters of national concerns has
been reinforced, and we are encouraged by the active
involvement of the Timorese leadership, including the
opposition, in that process. We believe that
strengthening the forums for open and democratic
discussions of national issues is the best way to find
solutions for them and to reinforce national cohesion in
facing difficult challenges.

In the economic field, growth has been fast, and
the recently approved budget may represent a useful
tool for the diversification of the economy, the
development of much-needed infrastructure and the
creation of jobs, while ensuring a better distribution of
wealth and increasing opportunities, especially for
young people.

The judicial system has also improved its
capacities, including in rural areas, and has
strengthened its independence. Training of judicial
officials and prison officers has continued. The
protection of human rights, including in terms of
gender issues, is progressing. As a leading cooperation
partner in the justice sector, Portugal recognizes the
importance of a coordinated approach to justice system
reform, in order to increase Timorese ownership in
strengthening national institutions.

I wish to commend UNMIT for the very
important contribution it has made to the progress I
have outlined. Timor-Leste is indeed an example of a
United Nations contribution to peacebuilding that has
succeeded well, and we are confident that the current
peaceful situation will endure during and beyond 2012.

Notwithstanding these very important positive
developments, Timor-Leste is still confronted with
serious challenges. There is still much to be done to
strengthen the State institutions in order for them to
fully discharge their responsibilities. Likewise,
accomplishing security sector reform, developing the
capacities of the civil society, ensuring full respect for
the rule of law and further promoting human rights are
still priority tasks on the path towards a consolidated
and stable democracy in Timor-Leste.

Like others, we believe that long-term stability
and security will depend on the capacity of Timorese
security institutions to function in an effective,
responsible and accountable way, fully respecting the
rule of law and benefiting from public trust and
support. A clear articulation of strategies within and
across State institutions is indispensable on these
issues.

One issue that has been a matter of concern for
members of the Council is the certification of officers
of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) facing
serious criminal and disciplinary charges. We took note
of the Prime Minister's encouraging comments on the
matter, and we trust that due and speedy process will
be observed, leading to the reinforcement of the
credibility, professionalism, impartiality and
effectiveness of the PNTL. Portugal encourages the
Government of Timor-Leste to continue working
closely with UNMIT on all issues concerning the
PNTL, specifically the five priority areas highlighted
by the Special Representative and with the continued
support of the United Nations police.

The people of Timor-Leste have repeatedly
shown their resolve to build a peaceful, democratic and
stable society. These goals require the continued
support of the international community, and it is
important that the Timorese rest assured that they are
not and will not be alone in pursuing these objectives.
UNMIT continues to play a crucial role in this context,
and we fully support the extension of its mandate for
an additional period of 12 months. UNMIT's role
before, during and after next year's elections will be
fundamental to help the Timorese authorities ensure a
stable and secure environment for the elections and
their outcome.

Portugal remains fully committed to supporting
Timor-Leste in its efforts to consolidate democracy and
development, both bilaterally and as a member of the
European Union and the CPLP. Our cooperation with
Timor-Leste covers a very wide spectrum of areas,
including governance, public administration, justice,
education and security sector reform, and fully
supports all areas under the responsibility of UNMIT.
We are particularly happy that, in the near future, we
will be welcoming Timorese officers in the framework
of Portuguese contingents in peacekeeping operations.
That highlights the degree of maturity and
professionalism reached by the Falintil-Forcas
Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL).

We are convinced that Timor-Leste will succeed
in its endeavours, but in order for the country to reach
its objective, the international community must carry
on providing the necessary political support and
appropriate resources, thereby living up to its
responsibilities and commitments to democracy and
stability in Timor-Leste.

