Mr. Chen Xu (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Like other delegations, we would like to express our sincere
gratitude to you, Sir, and to the delegation of Namibia for
your skilful exercise of the presidency.

On 7 July this year, the Government of Sierra Leone
and the Revolutionary United Front of Sierra Leone
(RUF) signed a Peace Agreement at Lome. Sierra Leone's
civil war, which lasted for more than eight years, is
finally over. The Chinese Government would like to
express its sincere appreciation to the parties concerned
for their active and constructive efforts to promote the
signing of that Agreement. We would also like to thank
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for their
outstanding contributions to stabilizing the situation there
and for their promotion of the peace process.

The peace in Sierra Leone is just beginning.
Everything must start from scratch, and urgent assistance
is needed. At the recently held third meeting of the
international contact group on the question of Sierra
Leone, the parties concerned indicated that they would
provide further assistance to that country. We would like
to express our appreciation for this.

China has always supported the popularly elected
Government in Sierra Leone and the peace process there.
We have provided various kinds of assistance to the
Government of Sierra Leone through various channels, as
well as to ECOMOG. Within our capabilities, we will
continue to provide that country with various types of
assistance.

At the same time, we should see very clearly that
the peace in that country is still very fragile and that
many uncertainties remain. We call upon the international
community to take a forward-looking approach in support
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement in order to
help the people of Sierra Leone achieve national
reconciliation at an early date and to begin economic
reconstruction.

We have always held that after the signing of the
Lome Agreement the United Nations, and especially the
Security Council, should respond as expeditiously as
possible to support the peace process there with concrete
actions.

The present domestic situation in that country calls
for the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) to take on a new and important role in
monitoring the ceasefire, ensuring the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and assisting with the

 

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into the
workforce of the former combatants.

We were pleased to note that in his report to the
Security Council on the question of Sierra Leone, the
Secretary-General put forward some concrete proposals on
the expansion of UNOMSIL. The Security Council has on
that basis speedily prepared a draft resolution, which we
support. We hope that the Secretariat can, as soon as
possible, carry out the necessary preparations for the
expansion of UNOMSIL and conduct consultations with the
Government on specific arrangements.

We believe that an expanded UNOMSIL will be able
fully to consider the views of the Government of Sierra
Leone and closely to cooperate with ECOMOG while
continuing to play an important role in the consolidation of
peace in that country.

We believe also that the current expansion of
UNOMSIL is only a provisional measure, as its strength
still falls short of the actual need. We hope that the
Secretary-General can, on the basis of consultations with
the parties concerned, put forward recommendations to the
Security Council on the final role and strength of
UNOMSIL.

