Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
thank Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for his briefing on the human rights
situation in Ukraine. We also commend the entire team
of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission,
who continue to diligently perform their mission in that
difficult environment.

Earlier this week, the Council met on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7234).
We expressed our concern with regard to the recent
developments, including the rapidly growing number
of refugees and internally displaced people, as well as
the deteriorating humanitarian situation. I would like
to recall that, in the same meeting, Rwanda proposed
holding a monthly meeting under the agenda item "The
situation in Ukraine", in order to have a comprehensive
view and a regular assessment of the crisis in Ukraine,
instead of the current ad hoc, piecemeal and letter-
based approach.

The report under review gives a gruesome
description of the situation in eastern Ukraine. Since
April, more than 15,000 innocent civilians have been
killed and 4,000 injured. In only five days - between
10 and 15 July - about 478 people were killed,
including women and children.

Furthermore, the population in areas controlled by
armed groups has been subjected to abduction, arbitrary
detention, forced labour and forced recruitment, sexual
harassment, torture and execution. On the other hand,
Ukrainians, including children, are caught between
fights of armies that continue to deploy heavy weaponry
in disregard of human life and seriously damaging
civilian infrastructure. We agree that this could
amount to violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

Rwanda condemns the use of civilians as human
shields by armed groups, such as the incident of 14 June
where two people were killed and eight were wounded.
We urge all parties involved to act proportionately and
to protect civilians as a matter of priority. The issue of
abduction and detention is of particular concern, with
more than 900 people reported to have been abducted
since mid-April, among whom there are a large number
of women and girls. The growing trend and tactics

being deployed by armed groups, including abduction
and torture, is extremely worrying. Also worrying are
reported cases of reprisals and illegal detention by
the Government, including the illegal detention of a
Russian journalist for a long time and in an unknown
place, as well the anti-Russian hate speech in the social
media and the targeting of Russian-owned banks and
businesses. All those serious human rights violations
must be thoroughly investigated and those responsible
must be held accountable. We urge the human rights
monitoring mission and the national preventive
mechanism to redouble their efforts in ensuring that
human rights are upheld and respected.

With regard to the crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7, Rwanda remains deeply concerned that the
ongoing investigation is being hindered by the fighting
around the crash site. It is imperative that the utmost
security be guaranteed for the international investigators
to carry out their mandate. Let us not forget that the
families are still grieving for their loved ones. We owe
them respect and the dignity they deserve. The remains
of those killed must be immediately returned for proper
burial, and the consequences of the plane crash must be
determined with a sense of urgency.

Finally, let me reiterate our call for the need to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. In that regard, we call on all
parties to respect the ceasefire, de-escalate the
situation and engage in an open political dialogue to
find a lasting solution to the crisis, based on President
Poroshenko's peace plan. We do not want to find
ourselves with another long-lasting crisis, adding to
many others already on the agenda of the Council. We
urge all members to consider the lives of Ukrainians
and to use any influence they may have to encourage
political dialogue. Failure should not be our default
option, as it will continue to undermine the credibility
of this institution.

