Mr. Kalomoh: First of all, I would like to
apologize on behalf of the Secretary-General, who, due
to an unavoidable scheduling conflict, is unable to
deliver his statement at this important meeting. He has
asked me to do so on his behalf, and I have the
pleasure of delivering that statement.

"Last week, world leaders renewed their
commitment to promote a culture of prevention
of armed conflict as a means of effectively
addressing the interconnected security and
development challenges of our time. They also
pledged to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations for the prevention of armed conflict. And
they decided to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission that will play a key role in
preventing the recurrence of armed conflict.

"Civil society made a significant impact on
the process leading to the summit. Last June's
hearings marked a new and welcome step forward
in United Nations-civil society relations. So did
the Conference on the Role of Civil Society in the
Prevention of Armed Conflict and Peacebuilding,
held in New York last July, where 500
representatives from civil society around the
world gathered to adopt an action agenda.

"My message to you today is simple: civil
society's role in conflict prevention needs to be
fully recognized. Both the United Nations and
regional organizations have to do more to tap into
civil society's comparative advantages, namely a
strong local presence and experience. Local
ownership and participation are essential for the
success of peace processes, be it conflict
prevention, peacemaking or peacebuilding.
Dialogue, transparency and accountability must
remain a priority.

"Civil society is often far out in front of us
in identifying new threats and concerns. This is
certainly one of its most important roles. Civil
society organizations are also indispensable in
'track-two' and 'people-to-people' diplomacy,
which is often integral to successful official
diplomacy and post-conflict political and
reconciliation processes. At times, they can reach
parties on the ground that Governments or the
United Nations cannot reach.

"Civil society organizations can also
complement the work of the United Nations by
offering valuable analyses originating in the field,
by forging partnerships to implement United
Nations decisions, by increasing the sustainability
of United Nations operations and by creating
networks to advocate for peacebuilding. For all
these reasons, civil society organizations would
have an important role to play in the deliberations
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

"The 2005 world summit produced some
remarkable commitments from Member States.
However, for these words to be turned into
action, and for prevention and peacebuilding
strategies to become more effective, all actors -
Governments, international financial institutions,
regional organizations and civil society - need
to work together as partners.

"I am committed to doing my part, and I
urge you all to do yours."

