Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to join others in welcoming
you, Mr. President, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Chief
Minister of the Second Transitional Government of
East Timor, the Vice-President of the World Bank and
the representative of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP).

We greatly appreciate the work done by the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), so brilliantly headed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello. We also greatly appreciate what has
been done to establish the statehood of this territory as
it moves towards independence. In particular, we
welcome the successful holding of elections to the
Constituent Assembly. We believe that is an indication
of a healthy trend in the development of social and
political processes in East Timor. We are convinced
that Timorization of authority in the territory is the
only real way that one can move towards establishing
an independent and stable State.

Overall, we feel that the United Nations has
played a key role in overcoming the East Timor crisis.
It is necessary to envisage a future evolution of the role
of the United Nations in the international community's
post-conflict presence in that new State. We believe
that the size, shape and timing of the future
international presence must be determined on the basis
of analysing the real needs of East Timor, while taking
into account the dynamics of the developing situation
on the island and the position of the country's
Government.

A broad range of United Nations organizations
and agencies must be engaged in helping to establish
the independent State. Regional structures,
international financial institutions and individual donor
countries must also back up the efforts of the United
Nations, which, in our opinion, should play the role of
coordinator in this process. We also think that as the
State structures of East Timor are established, the
international presence should gradually wind down. All
of these processes, including the transition from
UNTAET to the new format of a United Nations
presence, must be smoothly and carefully verified so
that there can be a successful continuation of United
Nations achievements in East Timor.
In view of all that I have said, let me now say that
we support the tenor and specific ideas contained in the
recent report of the Secretary-General. We believe that
report has set the right tone in discussing specific steps
of international assistance to an independent East
Timor. But at the same time, we would like to have a
clearer picture of exactly what is involved in the
programme of international assistance. The report of
the Secretary-General on the future role of the United
Nations in East Timor can be regarded as a good first
step that must be followed up with more substance -
one could call it a prelude to a complete, beautiful
symphony.

It is our expectation that detailed proposals by the
Secretary-General will be submitted to the Security
Council along with a recommendation about the last
extension of UNTAET's mandate, set for January of
next year, so that the Council can, in good time and
without undue haste, prepare the mandate of the new
mission and thereby help to ensure successful
preparations for independence in East Timor.

