Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate on peacekeeping operations and for preparing
the concept note (S/2014/478, annex) that forms the
basis of today's debate. I wish to also express my
delegation's appreciation to the Secretary-General and
the observers of the African Union and the European
Union for their respective briefings earlier today.

Malaysia would like to associate itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representative of
Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

It is worth recalling that under the Charter of the
United Nations, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, while regional organizations
have the responsibility to work towards the peaceful
settlement of issues and conflicts within their
respective regions. We are encouraged to note that, thus
far, various international organizations - including
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the European Union (EU), NATO and our very own
ASEAN - have been playing active roles in the
peaceful settlement of disputes at the regional level.
Malaysia believes that regional organizations should
continue to play a leading role in efforts to resolve
conflicts within their regions.

We all agree that partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations involving
peacekeeping operations offer unique comparative
advantages. Apart from commanding legitimacy
and affinity in their respective regions, regional
organizations can provide useful information that
could contribute, in turn, to enhancing the overall
effectiveness of United Nations efforts in managing
conflicts, as well as in addressing the root causes
of conflicts. Some regional organizations may
demonstrate even greater flexibility in the allocation
of resources. Coupled with geographical proximity,
regional organizations can deploy assets, including
troops, more rapidly than the United Nations, which is
often crucial in saving more lives. Now the question is:
How can we further enhance the effectiveness of such
cooperation in order to maximize the benefits?

Malaysia firmly believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations should
be an ongoing and dynamic process. Given the
increasingly complex and multidimensional nature
of today's peacekeeping operations, it is vital that
policy development at the intergovernmental level be
undertaken by consensus. The policymaking process
must also be based on the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and guided by the basic
principles of peacekeeping. Malaysia reaffirms that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
is the appropriate body in charge of policymaking in
peacekeeping.

A capability-driven approach should be one of the
key strategies to address the evolving nature of present
and future peacekeeping. It should focus on developing
capability standards, as well as on comprehensive and
effective training and preparation. It is essential that
the United Nations and regional organizations use the
same peacekeeping terminology and have a common
understanding of the basic doctrine and operational
rules of engagement that could be practically applied
under various circumstances.

In addition, it is vital for peacekeeping personnel
to be provided with clear operational tasks, appropriate
guidance and training, and the necessary tools and
equipment to enable them to carry out their duties
effectively. Peacekeepers must also be constantly aware
of the cultural sensitivities and local peculiarities of
the areas where they serve. That could be achieved
through joint training workshops and awareness-raising
programmes conducted by the United Nations in troop-
contributing countries and in the respective national
peacekeeping centres.

For our part, in June 1995 we established the
Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre, which is tasked with
training and providing armed forces officers, the Royal
Malaysian Police and non-governmental organizations
with appropriate knowledge of peacekeeping prior to
assignment with the United Nations. Over the years, the
Centre has collaborated with various United Nations
agencies, including the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme, as well as with training centres of partner
countries in conducting various training programmes.
To date, the Centre has trained 1,931 local officers and
612 international participants from 52 countries.

Peacekeeping operations depend to a great extent
on both financial and personnel resources. Malaysia is
all too aware that resources in a time of great economic
challenge are scarce. The discussion of the new troop
reimbursement rate at the most recent session of the
Fifth Committee only further attested to that challenge.
It is imperative for Member States to remain committed
to supporting United Nations peacekeeping missions. In
that regard, Malaysia is of the View that both the United
Nations and the respective regional organizations must
strive to adopt a more effective approach to generate
sufficient resources for peacekeeping operations.

Another key issue that the United Nations
and regional organizations must emphasize is the
importance of effective and efficient logistical support,
which has often been stretched too thin. It is of the
utmost importance to provide logistical support at the
right time, in the right place and in the right quantity to
meet the demands on the ground. Acknowledging that
there is no single solution that will be able to satisfy
the varying needs of different missions, the United
Nations, regional organizations and other partners must
cooperate so as to enhance their logistical capabilities.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the men and women of the United Nations,
particularly those who have sacrificed their lives while
serving in peacekeeping missions. The Council may
rest assured that, for its part, Malaysia will continue to
work together with all partners and stakeholders in our
collective efforts to advance the cause of international
peace and security through the United Nations
peacekeeping agenda.

