Mr. Davies (South Africa): It is with deep regret that
we must once again begin our remarks by expressing
South Africa's condolences on this occasion to the
people of Burkina Faso, who recently suffered an attack
at a place of worship. This attack comes only weeks after
the devastating attacks in New Zealand and Sri Lanka
claimed so many innocent lives, and, of course, we also
condemn the terrible attack that took place in Egypt on
Sunday. The frequency of these barbaric, cowardly acts
of terror lends even more urgency to our joint efforts to
eradicate violent extremism and terrorism.

We thank the Chairs of the Committees that
have briefed the Security Council today for their
informative briefings and capable stewardship of these
important Committees.

While the African continent has taken significant
steps towards addressing many of the peace, security,
governance and development challenges that we face,
terrorism and violent extremism continue to present a
serious threat to ourjoint efforts to uplift the continent
and its peoples.

The two most recent bulletins ofthe African Centre
for the Study and Research of Terrorism, which is an
African Union research institution, provide alarming
statistics on the nature of terrorism in Africa. The
Centre finds that from mid-March to mid-April,
Africa suffered 140 terrorist attacks, which claimed a
staggering 841 lives.

We are also deeply concerned at reports of the
spread of Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham affiliates
throughout the African continent, as the remnants of
the self-declared caliphate seek new areas of operation
and recruitment in the wake of its territorial defeat in
Iraq and Syria. We cannot allow these groups to exploit
our peoples in spreading their poisonous, extremist and
murderous ideologies.

South Africa unequivocally condemns all acts
of terrorism, in whatever form, for whatever reason
and wherever they may occur. We firmly believe
that the fight against terrorism must be led by the
United Nations, as the most widely representative and
appropriate international structure for coordinating
action against this global challenge, which threatens
us all.

South Africa also places great emphasis on the
need to address violent extremism and terrorism
holistically, beginning with addressing the conditions
that influence vulnerable people, particularly youth,
to become radicalized and involved with terrorist
organizations. Addressing the root causes of terrorism
and violent extremism should be imperative in our fight
against this scourge.

We also urge States to refrain from the use of
unilateral coercive measures in their counter-terrorism
measures and to take all measures to protect civilians
as well as to ensure that counter-terrorism efforts
do not have a negative impact on the provision of
humanitarian aid and medical assistance in conflict
situations. All counter-terrorism measures must also
accord with international law and respect international
human rights.

We welcome the format of this joint briefing, which
fulfils one ofthe core aims ofthe United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism under the capable leadership of
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, which
is to foster a "one UN" approach in addressing these
common challenges.

South Africa fully supports this approach and
encourages the identification of complementary
mandates and aims among the complex architecture of
the United Nations that can allow us to break down silos
and merge our efforts towards greater gains. We also
welcome the continuing work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate in promoting
cooperation in the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We also value the work being done
in providing technical assistance to those States that
request it so as to facilitate Member States' compliance
with the relevant decisions of the Security Council.

South Africa remains of the view that in
implementing our counter-terrorism obligations under
the various Security Council resolutions, we should
take into account the need for a Member-State-driven
agenda. Accordingly, we recognize that it is up to
each State to contextualize the threat in accordance
with local conditions, keeping in mind also regional
and international dynamics. In countering these very
threats, it is critical that all our counter-measures be
relative to the threat being faced and that Member
States do not adopt a one-size-fits-all approach but,
rather, deal with threats on an individual basis.

Turning now to the 1540 Committee, allow me to
state that resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the
most critical instruments in preventing non-State actors
from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery. In this
sense, it is evident that there are important links between
this Committee and its resolution and the counter-
terrorism efforts of the United Nations in ensuring that
terrorist organizations never have access to the types of
materials covered by resolution 1540 (2004).

To that end, South Africa welcomes the significant
progress made towards the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we renew our commitment
to working with the other members of the Committee to
address the challenges that remain, not least in terms of
national implementation and assistance.

Furthermore, while dealing with the challenges of
weapons of mass destruction, it is imperative that no
unwarranted restrictions be imposed on the inalienable
right of Member States, particularly developing
countries, to use any related materials, equipment and
technologies for peaceful purposes. In that context,
the opportunities provided by nuclear technologies,
for example, in the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly in the areas of food
security, public-health technologies and clean energy,
cannot be overlooked.

South Africa's experience with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) has demonstrated that
financial and technical assistance is critically needed
to ensure that developing countries are able to fully
implement the resolution, especially on the continent,
where greatest attention is still devoted to issues of
poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment. We
therefore call upon Member States in a position to do
so to, upon request, offer assistance to those in need.
We must always bear in mind that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will be
realized only through the strengthening of the weakest
among us.

