Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate, which is very opportune.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.

The need for multilateralism has never been greater.
Yet, the multilateral order is under strong criticism, and
its effectiveness is increasingly being questioned, not
only by Governments but more and more by the people.
The aggravation of social and economic inequalities
has undermined public agreement with common rules
and shared principles. Multilateralism is seen as unable
to find solutions to the world's most pressing problems
and, as such, is remote from people's everyday lives.
As a consequence, multilateral institutions are often
perceived as distant, ineffective and therefore irrelevant.

Ineffectiveness and irrelevance - whether
perceived or real - can drive an ever deeper wedge
between multilateral institutions and the people they
serve. Together, those problems pose an unprecedented
challenge to the existing multilateral order. There
is clearly an issue of trust, as the Secretary-General
underlined this morning - trust of the people in what
we do here, but also trust among us. The response
should be reform and recommitment.

We must reform the way our multilateral system
works in order to make it more effective and relevant
to the lives of people across the world. We must
recommit unwaveringly to renewed multilateralism
as the only way in which the international community
can come together to find effective solutions to
common problems and global challenges that cannot
be tackled by a group of States, let alone by one State
alone. They require a common set of rules and a global
network of engagements and partnerships based on an
equal footing.

Italy firmly believes in a rule-based international
legal order. At its core, the United Nations is the
primary forum in which we, the peoples, can come
together to develop a shared normative framework.
Only a strengthened United Nations can be the pillar
of an international system that ensures peace, justice,
equality and prosperity. The ongoing reform processes
are crucial to efforts to improve the United Nations
effectiveness and its capacity to reach the goals I have
mentioned. Italy reaffirms its steadfast support for the
Secretary-General's endeavours, particularly his efforts
in conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.

We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. Each of us has a role to play, as does Italy in
its capacity as a top troop-contributing country among
the Western countries in peacekeeping missions. Italy
stands ready to do its part to make United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective and efficient.
A reformed United Nations must continue to
operate in the logic of shared responsibility among its
Member States and regional organizations. The essence
of effective multilateralism is the capacity to reach the
widest possible consensus - even on the thorniest
of issues - through genuine, inclusive and open
dialogue. The Secretary-General spoke this morning of
a network of multilateralism. Italy strongly believes in
that concept.

I wish to mention three recent examples of our
commitment to open dialogue and encouragement for a
multilateral approach.

At the end of October, we hosted in Rome, for the
second time, the Italy-Africa Ministerial Conference.
One of the main outcomes of the Conference was our
renewed commitment to a strategic engagement and
an all-encompassing partnership with Africa in the
context of a strengthened multilateral cooperation
framework that includes regional organizations, such
as the African Union and the European Union, as well
as the United Nations, of course.

Next Monday and Tuesday, Italy will host in Palermo
an international conference on Libya, in which all of the
relevant stakeholders will come together with Libyan
representatives in order to renew the international
community's full support for United Nations leadership
in the political process. The conference in Palermo is
an event for Libya and with Libya.

At the end of this month, we will host in Rome, for
the fourth time, the Mediterranean Dialogues, which
will consist of three days of high-level discussions
on all of the political, economic, scientific, cultural
and people-to-people issues of shared interest in the
Mediterranean region, with the aim of strengthening
multilateral cooperation in such a crucial area for peace
and stability in the world.

The Council has a crucial role and a responsibility
in strengthening multilateralism. The Council
also needs reforms to become truly representative,
accountable, democratic, transparent and effective. It
is high time to give a concrete chance to all Member
States to sit on the Security Council, particularly to
those groups of States and regions of the world that are
nowadays underrepresented. To achieve that result, we
must redouble our efforts to find a consensual solution
that can garner the widest possible political acceptance.
The key concept here is not to enlarge the small circle
of the privileged, but to give everyone more chances
to contribute to finding solutions to maintain peace
and security.

Finally, let me conclude by calling on us, the
diplomats - the actors of multilateralism, the women
and men behind the scene - to be even more committed
to dialogue and to understanding the other's point of
view, and in the end, to recommit very strongly to
diplomacy itself.

