Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
Kazakhstan, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and
commend you, sir, for convening today's open debate,
which affords us an opportunity to weigh in on recent
developments in the Middle East. My appreciation
also goes to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
insightful remarks.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
in Palestine. In that regard, it is pertinent for all parties
to make genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful
solutions and cooperate closely with the United Nations
and its agencies in order to achieve the shared objective
of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law.

As the international community continues to seek
avenues to advance the peaceful resolution of the
Palestinian question, efforts must remain focused on
paving the way for Israel and Palestine to return to
meaningful negotiations. We therefore highlight the
cogency of multilateral diplomacy and reiterate that
there is no substitute to an agreed multilateral approach
in addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conundrum in a
sustainable manner.

Nigeria believes that achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine
is imperative for the attainment of durable peace and
stability in the Middle East. It is for that reason that
we acknowledge the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution ES-10/19, on the status of Jerusalem, on
21 December 2017, and once again, call on all parties to
respect the relevant United Nations resolutions on the
Israeli-Palestinian issue.

It must be stated that recent developments must
not obscure the underlying problem in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. We encourage Israel to take
concrete measures to freeze all settlement-related
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. On
their part, Palestinian leaders must also signal their
readiness to return to the negotiating table by, inter
alia, making enhanced efforts to forge unity and deal
with militancy and other internal security challenges.
It is beyond doubt that violence and unilateral actions
will not resolve the long drawn-out conflict.

In conclusion, Nigeria calls on all States with
influence over the parties concerned to encourage them
to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other
existing agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering
support for a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine existing side-by-side in peace and tranquillity.

