Mr. Quinlan (Australia): On behalf of the Chairs
of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, I have
the honour to brief the Council on the continuing
cooperation among those three Committees and their
respective expert groups.

On 18 November, the Chairs of the three Committees
joined the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, resolution
1737 (2006), which concerns the Islamic Republic of
Iran, and resolution 1988 (2011), which concerns the
Taliban, and the President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) in an open briefing for Member
States on the respective roles of the Security Council
and the FATF in combating the financing of terrorism
and proliferation. It was the first such meeting and
aimed to increase awareness among Member States
of the measures imposed by the Council, the related
recommendations and guidance developed by the
FATF and the assistance that the Council's sanctions
committees and their expert groups and the FATF can
provide to Member States.

Further to that open briefing, the three Committees,
through their panels of experts, have continued
their practice of sharing relevant information and
of meeting, where appropriate, in order to discuss
common issues and to coordinate actions and exchange
points of view on particular issues. The three panels
of experts participate actively in the activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
have continued their close cooperation on issues, in
particular, related to combating money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism and proliferation,

All three panels of experts coordinate their
outreach activities and country visits on a regular
basis. Where appropriate, they consult each other when
planning country visits or similar trips so as to allow
the participation of the experts of the other groups
in a particular visit or to enable the other groups to
communicate the specific needs for information of
the countries to be visited. The three panels of experts
continue to explore the further strengthening of the
current coordination and cooperation.

Allow me now to turn to my statement on behalf
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. A major lesson learned from
2012-13 is that Al-Qaida and its affiliates have already
evolved in several regions. The threat is no longer
anchored primarily in a global Al-Qaida organization but
revolves around a range of increasingly heterogeneous
franchises that are themselves continually evolving
with the recruitment of younger fighters and increased
mobility across borders. Al-Qaida has effectively
adapted to local conflicts and mobilized local affiliates
that, despite their differences, support the broader
Al-Qaida ideology.

Some States that have not yet been the victims
of terrorism face many of the same risk factors as
countries that have. As the 1267 Monitoring Team
found in its fourteenth report (S/2013/467), terrorist
propaganda on the Internet continues to grow in
sophistication and reach and contributes to the problem
of self-radicalization. That, in turn, inspires acts of
expressive terrorist violence committed by individuals
or small groups, such as the recent attacks in Boston,
London and Paris. Asymmetric tactics and complex
and simultaneous multipronged attacks used by small
but highly mobile Al-Qaida units draw strength from
a close understanding of regional weaknesses, such as
long and porous borders.

In today's briefing, I will focus on three principal
areas of work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, as
it continues to monitor the implementation of resolution
2083 (2012).

Those areas are, first, effectively addressing the
evolving threat to international peace and security
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates, with a particular
focus on the work of the Committee to address recent
threats to peace, stability and security in Mali and
the Sahel region, including through engagement with
the States in the region; secondly, ensuring that the
regime's application remains relevant and effective;
and, thirdly, ensuring that the sanctions regime has fair
and clear procedures.

A more detailed version of this statement will be
distributed in hard copy today and made available on
the Committee's website

With regard to the evolving threat, in its fourteenth
report, the Monitoring Team highlighted the Sahel
and the Middle East as the two most visible arenas
for Al-Qaida affiliate activity during 2013. That is
reflected in the Committee's activities for that period.

In May, I reported that the Committee had
held a special meeting on 9 April on threats to Mali
stemming from the activities of Al-Qaida affiliates in
the region, including Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM), the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa (MUJAO) and Ansar Eddine (see S/PV.6964),
That meeting highlighted the need for the continued
monitoring of the role of the Al-Qaida affiliates in Mali
and the Sahel, with a more central role for capacity-
building efforts in the area of counter-terrorism. That
followed the Committee's action earlier in the year to
list Ansar Eddine and its founder and leader, Iyad ag
Ghali, as well as the leadership of the already listed
MUJAO and AQIM, Hamada Ould Mohamed El Khairy
and Abderrahmane Ould El Amar, respectively.

Although the French-led Operation Serval
dislodged AQIM, Ansar Eddine and MUJAO from the
main towns in northern Mali, restoring governmental
authority and significantly degrading those groups,
pockets of resistance remain and the risk of attacks by
Al-Qaida affiliates across the Sahel persists. Operation
Serval also demonstrated the high level of the training
and equipment of terrorist groups in the region and
the close link between organized crime and terrorism,
highlighting the need to strengthen regional and
subregional cooperation, both within and between the
Maghreb and the Sahel.

Similarly, the Monitoring Team's fourteenth report
also describes operational contacts between terrorist
entities in eastern Libya and Al-Qaida affiliates in the
Sahel, the Maghreb, the Middle East and South Asia
and the presence of training camps in Libya, to which
many foreign fighters travel before heading elsewhere
to fight. The Committee has responded through the
listing of Muhammad Jamal Abd-Al Rahim Ahmad
Al-Kashif and his Muhammad Jamal Network, which
is responsible for establishing terrorist training camps
in Egypt and Libya and was reportedly involved in the
attack on the United States Mission in Benghazi. Libya,
on 11 September 2012.

In response to those ongoing and evolving threats,
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has invited Member
States of the Sahel and Maghreb regions to a special
meeting to discuss the threat posed by Al-Qaida and
its affiliates to consider ways in which the sanctions
regime could support affected States and to discuss how
best such measures may be integrated into the national
and regional responses to the Al-Qaida threat.

This special meeting represents an important
innovation in Committee engagement with States of
regions on the front lines. If the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime is to constitute a useful tool in efforts to counter
the destabilising activities of Al-Qaida affiliates in
these regions, it must be placed in the hands of affected
countries and regional groups. This will ensure that the
sanctions list accurately reflects the dynamic nature
of the threat and will enhance the implementation of
measures on the ground.

Meanwhile, the continuing civil war in the Syrian
Arab Republic has seen the emergence of a strong
Al-Qaida presence, drawing from Al-Qaida in Iraq
under the name J abhat al-Nusra and attracting hundreds
of recruits from outside the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Committee has responded through the listing in May of
Jabhat al-Nusrah as an alias of Al-Qaida in Iraq, as well
as its leader Abu Mohammed Al-Jawlani in July.

On the third point of ensuring the regime's
application remains relevant and effective, the
Committee has also continued in its efforts ensure
that the regime's application remains relevant and
effective. It has recently concluded its consideration
of the recommendations contained in the fourteenth
report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team. In its report, the Team made
19 recommendations, primarily focused on advancing a
more effective, evidence-based United Nations targeted
sanctions regime and improving the implementation
and effectiveness of the Sanctions measures.

Notably, based on the Team's recommendation, the
Committee has requested the Team to provide an annual
confidential briefing to the Committee of how the list
reflects the current threat picture, in recognition that
the sanctions will have most impact if the individuals
and entities targeted by the regime are those currently
involved in influential roles in or supporting Al-Qaida
and its affiliates. In addition, so as to preserve the
element of surprise with new listings and prevent
asset flight, the Committee encourages Member
States to make every effort to reduce delays between
the Committee's notification of new listings and the
domestic implementation of the measures. Finally, the
Committee has asked the Team to engage with Member
States to better understand the impediments to full
compliance with the measures and to present their
findings to the Committee.

The Committee has continued to review the entries
on the Al-Qaida sanctions list, focusing particular
attention on entries that lack identifiers necessary to
ensure the effective implementation of the sanctions
measures, entries corresponding to reportedly deceased
individuals and to entities that are reported or confirmed
to have ceased to exist, and entries that have not been
reviewed in three or more years. The responsiveness
of Member States remains crucial to the successful
implementation of these reviews, and I want to thank
those Member States that have actively participated
in these review processes by providing detailed and
updated information. The Committee has bolstered the
way that it interacts with Member States in the context
of these reviews, aiming to encourage greater and
more precise information-sharing on listed individuals
and entities, and to increase the attentiveness of the
Committee to Member States' views and concerns.

Since the last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6964), the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
has continued to operationalise the procedural
enhancements of resolution 2083 (2012), supporting the
Committee's mandate to clearly and effectively respond
to the threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. In
November, the Committee considered a request from
a listed individual for an exemption to the travel ban.
This request was the first of its kind to be received
through the focal point mechanism established in
resolution 1730 (2006). The Security Council expanded
the mandate of the focal point to receive exemption
requests in paragraph 8 of resolution 2083 (2012), and
this development affords listed individuals and entities
broader access to Committee procedures.

In 2013, several listed individuals were informed
of the identity of the State that suggested their name
for designation. This disclosure was streamlined
last year in paragraph 12 of resolution 2083 (2012),
which reverses the presumption that a State proposing
an individual or entity for listing wishes to have its
status as a designating State kept confidential. This
development, together with the provision of reasons
for the Committee's decision in Ombudsperson cases,
means that listed individuals and entities are afforded
greater scope to understand their designation.

The Office of the Ombudsperson continues to play
an integral role in guaranteeing that the Committee's
procedures are clear and the list dynamically reflects
the current threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
The Office of the Ombudsperson has a significant,
ever-increasing caseload. Since the last briefing to the
Council in May, the Committee has de-listed five names
following its consideration of reports submitted by the
Ombudsperson. There are currently 15 open petitions
received through the Office of the Ombudsperson at
various stages of consideration.

Going forward, the Committee will continue to
pay heed to due process principles in the context of the
Security Council so as to ensure that its procedures
are clear and that the regime adheres to fundamental
principles of fairness.

In the past six months, the Committee has remained
actively engaged on the situation in Mali, the Sahel,
the Maghreb and the Middle East, given the common
threat from Al-Qaida affiliates in these regions. The
second special meeting of the Committee will stress the
complementarity between the United Nations broader
Sahel strategy and the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
measures, particularly on the issues of countering
terrorism and creating a security environment
conducive to economic and social development.

Ensuring that the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
remains an effective tool to address the continued
threat from Al-Qaida and its affiliates is a shared
undertaking, in which the participation of all Member
States is crucial. Member States on the front lines are
in a unique position to assess the nature ofthe Al-Qaida
threat in their regions, as well as the main challenges to
implementation of the measures, and they are therefore
strongly encouraged to share their views with the
Committee.

