Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, I take pleasure in conveying to you at the
outset my congratulations on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
May. I am sure that, under your presidency, and with
your long experience as a diplomat, the Council will be
able to discharge its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I should also like to
thank most sincerely Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech
Republic for discharging his responsibility as President of
the Security Council last month with such great wisdom.

Only a few years ago the achievement of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East was but a distant dream.
Today, after the historic reconciliation between Palestine
and Israel, that dream has come closer to realization.
However, in order for it to come true all parties must
honour their international commitments.

No one can doubt that the steps taken by Israel to
expropriate occupied Arab territories in Jerusalem for the
purpose of establishing settlements are a flagrant violation
of international law, of Security Council resolutions and
of commitments undertaken by the Israeli Government
itself. These steps give rise to serious doubts about
Israel's intentions and its credibility. Moreover, they
threaten the peace process because they cut the ground
from under those who believe in negotiation as the way
to achieve a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, while
also lending strength to the proponents of extremism,
violence and terrorism on both sides.

Consequently, the Security Council must consider
these measures a source of destabilization in the region
and a threat to international peace and security. We are
certain that the Council will be able to consider all
aspects of this issue, taking into account its long-term
repercussions, which might lead to the triumph of the
logic of violence and confrontation over the logic of
peace and cooperation.

On more than one occasion the international
community has vigorously opposed the various illegal
Israeli attempts to annex East Jerusalem by altering its

 

legal status or its geographic and demographic character.
All these actions run counter to international law, especially
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

Ever since the very first steps taken by Israel to annex
the city of Jerusalem, the General Assembly and the
Security Council have adopted various resolutions
condemning the Israeli actions and decisions, pronouncing
them null and void and without any effect on the legal
status of the city, an integral part of the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967.

The Security Council adopted numerous resolutions on
the subject, including resolution 252 (1968), 271 (1969),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 672 (1990), all of which
demand that Israel, as the occupying Power, fulfil its
commitments under international law and the provisions of
the Geneva Convention and ask that it refrain from altering
the character of the occupied territories, including
Jerusalem.

The two parties, Palestinian and Israeli, reached a
historic reconciliation with the signing of the Declaration of
Principles, on 13 September 1993. The two parties agreed
on specific measures to settle their differences. The
reconciliation is based on the principle of land for peace,
Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories - pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) - and an arrangement based on the legitimate
political rights of the Palestinian people and security
measures in the region.

In spite of Israeli procrastination, the delay in the
implementation of the agreement and the impediments
Israel puts in the way of the withdrawal of its armed forces
from the West Bank, we still cling to the hope that the
logic of peace and reconciliation will prevail over
expansionist ambitions, that the Declaration of Principles
will be implemented on schedule and in good faith and that
the final negotiations will proceed in order to lay the
foundation of Palestinian political independence and lasting
peace between the two parties.

The parties have also agreed, under the terms of the
Declaration of Principles, to study certain issues when final
negotiations for a settlement resume. In these
circumstances, we wonder how Israel can honour its
commitments under the Declaration of Principles when it is
adopting measures designed to change the status of
Jerusalem. Can this agreement be used as a pretence, as
some are wont to say, so that the international community
will change its decisions regarding the inadmissibility of
Israeli measures to change the legal status of East
Jerusalem or the expropriation of territories? The
Declaration of Principles requires that the two parties not
change in any way whatsoever Jerusalem's legal status.

On 6 February - more than three months ago -
the Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs met with the
Ambassadors of the States members of the Security
Council and those of other States. On that occasion he
plainly enunciated Israel's commitment to implement the
Declaration of Principles. He said clearly that Israel
would not seize Arab territories in East Jerusalem. Which
language are we to believe - the language of assurances
and commitments or the language of expansionist
measures depriving people of their rights?

The international community, through the Security
Council, must today, more than before, reaffirm the
position it has always held: that the Israeli measures
intended to alter the status of Arab Jerusalem are
inadmissible. If the Council were to remain inactive, its
credibility would be undermined.

The States that want the peace process to succeed -
especially the United States, as a co-sponsor of the peace
process - should shoulder their responsibility and
convince Israel that it should reverse its unlawful decision
to expropriate Arab land in East Jerusalem. In this regard,
I would like to point out that resolution 478 (1980)
clearly reaffirms that Israel has no right to annex
Jerusalem and urges all States not to send diplomatic
delegations to Jerusalem. Respect for this resolution and
other relevant resolutions of the Security Council is not
only a principle of international law and of the United
Nations Charter, but is also a requirement for the
continuation of the peace process. It is certain that any
violation of these resolutions could hinder the peace
process, whose success so many countries, particularly
Egypt, have striven to assure.
The Ministerial Conference of the League of Arab
States, which met in emergency session on 6 May,
decided to demand, based on international law and on the
Security Council resolutions that I have mentioned, that
the Security Council declare the Israeli action illegal and
that Israel must rescind its decision to expropriate Arab
territories in Jerusalem and in other areas so as to put an
end to Israel's annexationist programmes and plans, the
encirclement of the city and the diggings that are
endangering the foundations of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

 

The Conference also decided to urge the Council to
reaffirm the need for security measures to be taken to
protect the Palestinian Arab territories, while still granting
Jerusalem its special status.

The eyes of all the Islamic and Arab peoples and of
all peace-loving peoples are turned on this Council in the
expectation of decisive action to put an end to the illegal
Israeli measures and practices that are destroying their
aspirations for a just and lasting peace to prevail in the
region, on the basis of negotiation rather than confrontation
and the use of force.

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt has stated that
Israel's decision violated all those principles, raised doubts
about the peace process and offended the religious feelings
of Christians and Muslims alike. On several occasions,
Egypt has warned against the misdeeds of failing to respect
the aspirations of the Arab and Islamic peoples and of
permitting Israel to continue its expansionist policy.

The Security Council, in awareness of its
responsibilities, will doubtless act today to avoid the danger
of hardening the positions of the extremists, heightening the
risk of confrontation and weakening those on the side of
moderation.

