Mr. Leite Magalhaes (Timor-Leste): I warmly
salute the Security Council on behalf of my Government
and all my compatriots. I also extend sincere gratitude
to Peru, the President of the Security Council, for the
invitation extended to me to address this body, with
which my country's history is forever intertwined.

For Timor-Leste, this discussion is timely as we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of a United
Nations-administered popular consultation mandated
by the Council through a special political mission,
the United Nations Mission in East Timor, which
enabled us to exercise self-determination. Following
our independence vote, the Council mandated the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). UNTAET
was followed by successive missions over a 10-year
period, which ended in 2012 with the establishment of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). It is therefore an honour for me to speak
from the perspective of a host country and share with
Council members some reflections on the importance
of partnerships and nationally owned transitions for
successful peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

Drawing from my country's partnership with
the United Nations, I will start by pointing out first
the importance of leadership and ownership. No
ownership of the transition processes, and hence no
successful inclusion of the people, are possible without
the full involvement of the national leaders. Regular,
extensive and meaningful consultations with national
Governments and local leaders throughout the life
of a mission, and more intensely as a mission winds
down, are paramount to ensuring ownership. National
Governments must be given the space to determine
the lifespan of the mission and the exit strategy for its
withdrawal. In a letter to the Secretary-General, dated
20 September 2012, our former Prime Minister, Xanana
Gusmao, underlined the nature of the relationship
during the transition as follows.

"The Government of Timor-Leste, in
consultation with UNMIT and with other relevant
stakeholders, is responsible for making decisions on
the nature, activities and role of the United Nations
after the withdrawal of UNMIT." (S/2012/736, annex, p. 2)

In our case, a high-level committee was created,
with representatives of the State of Timor-Leste and
UNMIT, to draft a joint transition plan to monitor the
finalization of UNMIT activities, including the hand-
over process. Continued stability, the holding offree and
fair elections, the formation of a national Government
based on those elections, ensuring democratic space
for the opposition, as well as progress in other areas
identified in the transition process, such as police and
security, the rule of law, justice and human rights,
democratic governance and the elements of economic
development, requiring the specific assistance of the
Mission, were part of the joint transition plan. Once
those elements were deemed to have been met, our
national leaders decided that continued assistance was
best done through the United Nations country team,
bilateral and other multilateral partners, rather than a
peacekeeping or political mission.

The Timorese leadership also proposed an
innovative working relationship of cooperation in
the form of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
who would focus on institutional strengthening and
development based on Timor-Leste's own strategic
development plan and would also be a direct link to the
Office of the Secretary-General.

A subsequent Security Council mission, undertaken
in November 2012, verified the tangible progress
in multiple areas, as well as a number of milestones
reached, which reflected further consolidation towards
sustainable peace, democratic governance, the rule
of law and socioeconomic development during the
transition. The mission's report (S/2012/889) also
confirmed the consensual position of Timorese
interlocutors, who requested the end of the United
Nations mission and articulated their vision for the next
stages of development, and presented the proposal for
the appointment of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General.

At the conclusion of UNMIT, local ownership,
leadership and consistent dialogue had become a set of
principles that contributed to the success ofthe Mission
and its sustained withdrawal.
I wish to also underline that financing for the
development aspects of the transition and the post-
Mission exit phase is crucial to sustaining peace. Official
development assistance needs to be well coordinated in
order to be efficient and effective in supporting the exit
plan. The deployment of advisers should be oriented to
those strategic needs in a focused manner.

To conclude, although we do hope that our
experience can be useful as the Council considers
the upcoming downsizing and withdrawal of some
peacekeeping and political missions, such as the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, we all know from experience that one
size really does not fit all and that there is no quick fix.

The right balance needs to be found, together
with the leadership of each of those countries, for an
integrated exit strategy that has the support of the Peace
Building Commission and the continued engagement
of the international and regional financial institutions,
the United Nations regional commissions, the United
Nations country teams and other relevant parts of the
United Nations system to sustain the hard-earned peace.

The meeting rose at 5.40 pm.
