Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa, Mr. Fall, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (S/2017/465). My delegation
would like to make the following observations and
recommendations.

First, Kazakhstan welcomes all ongoing political
and electoral processes in the countries of the Central
African region and believes that they should be held in
a strictly peaceful and legal manner in order to avoid a
deterioration of the political and security situation.

Secondly, the degradation of the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation is another worrisome
aspect that can lead to an outbreak of violence. Long-
term stability and sustainable peace can be achieved
only by strengthening the security/development nexus,
which is a bedrock of stabilization, reconciliation and
development in the region. It is therefore critically
important today to focus on the root causes of conflicts
in the region and address them using the full potential
of the United Nations and international organizations,
including the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of Central African States, Member States
and other stakeholders. It is our strong belief that all
United Nations agencies in the region must elaborate
a common strategy to deliver as one, and all donors to
the international conferences held in Oslo and Brussels
should fulfil their obligations in full and as soon
as possible.

Thirdly, we commend the success of all the States
of the region in their fight against armed groups in
the Central African subregion, especially the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and Boko Haram. Kazakhstan
fully supports the work of the African Union, which
is aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the fight against
Boko Haram. That terrorist organization is not a threat
only to the Lake Chad basin area, but to the African
continent, as a whole.

Fourthly, the LRA remains a significant threat to
the civilian population in affected areas. The AU-Ied
Regional Task Force did a great job. But, in order to
avoid a security gap after the Withdrawal of Ugandan
and South Sudanese forces, we now needto consider how
the international community can strengthen the Central
African Armed Forces. We support the proposal by
Uganda, the Sudan and South Sudan to train the Central
African Armed Forces to take over the responsibilities
of the Regional Task Force. Kazakhstan welcomes
the decision taken by the African Union to extend its
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the LRA mandate for another 12 months, until 27 May
2018, taking into consideration the need to review the
concept of operations and coordination mechanism for
cross-border operations.

