Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on presiding over today's meeting and to
congratulate your delegation on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I should
like to thank your delegation for taking this timely
initiative to consider issues of post-conflict
peacebuilding in an open debate of the Council with
the participation of the larger membership of the
United Nations.

My delegation has taken note with keen interest
of the statements of the Deputy Secretary-General and
the President of the World Bank.

My delegation extends its sincere appreciation to
Denmark for the non-paper on post-conflict peacebuilding
(S/2OOS/3l6, annex), which provides a sound basis for
today's discussion. We are particularly impressed by the
comprehensive and thought-provoking approach in the
non-paper highlighting very important and relevant
questions related to current policy, institutional and
financial challenges in post-conflict peacebuilding.

My delegation fully subscribes to the view that
the United Nations should play a key role in post-
conflict peacebuilding in order to prevent the
resurgence of conflict, help countries put back in place
the foundations of normal life, and move societies
towards sustainable peace. That normally involves a
multifaceted process and a multidimensional mandate
covering a full range of issues and activities.

Clearly, there are major policy, institutional and
financial challenges that need to be addressed. That
would require policy coherence and better coordination
involving the United Nations, the parties emerging
from conflict, local stakeholders, international
institutions, donors and other actors. It is important to
ensure that there exists an adequate and conducive
enabling and supporting environment. In that regard,
we welcome the consideration of possible regional
approaches to meeting the challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Malaysia concurs with the View that each post-
conflict situation generates its own unique set of
circumstances. There is no single peacebuilding model
that can fit all situations. The United Nations has to tailor
its activities to specific situations on a case-by-case basis.
We agree with the View that ways must be found to ensure
greater ownership and capacity among local actors to
ensure a more acceptable, implementable and sustainable
post-conflict peacebuilding programme.

In that regard, due attention must be given to
local norms and values, cultural and religious traditions
and capacity to respond. By now, the United Nations
and the international community have had sufficient
experience to put together best practices from past
situations to deal with future challenges. We would
support consideration of establishing a civilian rapid
deployment mechanism consisting of judges,
administrators, police and election observers on a
stand-by basis for United Nations missions.

Malaysia is fully cognizant of the need for a
comprehensive strategy in promoting peacebuilding
efforts. Currently, however, there is no clear
institutional mechanism for the formulation of such a
comprehensive strategy. We think that the ongoing
deliberations in the General Assembly on the possible
modalities of a Peacebuilding Commission and other
reform proposals can help clarify and redress the
institutional deficit.

Malaysia welcomes and supports the establishment
of a Peacebuilding Commission. However, I wish to
reiterate our view that, without any prejudice to the
competence and roles of the other principal organs of the
United Nations in post-conflict peacebuilding activities,
the General Assembly must also have the key role in the
formulation of post-conflict peacebuilding activities. The
implementation of post-conflict peacebuilding activities
requires full consultation with and the consent of the
parties concerned and should be based on the principles
of international law and the United Nations Charter.

