Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your friendly
country on your presidency of the Council this month.

We also thank you for convening this important
debate, as well as for the concept note on this topic
(S/2019/169, annex) and your valuable briefing this
morning. And I want to convey the apologies of Mr. Al
Dirdiri Mohamed Ahmed Al Dikhairi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, whose commitments
prevented him from attending today's important debate.
We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High Representative of the
African Union for Silencing the Guns in Africa; and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their valuable briefings this morning.

On 1 July 2017, the African Union Peace and
Security Council announced its African Union Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 on the ground. In that regard, we want
to express our full support for all the efforts of African
States to find African solutions to African problems.
That motto is evident in a number of African initiatives
and we would like to cite some of the most important
efforts that the Sudan has undertaken to achieve that
pivotal objective.

First, we made significant diplomatic efforts within
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
initiative for peace in South Sudan, which culminated
in the signing of the Khartoum declaration on 23 June
2018, followed by further progress in the form of the
signing in September 2018 of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.

Second, the Sudan has been contributing major
efforts in the context of the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, as a
result ofwhich an agreement on peace and reconciliation
was initialled in Khartoum on 5 February and was
finally signed in Bangui the following day.

Third, at the domestic level, an extended ceasefire
has continued throughout the Sudan with a view to
establishing an environment conducive to ensuring
continued political negotiations, the protection of
civilians and unobstructed humanitarian action.

Fourth, the Sudan approved all the proposals
presented by regional and international partners for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to areas under
the control of insurgent groups, which rejected all
these initiatives.

Fifth, the national weapons collection campaign in
Darfur has been a great success in helping to stabilize
the security situation, ensure the protection of civilians
and normalize economic and social life.

Sixth, the Sudan has welcomed its brothers
and sisters fleeing armed conflicts in neighbouring
countries and in the Middle East, and is currently
hosting more than 2 million foreign refugees.

Seventh, we signed a tripartite convention to
deliver humanitarian assistance to populations affected
by the conflict in South Sudan, an endeavour that
began through the Sudan's territories in July 2014 in
cooperation with the World Food Programme and the
Government of our sister Republic of South Sudan.

With regard to enabling the initiative of Silencing
the Guns by 2020 to achieve the best possible results,
we want to highlight a number of important points.
First, we emphasize the close links between peace and
development. One is impossible without the other. In
that regard, my delegation calls on the international
community to strengthen its support for post-
conflict objectives, the most important of which are
the resettlement of displaced persons and refugees,
the restoration of infrastructure, demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, the strengthening of
national reconciliation and the social fabric, and the
provision ofjob opportunities for young people.

Secondly, it will be vital to strengthen coordination
and the exchange of information between the African
Union Commission and the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the one hand, and the United
Nations Secretariat and the Security Council on the
other, while enhancing coherence and integration
between the work of the two organizations, as well as
avoiding any conflict of effort between them, such as
occurred during the peace process in 2018 in South
Sudan between the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the African Union on one side, and
the Security Council on the other. A similar situation
developed in Libya in 2011 between the African Union
and certain members of the Security Council.

Thirdly, appropriate and sustained financing for
the peacekeeping operations of the African Union
must be provided through the United Nations, and the
obstacles that prevented consensus on a draft resolution
presented by the three African members of the Security
Council in December 2018 must be removed. We
must also take into consideration the fact that African
operations actually represent a significant investment
in international peace and security, one of the main
objectives of the United Nations.

Fourthly, we must work to effectively address
the root causes of conflicts and security threats in
Africa, foremost among them lack of development,
the discrepancies between development levels in
various parts of the continent, the impact of drought,
desertification and climate change, poverty and weak
State institutions in some of the African States.

Fifthly, the international community, as represented
by States, regional and international organizations,
should strengthen its contribution in terms of national
capacity-building in African countries in the areas
of conflict prevention, mediation, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that all regional
and international partners can intensify their efforts
so that together we can achieve the grand objective of
silencing the guns on the African continent.

