The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Australia, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire,
Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, Gambia, India, Japan,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Mali, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zambia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions ofthe Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola),
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Saleh (Bahrain),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Adechi
(Benin), Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi), Mrs. Chassou
(Costa Rica), Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Dangue
Re'waka (Gabon), Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia),
Mr. Gopinathan (India), Mr. Motomura (Japan),
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Lamba
(Malawi), Mr. Ouane (Mali), Mr. Bennouna
(Morocco), Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Sharma (Nepal), Mr. Apata (Nigeria),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea), Mr. Gasana (Rwanda), Mr. Fall
(Senegal), Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hashi
(Somalia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias
(Spain), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia), Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine), Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Musambachime (Zambia) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Jagdish Koonjul,
Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

It is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Koonjul to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 May 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"On behalf of the Organization of African
Unity, I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation to
Ambassador Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer
of the Organization of African Unity to the
United Nations, to address the Council under rule
39 ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure
during the Council's consideration of the item
entitled 'The situation in Africa - Ad hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and

7"

Resolution in Africa .

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/554.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Amadou Kebe'.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Amadou Ke'be to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Simonovic', President of the Economic and
Social Council.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Simonovie to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I am very pleased to welcome everyone to this
open meeting to discuss the ad hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. On
behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a warm
welcome to Mr. Ivan Simonovic', President of the
Economic and Social Council; Mr. Amadou Ke'be,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of African
Unity; and Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Ibrahima Fall.

Permit me to make a few introductory comments
concerning our meeting today.

The ad hoc Working Group was established at the
end of February following an open debate on Africa
under the Security Council presidency of Mauritius in
January. It has since met on three occasions under the
able chairmanship of Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul,
Permanent Representative of Mauritius.

The background, purpose and format of this
meeting have been fully explained in the joint letter of
13 May 2002 from the Permanent Representatives of
Singapore and Mauritius. This letter has been sent to
all permanent missions and permanent observer
missions to the United Nations.

In brief, today's meeting on the work of the
Group is envisaged as an "outreach" session. The Chair
of the Group will explain its role, function and
programme of work. More importantly, today's
meeting will give the wider membership an opportunity
to provide its input and feedback on the work of the
group. In this regard, while taking all views into
account, we would like especially to ensure that the
concerns and preoccupations of the continent are taken
into consideration in the future work of the Group.
Hence, the Security Council will be in active listening
mode today. Council members will be reacting in an
informal way, where appropriate, to the statements
made by non-Council members. In this way, I hope that
we will have a truly frank and interactive discussion.

At the end ofthe meeting, I intend, under my own
responsibility, to sum up the discussion by drawing
oral conclusions that can be fed into the future work of
the Group.

Finally, we see this meeting as a substantial
follow-up to the Council presidency of Mauritius in
January, during which the concept of the Group was
first proposed to give sharper focus to African issues
considered by the Council and as a stepping stone to
our future discussions on this matter.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
the Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on Africa,
Mr. Jagdish Koonjul.


