Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Allow me, on behalf of
the Nigerian delegation, to congratulate the Republic
of Togo on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and for discharging the responsibilities wisely.
Let me convey our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely discussion on the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. I thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing,
which has set the stage for today's discussion.
The activity of criminal networks is an
international problem that transcends borders and
undermines our collective security and economic well-
being. In West Africa, organized crime negatively
impacts on efforts to achieve economic security and
political stability. Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is
persistently hampering maritime navigation, with dire

consequences for the economies of the subregion. It
also threatens the stability and security of coastal
countries and beyond.

Drug trafficking in the subregion has led directly
to increased violent crimes, small arms proliferation,
human trafficking, money laundering, and political and
economic instability. The fallout of the Libyan conflict
by fuelling illicit trafficking networks and arms flows
and an upsurge in terrorist attacks and other forms of
destabilization in the Sahel has made the threats in
West Africa and the Sahel more acute and deserving of
critical attention by the Security Council and the
international community.

Countries in the Sahel region are also contending
with the influx of hundreds of thousands of
traumatized and impoverished returnees. Indeed,
organized crime is a growing threat that is destabilizing
an already tenuous region that is still grappling with
challenges of security and development, such as weak
governance structures, high youth unemployment,
poverty and a lack of effective security.

Security Council resolution 2017 (2011), which
drew attention to the risk of destabilization posed by
the dissemination of illicit small arms and light
weapons in the Sahel region, was an important first
step in the effort to address the challenges of organized
crime in the region. But more can be done. That is why
we welcome the assessment missions to the Gulf of
Guinea and the Sahel. We hope that their findings and
recommendations will provide impetus for further
addressing the challenges in the region in a
comprehensive manner.

Undoubtedly, the countries of West Africa and the
Sahel region have demonstrated a strong political will
to confront the threats of organized crime. The joint
strategy developed by Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and
Niger to counter terrorism needs to be fully supported.
The prospect of expanding the scope of cooperation to
Mali and Nigeria in the implementation of the strategy
is a move in the right direction. The establishment of a
regional judicial platform by countries of the Sahel has
indeed institutionalized judicial cooperation in the
region. It has paved the way for the harmonization of
laws that have proved invaluable in prosecuting
transnational criminals.

However, fighting transnational organized crime
is not a task that can be undertaken in isolation. It
requires close collaboration and coordination at the
bilateral, subregional, regional and global levels. It
also requires partnerships, initiatives and strategies to
effectively address this menace. The expanding
scourge of drug trafficking demands heightened
vigilance and the firm commitment of the international
community, based on universal adherence to the
international conventions related to the fight against
drug trafficking. It also demands effective cooperation
and more active coordination of efforts. That approach
obliges the international community to always take into
account the larger question of drug-supply and drug-
demand control channels, as they are invariably
interrelated.

In West Africa, there have been several initiatives
in addressing the growing menace of piracy. Benin and
Nigeria commenced a six-month joint patrol
programme along the coast of Guinea on 28 September
2011. The programme, which is being conducted under
Nigeria's strategic command and Benin's operational
command, draws 95 per cent of its logistic support
from Nigeria, including in particular two helicopters,
two maritime vessels and two interceptor boats. The
collaboration has recorded some success but still faces
major constraints, including the absence of logistical
support facilities for vessels being used to conduct
patrols.

International assistance would be vital in
ensuring the sustainability of this productive
enterprise. The Economic Community of West African
States plan of action to address illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse is a relevant tool to
tackle the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, but its implementation has been limited to
West Africa. New initiatives should be taken to
broaden its capacity and widen its scope for more far-
reaching implementation.

Indeed, a multifaceted approach at the national,
regional and global levels in the wider context of
poverty eradication and human development is
required. Criminal justice and law enforcement
responses must be supported by programmes that
address root causes of crime and the eradication of
poverty. In that regard, the United Nations system as a
whole should recommit itself to the goal of assisting
the subregion to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals by the target date of 2015.

We cannot overstate the need for cooperation,
coordination and committed and concerted action by
the international community. We already have the legal
instruments and tools to make crime unattractive and
unprofitable. What we need most at this time is to
mobilize the oversight, international political will and
our resources to win the war against organized
transnational criminals.

