Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): Let me commence
by extending our congratulatory remarks and
appreciation to the Polish presidency for the excellent
work undertaken by your delegation, Madam President,
during the period of your term.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We wish to begin by commending troop-
contributing countries and the sacrifices of their
personnel, as well as international organizations such
as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
UNICEF, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and Medecins Sans Frontieres, which are at the forefront
of monitoring, mobilizing resources and assistance to
the civilian populations affected by conflict.

The theme of this debate is particularly important
and timely, given the unfortunate events in recent
weeks that have further illustrated in graphic detail
the dangers that civilians face all around the world in
conflict situations.

The Security Council, created following a
catastrophic world war that saw millions of civilians
being killed, has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. All of
us therefore have an obligation to work together to end
the scourge of war, which is deeply felt by the civilian
population in armed conflict.

It is for that reason that the failure of the Council to
act on the situation in Gaza, where a civilian population
was deliberately targeted by a military force, is a matter
of the utmost concern. It was left to the Human Rights
Council to initiate an investigation due to the failure of
the Security Council to carry out its mandate. We fully
support that independent inquiry.

We stress that the Security Council must uphold
and respect the norms of international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law. While it is
recognized that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with the host country, United
Nations peacekeeping missions are often mandated
with that task. Since 1999, the protection of civilians
has become one of the central concerns of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, yet neither policy
nor practice have evolved quickly enough to achieve
full and effective protection for civilians. South Africa
has argued, in line with resolution 1894 (2009), that,
in order for United Nations peacekeeping operations
to effectively carry out their protection-of-civilians
mandates, they require the resources and capabilities
necessary to assume a robust posture to implement
their mandate.

South Africa also sees a glaring violation of
international law by armed groups in deliberate attacks
on medical personnel, hospitals and installations.
Such practices not only plunge civilian populations
into crisis, but further threaten the mission of the
Health Care in Danger project by endangering the
lives of health workers, destroying their equipment,
obstructing access to civilians in need of medical care
and preventing the provision of other basic amenities
for life. It must be stressed that creating conditions
conducive to delivering humanitarian assistance
remains a core responsibility of mandated institutions
and of the host country. Any act of aggression towards
medical personnel and humanitarian workers is an act
of war, and such violations need to be accounted for.

I would like to conclude by commending all
personnel involved in peacekeeping missions, as well
as civil-society groups, for the service they perform.
They are often inadequately resourced for the enormous
challenges that they face on a daily basis. South Africa
will continue to interact closely with them to allow
them to perform their vital international role.

