Mr. Christian (Ghana): I would like to
acknowledge the presence of the Prime Minister of
Kosovo and of the President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija.

On this occasion - World Refugee Day - my
delegation joins other States Member of the United
Nations in expressing solidarity with all refugees,
displaced persons and victims of war, natural and man-
made disasters.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his comprehensive briefing
and to congratulate him for his exemplary work as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
take this opportunity to wish him success in his future
endeavours.

We are greatly encouraged by the fact that the
authorities in Belgrade and Pristina are engaged in
direct and sustained negotiations on a broad range of
issues, including on power structures, issues related to
cultural and religious heritage, as well as the economy.
All these affect the vital interests of the various
population groups, and we eagerly await the outcome
of the negotiations. Hopefully, it will be a win-win
situation for all.

My delegation remains convinced that the path to
social harmony and lasting peace in Kosovo must be
based on a deliberate policy of inclusiveness and
respect for the rights of all ethnic groups. The
importance of the principles embodied in the standards
cannot be overstated. They constitute the bedrock of a
democratic, stable and prosperous Kosovo, and we are
pleased with the determined efforts by the leadership
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of
Kosovo to meet the benchmarks. Whatever the
outcome of the final status negotiations, the vision of a
multicultural, tolerant, open and democratic Kosovo
must not be compromised.

In that regard, we call on the Kosovo Serbs and
other ethnic minorities to take full advantage of the
guarantees enshrined in the standards in order to secure
a meaningful role and greater well-being in the future
Kosovo. While we acknowledge that the wounds of
war will take time to heal, we believe that that should
not blind any ethnic group to the realities of a shared
destiny with others with whom they share longstanding
historical ties. It is only by participating fully and
meaningfully in the ongoing dialogue that each group
can make its fears, interests and aspirations heard and
understood by its counterparts.

In the meantime, my delegation wishes to
commend the leadership of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government for the bold steps they have taken
to reach out to the minority groups. We encourage them
to keep knocking on the doors of the Kosovo Serbs in
particular until they join in the process of forging a
common destiny for all the people of Kosovo.
Undoubtedly, this must be a most challenging
period for the authorities in Belgrade as well. We can
only encourage them, in weighing their options, to be
guided by the larger interests of peace and stability in
the Balkans, without which the region's economic and
political potential cannot be fully realized.

Finally, we join other delegations in appealing for
additional assistance for the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government to enable them to carry out their
capacity- and confidence-building programmes.

