Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Mr. John Ging from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
for his briefing. He has told us that the humanitarian
situation is worsening and he has described how the
Ukrainian authorities are dealing with that situation
with the support of the international community.

The number of internally displaced persons is
increasing, as pointed out by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Why is that the case? It is because people are fleeing
the fighting precipitated by the separatists, who have
refused to accept the hand extended by President
Poroshenko. It is because people are fleeing separatist
attacks in the areas they control - attacks that are
becoming deadlier every day.

The report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that the Security
Council will consider in the near future is very eloquent
in that regard. In fact, no report mentions instances of
people fleeing cities in which Ukrainian armed forces
have restored public order and the rule of law. Wherever
Kyiv has re-established its authority, public services
and basic services have been restored to the population.
According to statements by UNHCR, the return of the
internally displaced persons to areas now controlled
by the Government serves to clearly indicate that the
separatists were the main cause of the displacement.

The worsening humanitarian situation is also a
result ofthe presence of armed combatants coming from
outside of Ukraine. The question of external support
with regard to recruitment, the provision of equipment
and training is increasingly urgent and requires the
attention of the international community. Those who
arm the criminals who are terrorizing the population are
responsible for the worsening humanitarian situation.

All those events demonstrate the pressing need
for international cooperation in order to stabilize the
situation in Ukraine and ensure its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We call for a sincere commitment by
the Russian Federation, which has so far been lacking.
Despite the number of appeals made to President Putin,
we regret the fact that the Russian Federation has not
put pressure on the separatists in order to bring them
to the negotiating table and has not taken the expected
concrete measures in order to ensure control of the
Russian/ Ukrainian border.

We are also extremely vigilant with regard to any
direct military support that the Russian Federation
could give to the separatists in the fighting. In that
context, new measures against the Russian Federation
were taken by the European Union, but also by a
number of its partners - including the United States
and, later, Japan and Switzerland. That step shows that
there is unanimity in the international community in
condemning the lack of coordination by the Russian
Federation. The message is clear: the fleeing must end.
The Russian Federation can choose to de-escalate the
situation.

The tightening of sanctions has only one goal, that
is, to facilitate the emergence ofa political solution. Our
priority continues to be, first of all, to put an end to the
escalation and to establish a lasting ceasefire among all
parties. We call upon the Russian Federation to involve
itself in a constructive way in that endeavour and to use
its influence with the armed groups to convince them to
put down their arms and engage in dialogue.

