Ms. Zerrougui: I wish to thank you, Sir, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council on our visit to
the Central African Republic from 17 to 21 December
2013, and in particular on the situation of children and
armed conflict. At the outset, allow me to also express
my appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg, Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, and General
Babacar Gaye, Special Representative and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), for their
leadership and support for the children and armed
conflict mandate.

In the light ofgrowing protection concerns resulting
from mounting attacks against civilians and the deep
human rights crisis ravaging the country, I travelled
with my colleagues, Special Adviser Adama Dieng
and Ms. Nancee Oku Bright, a senior representative of
the Office of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura, to assess the impact of the conflict
on women and children as well as the risk of genocide.
The goal of our mission, in line with the "Rights up
front" framework, was to advocate for action and
responses from the transitional authorities and obtain
their commitment to stopping the violence. Our visit
took place soon after the 5 December attacks on the
capital, Bangui, and against the backdrop of increasing
sectarian violence, which is continuing today.

Despite its chronic instability, the Central African
Republic had not previously suffered from such a
violent outbreak of religiously motivated violence. Yet,
today, the country is trapped in a spiral of vengeance
that has destroyed the social fabric and undermined
trust among communities for generations to come. I
have witnessed members of those communities pitted
against one another, fleeing and seeking refuge in
churches and mosques. They are living in fear of being
attacked. They are even afraid of burying their dead.
Entire villages have been burned and are burning down
as we speak in this Chamber today.

The impact of the conflict on children has been
dramatic, with unprecedented levels of brutality.
Children have been directly attacked, maimed, killed
and beheaded in Bangui, Bouar, Bossangoa and
Bozoum. For over a year, ex-Seleka combatants and,
more recently, anti-Balaka militias, have actively
recruited children and forced them to commit atrocities.
Recent estimates indicate that as many as 6,000 children
could be currently associated with armed forces and
groups. During my visit, I witnessed youths who had
taken up arms, having been manipulated by both sides
and divided along religious lines. They have become
both victims and perpetrators of the ongoing sectarian
violence.

The lack of security has resulted in the displacement
over the course of 2013 of nearly halfa million children
across the country. Those children are in urgent need
of protection and assistance and are at a greater risk
of suffering violations. Schools and hospitals have
been attacked and looted. Medical personnel have been
repeatedly threatened and brutally targeted everywhere
in the country, leaving an already fragile social
infrastructure and basic services in complete disarray.

Our visit coincided with the transfer of authority
from the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace
in the Central African Republic to the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and with the initial phase of the
deployment of Operation Sangaris. While the presence
of African Union and French forces is deterring
ongoing violence, too many civilians remain without
basic protection, as crimes are being committed
daily in Bangui and in the provinces. I am hopeful
that the commendable efforts of the African Union,
the deployment of additional troops by the European
Union, together with the evolution of the political
landscape, will contribute to re-establishing law and
order. The rapid strengthening of BINUCA and the
deployment of MISCA's civilian component will be
key to ensuring adequate human rights monitoring and
protection expertise.

We must urgently ensure better coordination
among all actors on the ground, including through
civil-military liaisons. We should optimize existing
resources in Bangui and scale up capacity in the
provinces where military deployment and the presence
of humanitarian actors remains too limited.

On a positive note, on 6 January the process of
identifying and separating children started at five
ex-Seleka cantonment sites. On 17 January, 23 children
were released in Bangui and taken to a UNICEF-
supported transit and orientation centre. That is
the result of the dialogue between United Nations
representatives and the transitional authorities to allow
child protection actors unimpeded access to military
and cantonment sites. The former head of the transition
reiterated that commitment to me during our visit, and
it is my hope that that engagement will continue in the
new phase of the transitional process. I am encouraged
by the recent election of Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza as
Head of the Transition in the Central African Republic,
and Ijoin her in urging all parties to immediately stop
the violence.

The process of separating and reintegrating
children associated with armed forces and groups
in the Central African Republic will not be an easy
task. First, it cannot happen in a vacuum but must be
part of a comprehensive and holistic disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process.
Secondly, the current United Nations civilian capacity
remains all too limited and must be strengthened
urgently to confront the ongoing situation, as well as
the challenges of the DDR process.

Child protection actors need adequate human and
financial resources to provide the needed reintegration
assistance. At the same time, the sustained support
and cooperation of the military forces on the ground
are key to ensuring children's security and continued
protection. As recent experience in the Central African
Republic shows, children formerly associated with
armed forces and groups are especially vulnerable to
rerecruitment and retaliatory violence.

We need to send a stronger signal to the
perpetrators of these atrocious crimes that they will be
held to account. The international community should
spare no effort and use all the tools at its disposal. It is
crucial to assist the transitional authorities to restore
law enforcement and establish a judicial response to
the ongoing violations. This is essential to deterring
further violence and starting to re-establish trust
among communities.

I strongly welcome the imminent establishment
of a commission of inquiry, as well as the Council's
intention to adopt targeted measures against
perpetrators of violations against children. I also
welcome the appointment by the Human Rights
Council of the Independent Expert Marie-Therese
Keita Bocoum, and I look forward to working closely
with all mandate-holders to ensure complementarities
in our work.

This crisis has been looming for over a year, and
we have run out of time to prevent the violence from
escalating. Our only option today is to scale up our
response with robust, immediate and urgent actions.
I am here today to plead for the Council's continued
attention to the crisis in which the Central African
Republic has plunged. It is my hope that the Council
will unite to step up and sustain its engagement, with
the support of the African Union and States of the
region. Today's political commitment and mobilization
of the international community to end the crisis in the
Central African Republic must be swiftly translated
into adequate responses to protect civilians, provide
emergency assistance to the most vulnerable, and
accompany the transition towards the stabilization of
the country.

