Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thankMr. VladimirVoronkov and Ms. Michele
Coninsx for their valuable and comprehensive briefings
on the threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh) to international peace and
security. I will focus on three key issues.

First, with regard to the continuing threat posed
by Da'esh, despite the victory of the international
community against terrorist organizations, especially
the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh) and its military defeat in Syria with the fall
of the city of Al-Baghuz in the Deir ez-Zor region
in March, Da'esh has not been fully eradicated. It
continues to operate and develop covertly in Iraq,
Syria and other regions across the world by evolving
its tactics - either for terrorist operations or financing
such operations, as well as recruiting individuals based
on available resources.

The Secretary-General's report (S/20l9/6l2) notes
that Da'esh continues to be able to send money to carry
out subversive acts in ways that are difficult to detect by
authorities. It still has a wealth of nearly $300 million.

The war against Da'esh in Iraq and Syria has
resulted in many humanitarian and security threats and
challenges that include, for example, the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, returnees and people
wishing to relocate with their families. Addressing
their large number requires building the capacities of
law enforcement agencies to try them and rehabilitate
the victims.

Prisons are also incubators that fuel and spread
extremist ideologies among poor, marginalized or
discriminated against prisoners. That calls for greater
cooperation and communication among Member States,
with the support of relevant United Nations agencies, in
order to bolster efforts related to the rehabilitation of
prisoners and their reintegration into society, including
prisoners convicted of terrorist crimes.

The State of Kuwait has established Al-Salam
Rehabilitation Centre, which provides guidance to those
who were affected by aberrant ideologies. The centre's
programme leads to the rehabilitation of participants
with extremist ideologies. That reflects our endeavours
to cope with global events and counter the phenomenon
of religious bigotry and extremist thought.

Secondly, combating and preventing terrorist
financing is one of the main challenges that countries
face in their counter-terrorism efforts. Terrorist
groups finance their activities through various means,
including transnational organized crime, ransom, arms
trafficking, drug trafficking and extortion. The Security
Council has adopted many resolutions to consolidate the
capacity of Member States to prevent and combat the
financing of terrorism, notably, resolution 1373 (2001),
which introduced legally binding rules. Recently, the
Council also adopted resolution 2462 (2019) under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
resolution is dedicated exclusively to the prevention
and suppression of terrorism financing and refocuses
attention on evaluating and understanding the threat
posed by terrorist financing and the strategic role of
financial intelligence in efforts to combat terrorism.
It also focuses on the importance of public-private
partnerships, as well as effective activities related to
cooperation, coordination and exchange of information.

Thirdly, on the importance of international
cooperation, one of the key tools to combat the threat
of Da'esh to international peace and security is
international, regional and subregional cooperation in
the following areas - sharing information, improving
prevention, addressing circumstances conducive to
terrorism, preventing incitement to perpetrate terrorist
acts, combating financial support to terrorist groups,
training members of law enforcement agencies,
addressing the nexus between crime and terrorism and
focusing on youth and engaging them in national plans
related to combating terrorism. We must also conclude
bilateral and multilateral counter-terrorism agreements.

We commend the ongoing cooperation between
United Nations bodies and agencies with regional
organizations and Member States in the areas of
capacity-building and the exchange of expertise. We
look forward to further cooperation in that regard.

In conclusion, we continue to condemn terrorism
in all of its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
motives. It is a criminal act that cannot be justified and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnicity. Combating terrorism requires
the mobilization of all international efforts to tackle this
criminal scourge through measures to ensure respect
for human rights, the rule of law and good governance.

