Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I would like to congratulate
the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting the African Union to this biannual briefing on
the situation in the Sahel, in particular the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel). I also
commend the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2019/37l), which covers all issues in the Sahel.

At the time of this briefing, the security situation
remains difficult in the Sahelo-Saharan region. In
Mali, terrorist acts in the north have persisted and have
spread to central Mali, while intercommunal conflicts
have exacerbated an already worrisome situation. The
attack on the Dioura camp and the massacre of civilians
in Ogossagou, which killed more people than all the
terrorist attacks in 2018 combined, have made headlines
in recent days.

In the Niger, in addition to terrorist incursions into
border areas with Mali and attacks on police stations,
the country also faces insurgents from Boko Haram
in the south, particularly in Bosso and Diffa, where
the many attacks claimed by that group have led to a
massive displacement to the centre of the country.

The 14 May attack in Mangaize, in the Tillaberi
region of western Niger near the Malian border, which
targeted a military column of the Nigerian armed forces
and killed 28 people, was a reminder that the infamous
Islamic State is still active in the tri-border area. The
African Union once again condemns that despicable act
and offers its condolences to the families, the aggrieved
and the Government of the Niger.

In Burkina Faso we have observed an expansion in
the terrorist brutality from the north to the east, and
even in the centre of the country, with a trend towards
the targeting of churches in recent days. We can see
evidence of that in the heinous attacks perpetrated on
Sunday, 12 May, in a Catholic church in Dablo, in the
centre-north of the country, which resulted in the death
of six people, including the parish priest, and on 13 May,
in the north of the country, where four believers were
kidnapped and then brutally murdered. The expansion
of terrorist attacks to the south-east of the country now
means that the threat is expanding towards Togo, Benin
and Ghana. In Chad, in addition to insecurity linked
to the activities of the terrorist group Boko Haram, the
country fell victim in January to a rebel attack in the
north-east.

The presence of the Malian Armed forces in
Operation Barkhane has not able to prevent the
deterioration of the security situation in the Sahel. It
is that continued deterioration of the security situation
that led the leaders of the States of the Group of Five
for the Sahel to establish the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The
African Union commended that extremely responsible
decision, which is in line with the principles of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. The African
Union firmly supported that decision, and its Peace
and Security Council, at its meeting on 13 April
2017, adopted the strategic concept of operations and
authorized the deployment of the Force for an initial
period of 12 months.

The Peace and Security Council renewed the
mandate of the Joint Force at its meeting on 9 April,
while also noting the progress that had been made, the
operations conducted and the support that countries
continue to provide to the Force. The Peace and Security
Council congratulated the countries of the region as
well as the Force Commander and encouraged them to
forge ahead.

The Peace and Security Council addressed a
number of recommendations, namely, that the financing
promised for the Force during the donor conference
organized in February 2018 in Brussels be made
available quickly; that the assistance of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali be expanded to cover the entirety of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force; and that the African Union
Commission consider how it can further support the
Force as part of a comprehensive strategic vision for
stabilizing the Sahel region. I would like to take this
opportunity to recall the regular requests from the
Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel for the Joint Force
to enjoy direct financing from the United Nations
and operate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, as recommended in the report of the
Secretary-General.

Given the situation prevailing in the Sahel region,
the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has
now become an absolute and urgent necessity. This
is an effort that the entire international community
should support. It is, however, an effort that must be
part of a comprehensive perspective that takes into
account the other challenges of the Sahel region, such
as governance, development and climate change. The
African Union aligns itself with that vision because it
believes that it will provide greater hope for the people.

On the security front, the African Union has
revitalized the Nouakchott process in order to strengthen
regional security. On the political front, the African
Union continues to be engaged in the peace process in
Mali and also in Libya and will continue its efforts to
resolve the crises that are besetting those countries.

In terms of development, the African Union is
supporting the countries of the Lake Chad basin in the
framework of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram.
The African Union continues to support the G-5 Sahel
in advocating for the mobilization of the resources
pledged during the partners and donors coordination
conference in Nouakchott on 6 December 2018 for
the financing of the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment
Programme. The African Union also recently held in
Niamey a regional conference on climate change in the
Sahel and adopted relevant resolutions.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the African
Union firmly supports the report of the Secretary-
General and asserts that no effort should be spared in
supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

