Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the delegation of Indonesia for organizing
today's open debate. We welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General this morning, an encouraging signal
confirming the Secretariat's commitment on this
important issue. I congratulate him on his excellent
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643), and thank the Under-Secretary-General
for his briefing.

Switzerland fully endorses the report's emphasis
of certain challenges, including the denial of access to
civilians and sexual violence. We also welcome the
practical and operational aspect of the report. We will
support operational implementation of initiatives
suggested by the Secretary-General.

The written version of my statement now being
distributed focuses on compliance with international
law, access, the group of experts on protection, sexual
violence and the right to shelter, land and property -
thus referring to the five actions proposed in the report
of the Secretary-General. So as not to take up more
time than we are given, I will limit myself to
discussing three of these points.
First of all, the erosion in current conflicts of the
principles of distinction and proportionality is
disconcerting, and the indiscriminate attacks against
civilian populations and humanitarian actors in the
performance of their duties are inadmissible. It is the
duty of the Security Council to remind all parties to a
conflict that they are bound at all times to respect
international law, and we call upon the Council to
systematically do everything possible to demand that
the parties to a conflict, as well as peacekeeping forces,
respect international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We feel very
strongly that resolutions establishing peacekeeping
missions, as well as all other types of missions, must
insist on respect for these obligations.

Rigorous efforts to combat impunity for the
perpetrators of violations are also implicit in respect
for international humanitarian law. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) has an important role to play in
cases where national jurisdictions are unable to judge
those who have committed the most serious
international crimes. Once again, we call on all States
that have not yet ratified the ICC Statute to do so as
soon as possible.

My second comment has to do with the
importance of unhindered access by humanitarian
actors to civilian populations in armed conflict. It is
important that the Security Council be fully informed
of cases of obstruction to humanitarian assistance, and
Switzerland supports the Secretary-General's proposal
in favour of systematic reporting to the Council on
situations where serious access concerns exist.

We call upon the Council to ensure that in its
resolutions, parties to a conflict are required to
guarantee rapid and unhindered access to civilians in
need. The Swiss Government plans to hold a meeting
of experts next spring, focusing on humanitarian access
in conflict situations. We hope in that way to contribute
to the efforts of the international community, and to
propose innovative solutions that are in the interest of
the victims and that respect the law.

Finally, questions relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must be better integrated in
the discussion of mandates of peacekeeping missions,
in efforts at mediation and conflict resolution and in
other United Nations missions. We consider it essential
that the Secretariat and the Council pursue a more
systematic and structured dialogue on the key aspects

of the implementation of Security Council resolution
1674 (2006). In this context, the establishment of an
expert-level working group on the protection of
civilians has received my Government's full attention.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the
protection of civilians in conflict situations also
depends on the capacity of the United Nations to enter
into partnerships with regional organizations. It is with
this in mind that a regional meeting organized by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with the support of Switzerland and Canada
was convened in Dakar in April 2007. We encourage
OCHA to organize similar meetings to create
awareness of these problems elsewhere in Africa, Asia,
the Middle East and Europe.

