Mr. Corr (Ireland): On behalf of my delegation, I
would like to thank Ambassador Kassem for
introducing the addendum to the report of the Panel of
Experts. I also thank the Ambassador and the Panel for
their dedication and commitment in pursuing their
mandate. The Panel has done an excellent job in setting
out the pattern of exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the parties to the
conflict.

My delegation very much welcomes the high-
level presence today from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda and Tanzania and thanks
the ministers and representatives for their statements.

The representative of Belgium will speak shortly
on behalf of the European Union. My delegation
subscribes to his statement and I make the following
points in my national capacity.

The Panel has pointed out that, without a
resolution of the broader conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, it will be all the
more difficult to expect an end to such exploitation.
Ireland shares this View. In taking this matter forward,
our primary goal must be to support the Lusaka peace
process. My delegation believes that its
implementation offers the only viable solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Panel recognizes that the issue of
exploitation is inextricably linked to other serious
issues in the region. Nonetheless, regardless of the
initial motives which led to the conflict, it is clearly
now unacceptable that a primary motive for all parties

Sll'V.4437

 

to the conflict has become the extraction of maximum
material and commercial benefits. This is unacceptable
in terms of restoring State institutions and unacceptable
in human terms; it is unacceptable that peacekeeping or
peacemaking can rest on foundations corrosively
undermined by economic injustice. As Ambassador
Kassem said this morning, exploitation is both the
means and the motive for sustaining the conflict.

In paragraph 16 of its report, the Panel refers to
the exploitation of human resources. For my
delegation, this is the most profoundly disturbing
aspect of the complex situation in the region. That the
human rights of the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are being systematically violated in such
a flagrant and self-serving manner is a matter of the
gravest concern and we hope that the Panel will revert
to this issue.

As regards further action by the Council and the
recommendations of the Panel, my delegation strongly
supports an extension of the mandate of the Panel of
Experts and we look forward to the adoption of a
presidential Statement to this end. A continuing
oversight function will serve as an important deterrent
factor. Beyond this, however, we need to send a clear
signal to all those involved in such activities that the
Council is not prepared to see individuals, groups and
States benefit from the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at the expense, very often in
shocking human terms, of the population of the
country.

For this reason, as my delegation has previously
stated, we see value in the proposal of the Panel for a
voluntary moratorium on the import of specific goods.
There is every chance that such action just might, as
the Panel intends, have an impact on consumers and
persuade them to pressurize the companies that
purchase the commodities in question to seek
alternative sources.

Bearing in mind the primary objective of
supporting the Lusaka peace process, we feel that it
would be valuable for the Panel to now look at steps
which the Council might take to curb and control
exploitation linked to the continuation of the conflict.
This should include precise recommendations, where
possible, and an assessment of the humanitarian and
social impact of such steps. The Panel, in our view,
should report back to the Council within six months.
Of course, we have full confidence that, in so doing,
the Panel will give due regard to balance and progress
in the wider peace process. Flowing from paragraph
158 of the addendum, we also look forward to detailed
recommendations from the Panel as to how existing
international organizations and mechanisms could be
used to control the exploitation.

It is clear from the recommendations of the Panel
that ending foreign exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will not be
sufficient to halt exploitation and ensure that the
people and the Government of that country will benefit
from their resources. Other action will also be required.
The international community will have to engage over
many years, assisting in rebuilding the State
institutions and structures of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. To this end, we look forward to a
positive conclusion to the inter-Congolese dialogue and
the agreement of the parties on their future political
structures, so that the international community can help
them in these tasks.

We agree with the Panel that all concessions,
commercial agreements and contracts signed since
1997 should be reviewed and revised, with independent
international assistance, to ensure that the revenue
from the resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is put to the use of the country and its people,
rather than to lining the pockets of some. Furthermore,
we support the recommendation of the Panel that those
countries involved, directly or indirectly, in the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
countries of transit, should take appropriate steps to
address the issues raised in the addendum.

In conclusion, we support an extension of the
mandate of the Panel and, if this were to be agreed, we
would hope to hear from the Panel again in a few
months. More importantly, we look forward before
then to tangible progress in the Lusaka peace process.
It is our hope that all the parties will have taken real
steps towards peace so that, when we revert to this
issue again, it will be a case of reviewing the progress
made in addressing this issue as part of progress in the
overall peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, rather than looking at it as an obstacle to
peace in that country.

