Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation expresses its appreciation to Lord Paddy
Ashdown, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his update on the situation in that country and for
his written report, which is before us. We pay tribute to
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
remarkable progress that they have made towards
integration into the European Union. As we have just
heard from Lord Ashdown, it is almost the tenth
anniversary of the Dayton Agreement.

We welcome the positive developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, particularly the reforms designed to
improve the business environment and regulate the
fiscal system so as to increase economic stability. We
are also impressed by the achievements of the
European Union peacekeeping force in implementing
its mandate after successfully taking over from the
NATO force. It is encouraging to note that the defence
reform is proceeding well.

My delegation is also encouraged by the steps
taken by the authorities of the Republika Srpska in
surrendering, for the first time, several indictees to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) at The Hague. However, we are
disappointed by their lack of full cooperation with the
ICTY, which lack continues to ensure the freedom of
its most wanted indictees, Karadzic and Mladic. As
pointed out in the Secretary-General's report and
confirmed by Lord Paddy Ashdown, those two persons
are among the most wanted fugitives still on the
ICTY's list, and they still enjoy protection by the
authorities of the Republika Srpska. In this regard, we
urge the Republika Srpska, the neighbouring countries
and the whole region to extend maximum cooperation
with the ICTY so that the remaining indictees do not
escape justice.

We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
on the lack of progress on police reform. The Serbian
side is reportedly rejecting the fundamental principles,
endorsed by the European Union, on which the reform
is based, including the abolition of the Republika
Srpska police. By so doing, they are not only alienating
themselves, but are obstructing progress on police
reform, causing a stalemate and an unnecessary delay
in building a single State in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
it prepares itself to join the European Union. It is
inconceivable to imagine a State with more than one
police force. We thus call upon the Republika Srpska to
avoid divisive policies and to join with others in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to build the future of their
country together. We also urge it to cooperate with the
High Representative in the review of the law on
salaries so as to develop a single system covering all
State employees.

Finally, we pay tribute to the High Representative
and the European Union force for the good work that
they are doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for their
patience and perseverance in introducing and following
up on a range of reforms designed to bring about
sustainable peace and development in the country, most
of which are progressing according to plan. We also
recognize the important role played by the European
Union, NATO and other friends and partners of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in assisting the country to leave its
tragic history behind and march towards prosperity.

