Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): Before I begin, I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing.

In all our statements in the Security Council on
this topic, regional stability and the development of
all-round cooperation with Serbia's closest neighbours
have been accentuated as its most important foreign
policy priorities. These issues, we believe, should
continue to be the fulcrum of attention of the countries
of the Western Balkans and South-East Europe as they
plan their activities and take concrete actions. In that
context and to those ends, my country sees Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a key partner.

The European Union is facing many challenges
and its enlargement may not be at the forefront of
its ongoing endeavours. Yet the continuation of the
process of enlargement and the region's steady progress
towards reforms are needed by the countries of the
Western Balkans, perhaps more than ever before. We
therefore look forward to each and every step made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina in that direction as it brings us
closer to our common European future. As a candidate
country, Serbia considers that the European integration
by Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important process
and is ready to render its unyielding help and all-
round support.

Strengthening comprehensive regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans is an indispensable part of its
European integration. We are convinced that ample
possibilities exist for cooperation between Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and stand ready and willing
to step up our efforts in promoting the all-important
task of furthering such cooperation. In order to do so, it
is necessary that our two countries undertake realizing
our common interests as that provides the most solid
and reliable basis for a better future of the citizens of
both Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Commitments to promoting stability and all-
round cooperation and avowed readiness to undertake
reforms conducive to the process of European
integration feature prominently on the political agendas
of the Governments of our region. Yet we have borne
witness to various recent trends that cause unnecessary
political tensions and send messages reminiscent of
the troublesome past, while a constructive approach
has often been pushed aside. They have marked the
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
relations between its entities and constituent peoples
and, by extension, the situation in the region.

My country firmly believes that its active policy of
promoting reconciliation in the Western Balkans and
strengthening good-neighbourly relations is rightful
and correct. We must continue to promote political,
legal and economic reforms, strengthen the rule of law
and institutions, and pledge allegiance to European
values as the only avenue to a more prosperous and
stable region.

I also emphasize on this occasion that respect for
territorial integrity is an international standard and a
principle that must always be honoured and upheld.
The past of the Western Balkans makes it imperative
for us to accept the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States as the basis of a different and better future.
In accordance with the provisions of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, therefore, Serbia has been consistently
and lastingly committed to the maintenance of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Dayton Peace Agreement was signed more
than 20 years ago in order to bring an end to the tragic
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As its guarantor,
Serbia considers that the Agreement continues to be a
condition sine qua non for peace and stability. Since we
are called on to safeguard peace and stability, we must
therefore keep the Agreement. Genuine reconciliation
is needed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, all the more so
as differing views and other challenges are becoming
increasingly evident in the region.

Over the past two decades, it has been said and
demonstrated many times that dialogue and agreements
are the best and safest ways to address the outstanding
issues affecting relations between the country's entities
and constituent peoples. We believe that is the only way
that we can ensure that potential solutions are acceptable
and implementable as they help to build confidence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia considers outstanding
issues - such as the observance of Republika Srpska
Day, the functioning of shared institutions, election
laws and others that are the focus of differences between
the entities - to be internal questions for the country.

We therefore support an active dialogue within
Bosnia and Herzegovina as the right way to find solutions
acceptable to all and to build confidence. It will help
strengthen cooperation, transparency and effectiveness
in the shared institutions, promote confidence between
the entities and have a positive influence on the situation
in the region. Without it, there may be efforts to resort
to unilateral acts, such as the attempt to institute
legally unfounded proceedings aimed at revising the
judgment of the International Court of Justice in the
case concerning Application of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro).
The Court's rejection of the request confirms the need
for conducting political dialogue aimed at addressing
disagreements and solving outstanding issues to the
benefit of all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Serbia has given special attention to continuing
and intensifying its political dialogue with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which we see as one ofthe most important
elements promoting general good relations. In that
context, I should point out that Mr. Aleksandar Vucie,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, has visited
Bosnia and Herzegovina this year on two occasions,
in March and April. He took part in a meeting of the
Prime Ministers of the Western Balkans on 16 March,
convened to help prepare for the Western Balkans
Summit, to be held within the Berlin process initiative
in Trieste in July. In Sarajevo, the Prime Minister
emphasized once again the importance of regional
stability, strengthening economic cooperation, free
trade and interlinkages, and the European prospects
of the Western Balkans. On 3 and 4 April Mr. Vueie
also visited Mostar for the opening of the twentieth
International Economic Fair, where he met with
high representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
discussed regional stability, promoting cooperation and
realizing regional projects.

On 10 April, Ms. Zorana Mihajlovic', Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Civil Engineering, Transport
and Infrastructure of the Republic of Serbia, visited
Srebrenica, where she commissioned the construction
of a kindergarten financed by a donation from the
Serbian Government. The children of Srebrenica,
Bosniak and Serb alike - the town's future - will
attend the kindergarten together. Mr. Denis Zvizdic',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, visited Belgrade on 21 January. In his
discussions with Serbian Government officials, the
two countries recommitted to promoting peace and
stability and furthering cooperation, including on joint
infrastructure projects connecting the two countries,
such as new bridges, highways and railways. On 13 May,
Mr. Igor Crnadak, Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the representative of a partner country,
visited Serbia to open the eighty-fourth Agricultural
Fair in Novi Sad, alongside Mr. Ivica Daeie, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia.

Serbia continues to be interested in promoting
economic cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Trade between the two countries is growing, with a
5.8 per cent increase in 2016 over the previous year.
Serbia's total investment of €900 million in Bosnia and
Herzegovina makes it one of its biggest investors. We
believe that the creation of ties between our peoples
and economies should be a priority for Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, just as they are for the other
countries of the Western Balkans, especially in the
areas of infrastructure, energy, tourism, free trade and
elsewhere. We simply must continue to promote projects
that bring us together. We trust and believe that Bosnia
and Herzegovina and our other neighbours are ready

to embark on joint and responsible efforts to achieve
all our goals, creating a better future and avoiding the
pitfalls ofthe past.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
