Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I thank His
Excellency President for Touadera for his statement, as
well as the Permanent Mission of France and the British
presidency for organizing this meeting. I would also
like to thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing,
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his work
on the ground. We, of course, commend the efforts of
the United Nations peacekeeping forces of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
to prevent armed groups from endangering the unity of
the country and the security of its civilians.

Like the other the members of the Security
Council, we are concerned about both the insecurity
and the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which remains one of the most serious in
the world. Although the security and humanitarian
situation continues to be fragile, the country is truly at
a decisive turning point in its history. Accordingly, at
the bilateral level, Italy has supported the Government
of the Central African Republic since the beginning
of its mandate. The President of the Republic, Sergio
Mattarella, demonstrated that support in person to
President Touadera during his visit to Rome last year.

Our country has long stood by the people of the
Central African Republic. Last October, our Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mario Giro, visited Bangui
to launch bilateral projects and inaugurate the opening
of the cooperation office by the Italian Development
Cooperation, which coordinates numerous Italian
activities in the Central African Republic, where there
is a strong presence of agencies and non-governmental
organizations, many of which are Catholic.

In that regard, let me emphasize the role that
those organizations play in Central African society
at various levels. I would point in particular to the
Community of Sant'Egidio, which is an active player
in promoting dialogue and reconciliation among the
various components of Central African society, while
ensuring the strengthening of Government institutions
and full cooperation with the Government, the United
Nations, the African Union, the countries of the region,
the Catholic Church and the Muslim community.
More generally, it is crucial that the Government of
the Central African Republic enjoy the strong and
determined support of the international community.

With regard to the economy, we listened very
attentively to the briefing by Ambassador Hilale, Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, who spoke about the work
of the Commission to help the Government develop
its National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. It is
important that the Council continues to support the
work of that body. Further, it is urgent that the goals
of the Brussels Conference quickly become a reality.
The European Union and its member States continue to
stand with the Central African Republic.

At the political level, the African mediation
initiative between the Government and armed groups
appears to have the potential to generate the conditions
necessary for an inclusive peace agreement. If that
important initiative is to be fully successful, it is
important to ensure its full coordination with both
the United Nations and the Government of the Central
African Republic. We especially recognize the need for
an active role of President Touadera as a representative
democratically elected by his fellow citizens.

The objective of any mediation initiative must
be to strengthen the Government and the extend its
authority throughout the Central African Republic in
its territorial entirety so as to enable it to build up the
security and promote the development of the country for
the long-term. The question of reconciling the demand
for justice with the inclusiveness of the peace process
is central. In our View, the need to end the conflict in
the Central African Republic is a priority. The civilian
population is waiting for the relief that lasting peace
will bring, ever conscious that impunity for the most
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will not be tolerated.

To conclude, we support France's proposal for the
Council to put forward a document clearly expressing
its support for the Government and the African
initiative that recalls the demand for cooperation with
other regional organizations and the United Nations.

