Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
welcome this opportunity for a productive and frank
exchange with Force Commanders, and we thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in holding this
meeting. I also want to thank the three Generals for
their clear and informative briefings this morning. This
dialogue is important because it helps our understanding
of the constraints that Force Commanders face, and
therefore informs our decision-making on the mandates
for each mission. It should not be a one-off event, and
I am pleased that increasingly the Security Council
has the opportunity to hear from individual Force
Commanders when individual missions are discussed
by the Council.

Protecting civilians is now at the heart of many
United Nations peacekeeping missions. But sadly,
as the recent report of Office of Internal Oversight
Services states, there has been "a persistent pattern
of peacekeeping operations not intervening with force
when civilians are under attack."(A/68/787, Summary)
That is unacceptable because, as General Dos Santos
Cruz spelled out there, is no risk-free option. And
civilians are best protected through prevention, mobility
and active intervention, rather than simple presence.

If missions do not fulfil their protection-of-civilian
responsibilities, it undermines other tasks the mission
may have been mandated to do, to say nothing of the
loss of life and suffering that ensues. Ifthis is a question
of tools or authority, then the Council needs to ensure
that peacekeepers have the ability to fully deliver
against the mandate set. But if, as seems sometimes
to be the case, it is a question of interpretation of the
mandate, then that needs to be urgently resolved among
the Secretariat, the Force Commander and the national
contingent commanders.

What is the dialogue with United Nations
Headquarters, including senior Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) leadership
and military advisers on protection of civilian
implementation? How often do they discuss the
protection-of-civilian strategy and requirements? As
my Rwandan colleague pointed out, many peacekeeping
operations are now taking place in a very different,
more hostile environment. Grom my Government's
perspective - I am thinking about preventable
atrocities such as the massacre in South Kivu in
June - now is the right time to push for an agreed
standard and formal DPKO guidance on the remit of
protection of civilians. General Dos Santos Cruz made
some important recommendations, which the Council
should consider carefully. I wonder if he could say a
bit more about how he as Force Commander ensured
that everyone in the United Nations Organizations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUSCO) force understood the protection of
civilians and their expected role in it.

The seizure of45 peacekepiers ofthe United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in August,
reflecting the changing nature of the security situation
in UNDOF's area of operation, as General Singha
described, was deeply disturbing. Their subsequent
release was a happy ending to the incident, but it
brings into sharp relief the risks that all peacekeepers
now face. More tragic still, in Mali we have seen
31 peacekeepers killed in a variety of terrorist and other
attacks in recent months. Those incidents highlight
the fact that United Nations peacekeeping missions
are increasingly coming into contact with non-State
actors, some using terrorist methods of operation.
General Kazura made some important points about
the mismatch between the tasks of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and its ability to perform them.
Following yesterday's discussion (see S/PV.7274), the
Security Council is well seized of that gap and needs to
take some tough decisions about the future direction of
MINUSMA.

More generally, support from United Nations
Headquarters for missions to adapt to changing
environments is clearly essential. If missions are
unable to protect themselves, they will be unable to
protect others. We have heard that in order to fulfil
their mandates to protect civilians missions need more
protected mobility, better intelligence and an increase
in medical evacuation capability. I would be interested
to hear the Force Commanders' views on that. Is it
primarily an issue of better training and needing better
technology, information-gathering techniques and
analysis, or is there a more fundamental shift required
in how such missions are conceived? I would also be
interested to hear from the Force Commanders how the
military components understand their role in relations to
operating with non-State actors. Do they have guidance
they need from New York to engage with non-State
actors they encounter on the ground, particular in areas
where State control no longer exists.

In conclusion, we recognize the noble and critical
role that peacekeepers play, and the risks to which they
are exposed. We recognize the need to supply missions
with reasonable and appropriate mandates and all the
necessary tools and authority that they need to fulfil
the obligations. If we do that, then we can legitimately
expect that peacekeepers will do their utmost to fulfil
those mandates.

