Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for having invited us to participate in
this debate. Like my colleagues from Portugal and
Brazil, I seek your indulgence to deliver my statement
in Portuguese.

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation)

Allow me, at outset, to thank you, Sir, for having
given Mozambique the opportunity to address this
important organ of the United Nations in its capacity as
the Chair of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), which also includes Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe,
Portugal and Timor-Leste.

We welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste, whose presence in this debate reflects
the strong commitment of his country to the effective
implementation of provisions for cooperation with the
United Nations system, in particularly under auspices of
the Security Council. We therefore align ourselves with
the content of his statement, as we support the range of
efforts that Timor-Leste has undertaken with a View to
consolidating peace, stability, democratic institutions
and promoting sustainable economic development.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (S/2012/765), presented at this meeting, which
in general indicates remarkable progress in important
sectors of the political, economic and social spheres in
the country that should be a cause for rejoicing and pride
for the leadership and the people of Timor-Leste. Two of
the important events that characterize the progress and
deserve special mention are the presidential elections in
March and April and the parliamentary elections in July,
both of which the international community judged to
have been free and fair. We are aware that those positive
developments reflect the will and determination of the
people of Timor-Leste to continue in their quest for a
future of lasting peace and leading to the realization of
their noble aspirations.

The implementation of the framework of
cooperation between the United Nations and Timor-
Leste - in particular, the success of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
which is now drawing down - demonstrates a positive
experience in the stabilization of the country and has
brought new advantages. At present, Timor-Leste
participates actively in peace efforts as a contributor
to United Nations peace and security missions around
the world, thereby assisting in the solution of conflicts
and the building of an increasingly peaceful and
stable world. We therefore reiterate our appeal to the
international community to continue to provide its
valuable contribution to the political, economic and
social development of Timor-Leste, a country with
great potential for growth and development.

In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the
importance of the visit paid by the members of the
Security Council to Timor-Leste at the beginning ofthis
month, as well as the visit of the Secretary - General
last August. Such visits, among other initiatives, will
help to identify, in turn, better ways to overcome
the challenges the country still faces, such as the
promotion of economic and social development and the
capacity-building of State institutions, areas in which
the international community can still play an important
role.

Alongside the efforts of the international
community, CPLP member States continue to redouble
efforts aimed at strengthening the political and
economic stability of Timor-Leste in order to harness
the experience of this sister country so that it can
continue to be an increasingly important partner in
building peace and development at the regional and
global levels.

