Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Salame' for his objective
briefing and support his efforts to implement the United
Nations action plan approved by the Security Council
and aimed at helping Libyans to unify their country
and ensure its socioeconomic recovery. We realize that
the differences among Libyans run too deep to expect
rapid progress. We believe that the main prerequisite
for the success of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya will be the ability to unite international efforts
to achieve a settlement, which means refraining from
competing political initiatives. And if agreements are
reached, it will be essential to make every possible
effort to implement them.

We are extremely concerned about the unfortunate
developments in Tripoli over the past few weeks.
The escalating situation was halted only thanks to
the courageous efforts of Mr. Salame' and his team.
The ongoing clashes have shown the pointlessness of
the attempts to portray the situation in the capital as
being stabilized. Owing to the force of these objective
circumstances, the authorities in Tripoli continue to
have extremely limited capabilities and have to rely
on the dominant armed groups. Most unfortunately,
unification of the security forces has still not begun,
although it should be a priority. Even the widely
proclaimed project to establish a so-called presidential
guard has still not been realized.

We welcome Mr. Salame's efforts to help the parties
to the conflict reach a lasting agreement on a cessation
of hostilities. We call on Libyans to stop the escalating
violence and unite to restore and rebuild their country
and combat terrorism. We call on external sponsors
to work to unify Libya, encourage efforts aimed at
centralization and to remember that Libya, with its rich
history, culture and natural resources, belongs to its
people alone. Outside actors should contribute to national
reconciliation in Libya and the key coordinating role of
the United Nations could be improved. We believe that
every useful initiative deserves attention and support,
but isolated political acts without a clear strategy are
very unlikely to raise intra-Libyan reconciliation to a
qualitatively higher level. Every step should be aimed
at unifying the country on every possible level. Russia
maintains contacts with all parties, encouraging them
to seek compromises for the sake of peace and stability
in Libya and the Mediterranean region. We support
establishing a consolidated mechanism for external
assistance in the settlement process, under the auspices
and with the help of the United Nations.

We support the efforts to steer the political process
towards the holding of general elections by the end of
the year. Needless to say, we should bear in mind that
favourable conditions are essential for that. Libyan
society must be ready to enter the electoral phase,
because if not, elections will only reopen old wounds
and lead to a new cycle of confrontation rather than
the desired reunification, inevitably complicating the
political efforts of the United Nations.

We have been closely following developments
in the vitally important oil sector, on which the well-
being of Libya's citizens depends. Natural resources
should be used for the benefit of every single citizen
of the country, not as pocket change in the geopolitical
arrangements of other States. Issues pertaining to the
control of oil infrastructure, export operations and
the functioning of banking and financial institutions
should be resolved by Libyans themselves through
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations. The
participation ofinternational financial organizations in
these processes should be carefully considered and the
position of the Libyan authorities taken into account.

The Secretary-General underscores in his report
(S/2018/780) that support for the dignified and safe
return of internally displaced persons is a key priority
for the international community's humanitarian
assistance to Libya, and we are in complete agreement
with his position. There should be a similar approach in
Syria, free of politicized attitudes.

We thank the Ambassador of Sweden, in his
capacity as Chair, and his team for their professionalism
in coordinating the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
International restrictions are not an end in themselves
but should rather contribute to the political process,
which is why from now on we will take an extremely
careful approach to sanctions measures that do not
have obvious added value. We are concerned about
the situation of migrants and refugees in Libya and the
abuses of their rights, but a long-term solution to that
problem is certainly not to be found through sanctions.
For that, effective criminal prosecution has to be
launched at the national level. International cooperation
is very important, including within the framework of
the relevant entities. No attention has been given to
criminality in countries of destination for migrants.
Lastly, we have not seen any serious attempts to deal
with the root causes of these mass migrations, which
originate first and foremost in dire socioeconomic
situations and conflicts, including some provoked from
outside. We must work on improving the situation in
these regions, after which people will return to their
homes of their own volition.

Libyans have been complaining for a long time
about the significant losses they have sustained where
their assets in foreign credit institutions have been
frozen in accordance with Security Council decisions.
The situation should be impartially evaluated in order
to make the best possible decision without going
beyond the existing sanction frameworks. Another
ongoing pressing problem involves the illegal flow of
weapons into Libya, which affects both its own security
and that of the surrounding region. In the absence of
a centralized State authority and a united army, talk
about easing the arms embargo would be premature.
Furthermore, the strictest possible control is required
when delivering products for military use in Libya
within the framework of existing exemptions, in order
to ensure that they are not lost or misappropriated. Who
wins when weapons or military technology fall into the
hands of armed groups, foreign mercenaries or even
terrorists, who are still present in Libya to this day?
Russia and Libya are linked in a historically
friendly and mutually respectful relationship in many
areas. We want to advance and deepen our cooperation
with Libya, but if we are to stabilize it we must unite
international and regional efforts as quickly as possible.

