Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like express my appreciation to you,
Sir, for organizing this meaningful open debate on
children and armed conflict. I would also like to
commend the work of the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to end
violations against children and to protect their rights.
My delegation would also like to applaud Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Special Representative
Radhika Coomaraswamy for working tirelessly to
lessen the plight of children in armed conflict around
the world. In this regard, we welcome the most recent
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2011/250).

Taking this opportunity, my delegation would like
to note the positive developments on this issue since
the historic adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) and the
expansion of the triggers. Specific achievements have
been realized in the key areas of recruitment, and an
expansion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes has been seen. The Republic
of Korea also welcomes the efforts of the Working
Group thus far in 2011, including its adoption of four
sets of conclusions on Afghanistan, Chad, Somalia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
connection, we urge the relevant Governments to
establish action plans to ban the recruitment of child
soldiers.

We are particularly pleased to note the increase in
country-specific reports of the Secretary-General in
2010 that contain information on the protection of
children, as recommended in resolution 1460 (2003).
This is a helpful step in the right direction but should
be scaled up even further, if possible, to include more
references to the protection of children in country-
specific reports with a view towards full compliance
with resolution 1460 (2003).

However, despite the aforementioned progress,
my delegation remains concerned by the perpetual
plight of children affected by armed conflict around the
world. There is still widespread impunity for grave
crimes perpetrated against children in many countries.
While we note some of the steps in the right
direction - including investigations, arrests, trials and
prosecutions that Governments have committed to
address - the issue of impunity continues to prevail in
too many conflict areas.

Indeed, the Council must stand resolute and apply
robust, targeted measures to confront these persistent
perpetrators. In this connection, my delegation
continues to support the Secretary-General's
recommendations that the Council consider including
child recruitment and use in the mandate of all of its
sanctions committees, including those that deal with
counter-terrorism. Incorporating more expertise in the
field of child protection on the Council's sanction
committee expert groups, as well as scaling up
reporting on violations against children, would be steps
in the right direction.

Many persistent violators, in addition to child
recruitment, have been responsible for committing
other grave violations against children, such as rape
and sexual violence. In this connection, we continue to
support the annex listing of parties accused of rape and
sexual violence against children in the report of the
Secretary-General, pursuant to resolution 1882 (2009),
as well as the adoption of resolution 1960 (2010),
which specifically established a mechanism for
monitoring and reporting sexual violence in conflict
areas on the Council's agenda. My delegation
encourages close consultations between the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict in this regard.

My delegation believes that the adoption of
resolution 1998 (2011) today is yet another milestone
in the Council's work on the issue of children and
armed conflict, and we are confident that it will go a
long way towards further protecting children around
the world and send a strong message that such crimes
will not be tolerated.
11-41151

We hope that today's open discussion will
continue to increase the Council's consequential
deliberation on this critical issue. The Republic of
Korea will continue to stand with the international
community on this issue to ensure the protection of
children around the world.

