The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Singapore.

Twelve years ago, on 11 December 1988, the
United Nations was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize for
peacekeeping. Today it is unlikely that United Nations
peacekeeping would qualify for a prize. The bloom is
off the rose. A series of disastrous experiences over the
past decade, in places like Somalia, Rwanda, Bosnia
and Sierra Leone, have clearly indicated that all is not
well in the world of peacekeeping.

The good news is that the United Nations has
made an honest effort to investigate these failures.
There has been much soul-searching on the failures and
shortcomings in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly on the part of the Secretariat.
The ground-breaking reports of the Secretary-General
on the fall of Srebrenica, of the Independent Inquiry on
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda and of the Assessment
Mission on the recent debacle in Sierra Leone all bear
testimony to this. The Secretary-General has also built
on this by commissioning the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, better known as the
Brahimi report. Some of the Panel's recommendation
have already begun to be implemented.

The bad news is that not all the lessons have been
fully taken in, either by the Security Council or by the
Secretariat. It is shocking that in the year 2000 we
should see a recurrence of problems with
peacekeeping, despite the lessons of Somalia and
Bosnia in the mid-1990s. The unprecedented move by
India and Jordan to withdraw their troops from the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
arising from a lack of consultation by the Security
Council with the troop contributors, has served as a
wake-up call to all those who are responsible for
designing and mandating peacekeeping operations.

This UNAMSIL episode demonstrated one of the
core truths we have to face head on: there can be no
peacekeeping without peacekeepers. Were the United
Nations to lose the confidence of major troop-
contributing countries (TCCS), we would be effectively
sounding the death knell or signalling the decline of
United Nations peacekeeping activities. This is why
today it was important for members of the Council to
first hear the views of TCCS before responding. The
rich dialogue we have had since this morning has
confirmed that we have adopted the right format for
today's discussions.

We have also heard today a rich menu of
suggestions on what can be done to strengthen
cooperation with TCCs. Many of these suggestions
build on ideas contained in the Brahimi report. As I am
the last speaker in this debate, I would like to briefly
highlight a few which, in our View, deserve closer
study with a view to early implementation.

First, there needs to be conceptual clarity on the
relationship between the three parties. This morning,
for example, I spoke of the triangular relationship
among the three. This means that all three should have
direct links with each other. However, when we heard
the concerns of the TCCs this morning, it occurred to
us that perhaps the working model of the United
Nations is not a triangular relationship but a linear
relationship, with the Secretariat in the middle.
Following today's debate, we need to be certain that all
three partners have a common mental map of the
structure of the consultative process: should it be
triangular or linear?

Secondly, virtually all speakers agreed that we
must develop a culture of communication and
consultations at all levels among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the TCCS. Given this high level of
agreement on the need for such a culture, why has it
not been achieved yet? One recurring theme we heard
all morning was that consultations should be a two-way
street. This calls for a high degree of openness and
timeliness on the part of the Council and the Secretariat
in sharing pertinent information with the TCCS,
especially if their troops are to be put at any risk by the
Council's decisions, while at the same time, listening
carefully to the TCCs. It also means a habit of
consulting the TCCS before major decisions are made.

Another unresolved question at this morning's
discussion was whether TCCS should be consulted only
on implementation of a mandate or even before that, on
the formulation of the mandates. Article 44 of the
Charter, which was mentioned by several TCCs today,
states that TCCS should be invited "to participate in the
decisions of the Security Council concerning the
employment of contingents of that Member's armed
forces". Should the TCCs be kept informed and their
views sought consistently by the Security Council at all
stage of their deliberations on a peacekeeping
operation?

Thirdly, among the TCCs, there seemed to be
general agreement that the present format of TCC
meeting is not functioning well, with the exception of
the private meeting held on 4 October on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). Indeed,
this UNAMSIL meeting can serve as a model for
improving the form and substance of private meetings
with the TCCs. Clearly, we need to make them more
interactive and productive with a view to achieving
greater dialogue and cooperation in these meetings.
Some guidelines have already been established for
TCC meetings. The spirit of these guidelines needs to
be realized at the meetings with TCCS.

Fourthly, many countries also felt that there was a
need for new mechanisms. Several TCCs referred to
paragraph 61 of the Brahimi report, which suggested
the institutionalization of consultation with the TCCS
through the establishment of ad hoc subsidiary organs
of the Council, as provided for in Article 29 of the
Charter. Nobody seems to know why this suggestion
was not included in the summary of key
recommendations. We need to revisit this suggestion.

There could, of course, be many forms for this
subsidiary organ. For example, a number of countries
suggested a troop contributors' committee for each
peacekeeping operation. The United Kingdom has
suggested that a Security Council working group on
peacekeeping be established, a proposal which was
supported by several delegations. In our view, the
working group should not replace the Secretariat, but
complement the Secretariat in providing the Security
Council the best possible advice on peacekeeping
matters. The working group should also not add
another layer of bureaucracy. Rather, it should add
value to the Council's work. Hence, it should have
clear, realistic and focused terms of reference.

This proposed working group, or any other body
which may be established, will also not replace the
current direct meetings between the Security Council
and the TCCs on specific peacekeeping operations.
Those meetings should continue. However, the working
group can enhance the way the Council cooperates with
the TCCs. It should serve as a professional bridge to
the TCCS, ensuring that the views and inputs as well as
the rich experience and expertise of the TCCS are
constantly fed to the Council.

Fifthly, another key phrase we heard today was
"mutual trust". Whether through the proposed working
group on peacekeeping or directly, the Security
Council can work in close partnership with the TCCs
and the Secretariat to tackle major problems in the
peacekeeping arena. The recent commitment gaps in
the contribution of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations can only be resolved jointly
by all three partners. The TCCs must be confident in
what the Security Council and the Secretariat are
doing, and the Council and the Secretariat must be
confident that the TCCs can provide the well-trained
and well-equipped troops required. In a more practical
area, such as the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers, the Council, the Secretariat and the
TCCs would have to cooperate closely to ensure that
there is no gap or contradiction in the necessary
policies and measures that need to be put in place. The
lives of peacekeepers are at stake each time the
Council makes a mistake.

Finally, I would like to call on all parties to help
develop a new spirit of cooperation between the TCCs,
the Security Council and the Secretariat. We, the
Council members, should therefore change our attitude
towards the TCCs and View them as partners, not
spoilers, in our common goal to improve the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. With a new
spirit of partnership, we may avoid a recurrence of the
disasters we saw in the last decade and perhaps pave
the way for another global award of excellence for
United Nations peacekeeping activities.

Before I resume my function as President of the
Council, may I also reiterate a point I made in my
introductory remarks this morning. We continue to
hope that as a result of the rich exchange of views we
have heard today some concrete recommendations will
emerge. If these recommendations are accepted, we
could then consider whether the Council should
formulate a resolution or presidential statement to
adopt them.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

Consultations on this issue will continue. The
next meeting of the Security Council to continue the
consideration of this item on the agenda will be fixed
in consultation with members of the Council.

The meeting rose at 6.30pm.
