Mr. Margelov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Alain
le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his detailed briefing on the situation in
Darfur and the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

The Secretary-General has repeatedly focused on
the indivisibility of peace in the Sudan and has noted
the need for a comprehensive approach to resolving the
conflict in Darfur and to achieving a peaceful
settlement in the country.

Our task today is to pave the way to peace in the
Sudan. This is a difficult task, especially when we
recall that the modern and most recent history of the
Sudan has seen an alternation between dependence and
independence, conflicts among provinces, religions and
ethnic groups, and almost continuous civil war. The
country today is in a state of deep civil strife. Military
activities of varying intensity are interrupted only by
brief and fragile ceasefires. These activities are
exacerbating the country's humanitarian problems.
Experts claim that, today, the Sudan is either incapable
of feeding itself or is having great difficulty doing so.
Meeting the alimentary needs of the South alone
already requires 75,000 tons of food. The situation is
holding only because of lowered demand in the South
and the North.

The Sudan requires the ongoing attention of the
international community. We must strive to intensify
dialogue between the conflicting parties in Darfur and
to ensure the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement between the North and the South. For
now, there is no other way to establish peace in the
Sudan.

It is necessary to recall that the conflicts in that
country are underpinned by many factors. The reasons
for clashes are sometimes difficult to identify clearly.
For example, Khartoum officially considers the rebels
to be separatists, which defines the conflict as one
between separatists and central Government. Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon places emphasis on an
environmental problem - lack of water - in Darfur
and the resulting fighting between sedentary and

nomadic populations. There is also the view that the
Janjaweed militia is forcing non-believers off their
land, which gives the conflict an ostensibly religious
dimension. Others believe that the conflict has ethnic
roots, and still others focus on natural resources and
assert that the various sides are seeking to divide
revenues from these resources.

Yet all those elements are present, which means
that a kind of civil war over economic interests is
under way in the Sudan. A number of humanitarian
organizations believe that the Sudanese Government
wishes, with the assistance of the Janjaweed, to force
African tribes out of Darfur so that they can develop
oil fields there.

I believe that all of those elements spoken of by
experts and representatives of non-governmental
organizations, and others as well, are in play in the
tragedy in the Sudan. Hence the difficulty of finding a
peaceful settlement. We are convinced that to resolve
the problems of Darfur there is no alternative to the
parties reaching comprehensive political agreements,
first and foremost on bring about security in Darfur.
The implementation of such agreements would be
supported by UNAMID.

Today, conditions for negotiations between
Khartoum and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM), the main rebel group, have become
complicated. It is well known that, in February, with
the mediation of the African Union, the United Nations
and Qatar, the sides signed an Agreement of Goodwill,
which addressed the issues of exchanges of prisoners
of war and increasing international humanitarian
activity in Darfur. This was followed by the
International Criminal Court's (ICC) issuance of a
warrant for the arrest of the President of the Sudan, the
Sudanese Government's decision to ban the activities
of a number of humanitarian missions, JEM's refusal to
continue negotiations and new armed conflict among
the sides in Darfur.

Recently in Doha, representatives of the Justice
and Equality Movement accused the Sudanese
Government of having broken off the negotiations,
saying that it was Khartoum that had failed to produce
any strategic proposals. As a result, the negotiating
process is now at an impasse. Moreover, the Qatar
agreement of good intentions lacks the signature of an
influential field commander, the opposition leader
Abdul Wahid Mohammed al-Nur. The international
community must actively work to get the sides to focus
on resuming political dialogue without preconditions.
The dialogue should be truly comprehensive. It is
necessary to put pressure on rebel leaders who refuse
to participate in a settlement. A number of provisions
of Security Council decisions remain relevant, relating
to the Council's readiness to take measures against
those who hinder progress in the peace process; we
believe that this is very important.

An agreement on the normalization of relations
with Chad was also signed at Doha, but the fact is that
it is not now being observed. There is no doubt that
stabilizing Darfur will be impossible without
strengthened trust between the Sudan and Chad. We are
gravely concerned by violations of the Sudan's borders
and air strikes against the territory of Darfur by the
Chadian air force. We believe that both sides should
demonstrate political will in establishing good-
neighbourly relations, which would be in the interest of
the entire subregion. In our View, a basis for
negotiations and the relevant mechanisms for this
normalization already exist.

But we note that the ICC's issuance of a warrant
for the arrest of the President of the Sudan, Omer
Al-Bashir, does not contribute to a peaceful settlement
in Darfur. It is well known that the African Union
favours full guarantees for the safety and security of
the President of the Sudan: in other words, progress in
the negotiations takes priority over the judicial process,
because it is considered that activities under the slogan
of judicial fairness are undermining the ongoing peace
process. And there can be no doubt that the process is
ongoing, albeit with certain complications. The African
Union also believes that the International Criminal
Court is ignoring Arab and African efforts to resolve
the conflict in the Sudan.

In the interest of making progress towards a
peaceful settlement in Darfur while ensuring fairness
and observance of the norms of international law,
Russia understands the approach of the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the Non-Aligned
Movement to resolving this political and legal
problem. In our view, what is important is making
comprehensive progress towards a settlement and
ensuring the country's territorial integrity. We are
particularly concerned about the general elections
planned in the Sudan for April 2010. Time is
inexorably moving on, and the process of preparation
for those elections is at an impasse. In that connection,

a key task is to ensure that the elections are held.
Successful elections should bring Sudanese society
together. They are also a prerequisite for the next step:
the 2011 referendum on the status of Southern Sudan,
which, essentially, is the principal element of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

With respect to implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, we welcome the
settlement of one of the most complex problems: the
conflict over the administrative borders of the Abyei
region. We are pleased that Khartoum and Juba both
agreed to the decision by the Permanent Court of
Arbitration at The Hague and have reaffirmed their
commitment to its unfailing implementation. We View
this as a very important step forward. We consider that
the decision should contribute to preserving the unity
of the Sudan, which is of paramount importance for
ensuring long-term stability in the country and
throughout the African continent.

I wish in conclusion to commend UNAMID for
its activities. I have repeatedly observed its work in the
field, and I can say that it is effective. We view the
Mission as an important integral component of the
process of settling the problems of Darfur. It is of
particular importance that during the reporting period it
was thanks to the activities of peacekeepers it was
possible to avoid numerous casualties during armed
clashes between the parties to the conflict in Darfur,
and also to provide humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population.

Let me share a personal impression: in 2009 El
Fasher and Nyala were completely different cities from
those I saw in 2007; the feeling is completely different
there. To a large extent, the feeling one gets when
arriving today can be attributed to the activities of
UNAMID.

I wish in particular to thank the United Kingdom
delegation for having prepared a draft resolution on the
extension of the Mission's mandate. The Russian
delegation is ready to continue working on that
Council decision. It is necessary to ensure a unified
approach by the Security Council to resolving the
problems of Darfur. Only in that way will it be possible
to make progress in the political dialogue among the
parties in Darfur, to deploy and ensure the
effectiveness of UNAMID and to normalize the
humanitarian situation. I wish also to emphasize that
we are looking to move ahead in all areas of a Sudan
settlement on the sole basis of constructive and
equitable dialogue between the international
community and the Government of the Sudan, with
respect for the country's sovereignty.

