Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
High Commissioner for Refugees for her briefing. We
appreciate her contributions to the question of refugees.

The question of refugees has always been a salient
problem in conflict areas and an important element in the
settlement of conflicts. The High Commissioner's briefing
shows that the massive flow and militarization of refugees
have become serious destabilizing elements in Africa,
especially in the Great Lakes region. The return and
settlement of refugees are also keys to lasting peace and
stability in post-war Bosnia.

Solving the refugee question requires us to settle not
only the immediate problems, but also to tackle its root
causes. While providing humanitarian assistance to
conflict regions, helping to protect refugees and arranging
for their voluntary repatriation and resettlement, the
international community must also seek at a deeper level
the sources of regional conflicts and humanitarian crises.
It should strive to eradicate the root causes of the refugee
problem by encouraging national unity, increasing mutual
trust, promoting economic development and safeguarding
the stability of the countries affected.

At the same time, we should take care not to
politicize the question of refugees, which would hinder
the settlement of the question. Terrorist forces in some
regions, in order to achieve their political aims, obstruct
the return of refugees, take them hostage by force, and
extend, exacerbate and prolong humanitarian crises. Such
an approach is deeply inhumane. The international
community should understand this phenomenon clearly.

The settlement of the question of refugees and the
provision of humanitarian assistance to them are the
collective responsibility of the international community.
UNHCR, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other international humanitarian organizations have
long worked tirelessly to that end. Many international
humanitarian workers have laboured in the most difficult

 

and dangerous circumstances, making tremendous efforts
and even laying down their lives. I take this opportunity to
pay them our respects and express our condolences. The
Chinese delegation supports the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs and UNHCR for their ongoing leading
role.

