Ms. Del Ponte: Thank you very much, Madam
President, for having given me the opportunity to
provide the Council with my assessment of the
progress made in the completion strategy and to
highlight the problems that we continue to face. A
written assessment has already been delivered; I intend
to focus on the main issues.

A number of steps were taken internally to
increase the efficiency of the Tribunal while
maintaining the highest standards expected from an
international court created by the United Nations.

In this regard, I have proposed the joining of
cases with a similar crime base. I have filed four
motions for that purpose, three of which have been
accepted by the Chambers. One trial with six accused
has already begun. Later this year, a consolidated trial,
with nine accused charged with crimes committed in
Srebrenica, will start, as will another, with six leading
political and military figures indicted for crimes
committed by Serb forces in Kosovo.

My second initiative has been to propose the
transfer of cases involving mid- and lower-level
perpetrators. That undertaking was met with strong
opposition from some victims' groups. However, my
assessment of the local judiciaries is that they are now
capable of trying such cases. I have thus filed 13
motions, beginning in September 2004, requesting the
transfer of cases to the domestic jurisdictions of the
former Yugoslavia. There are no other cases at the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) that could be transferred to the
region, as, according to the criteria set by the Council,
they all concern the most senior leaders responsible for
the most serious crimes.

Thirdly, I have been working with the judges in
taking all possible measures to ensure that the
Tribunal's own process is as efficient as possible. I
have put forward packages of reforms that, if
implemented, would significantly accelerate the pre-
trial and trial proceedings. Given the seriousness of the
cases at the ICTY, it is essential to urgently improve
pre-trial management, so that issues are narrowed
before the trials start and trials can focus on truly
contested matters.

Decisions on key issues must be made long
before the beginning of a trial. For instance, it is
important that a decision be rendered very soon on a
motion regarding the disclosure of materials in
electronic or hard copy that I filed in the Seselj case
over two years ago.

I have also proposed that a much more dynamic
approach be taken on adjudicated facts. Such facts
have been proven in previous trials, and the Chambers
have the power to decide that they must not be proven
again in a given trial. The instrument of adjudicated
facts is therefore a key tool to reduce the scope of the
trials. For instance, the prosecution has proven an
international armed conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina
no less than five times, wasting months and months on
proving the same facts, sometimes with the same
witnesses, in case after case. We will have to prove it
again, for the sixth time, in the ongoing Prlic trial.

I have also taken the lead in promoting the
efficient use of time at trial. For example, in the Prlic
case, the prosecution has put forward a 10-point plan to
streamline the trial, within the time limit set by the
President of the Trial Chamber, for the prosecution and
defence, respectively, to present their cases and
undertake cross-examination. That plan was accepted
by the Trial Chamber, and its implementation will have
serious positive effects.

During the judges' plenary on 30 May, an
amendment to the rules was unfortunately adopted that
would allow a Trial Chamber to direct the Prosecutor
to cut counts in an indictment. In view of the checks
and balances contained in the Statute, and particularly
the duties and responsibilities of the Prosecutor under
the Statute, such directions by the Chambers can be
interpreted only as purely advisory in nature. Only the
Security Council has the power to modify the ICTY
Statute, which guarantees the independence of the
Prosecutor and assigns to her the responsibility of
determining which charges to bring in a prosecution.

I am continuously reviewing our cases, and I will
not hesitate to cut counts when there are clear judicial
reasons for doing so. It is, however, impossible to
arbitrarily cut and slice cases which are complex by
their very nature. My mandate, given by the Security
Council, is to prosecute the most senior officials, that
is to say persons who were most often far removed
from the crime scenes and whose responsibility can be
established only by examining a number of different
crimes, often in different geographical areas.
Removing one or several counts artificially may
seriously undermine the prosecution case. It eventually
leads to impunity for certain crimes and does not do
justice to the victims, who are already puzzled by the
completion strategy.

Allow me to cite an example: Srebrenica. Which
counts should I eliminate - those referring to the
killings of over 7,000 men and boys, or those relating
to the forcible transfer of 25,000 women, children and
elderly people? Doing either would mean that I would
be presenting only half the picture of the serious
crimes that took place in Srebrenica. How can I justify
presenting only half the picture of the brutal crimes
that took place in the former Yugoslavia? Those are
choices that, as a Prosecutor who is also representing
the victims, I am not ready to make. It would introduce
an unacceptable disparity in the treatment of the
persons accused by the Tribunal. There must be no
justice a la carte.

Speeding up the proceedings is a top priority of
my Office; obtaining the arrest and transfer of the
remaining indictees at large is another. It has been said
a thousand times that it is inconceivable that the ICTY
could close its doors with Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic at large. I want to stress again before the
Council that impunity for these two most serious
architects of the crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, both of whom are accused of genocide,
would represent a terrible, terrible blow not only to the
Tribunal and its success or failure, but to the future of
international justice as a whole.

Serbia has the main responsibility to locate, arrest
and transfer all six fugitives. According to my
information, Mladic, Tolimir, Hadzic and Zupljanin are
in Serbia. Furthermore, there are established leads
connecting Serbia to Karadzic, whose location is
unknown, and to Djordjevic, who is still believed to be
in Russia. The fact that Mladic was an active officer of
the army of Yugoslavia until May 2002 - a year and a
half after the fall of Milosevic and seven years after he
had been indicted - adds to Belgrade's responsibility
for its failure to deliver the former General.

Over the past 12 months, the Serbian authorities
have repeatedly promised that Mladic would be
delivered soon. I was told regularly by Serbian officials
that the circle was closing in around him. At the end of
April, in View of Serbia's failure to achieve the
promised results, I reassessed the whole operation and
found out that it had been suffering from grave defects.
During 2005 there was no real attempt to locate and
arrest Mladic; time was wasted in trying to encourage
him to surrender voluntarily. Since the beginning of
this year, it seems that further actions have been
undertaken. In particular, his support network has been
targeted and several of his supporters arrested. These
actions have sometimes been spectacular; they fed
many news articles, but they lacked the necessary
discretion that would have permitted the acquisition of
information leading to Mladic.

The most blatant dysfunction is the total lack of
cooperation between the military and the civilian
authorities. The inconsistencies that I could identify in
the various reports provided to me came as another
surprise and forced me to suspect that some of the
information contained in those reports had been
doctored for political reasons. In our cooperation with
Belgrade, we have not managed so far to achieve the
level of trust and transparency that we have achieved
with other countries. I will continue to engage the
Serbian Government in the months to come, trying to
establish more confidence and better communication.

As for the other aspects of the cooperation with
Belgrade, a mission was sent in the second half of May
to test the new arrangement agreed upon with the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro regarding
access to archives. That has been a long-standing
problem. The first accounts that I have received from
my staff are encouraging.

To sum up, the cooperation provided by Serbia to
the ICTY has been and remains very difficult and
frustrating. There is serious political and administrative
resistance within the system, and strong political will is
needed to overcome those obstacles. On the basis of
the facts in my possession, I cannot be convinced that
Serbia is ready to arrest Mladic. For a number of
reasons, the authorities may still prefer to force him to
surrender voluntarily.

Republika Srpska, within Bosnia and
Herzegovina, also has to substantially increase its
efforts to locate and arrest fugitives. While it is unclear
whether Radovan Karadzic still sometimes resides in
or travels through Republika Srpska, it is certain that
part of his network and part of his family remain there.
In the reporting period, the cooperation provided by
Republika Srpska to my Office has somewhat
decreased, because of political reasons and the
reshuffling of police personnel. Now that a new team is
in place, the search for Karadzic must rapidly intensify.
My office has maintained a positive working
relationship with Montenegro for over a year, and I
expect that cooperation to continue at full speed. Part
of Karadzic's family is living in Montenegro, and he
can count on numerous supporters there.

I am particularly disappointed about the lack of
movement regarding another important fugitive,
Vlastimir Djordjevic. The investigation carried out by
the Russian authorities, as they told us, has failed to
produce results. That will have negative implications
for the completion strategy, because if Djordjevic is
not surrendered within the next weeks it will be
impossible to try him together with his six co-accused.
Resources will therefore have to be wasted in a
separate trial. Djordjevic is accused of very serious
crimes committed by Serbian forces in Kosovo. The
long and unexplained delays in the transfer of
Zelenovic, who has been detained in Russia since
August 2005, do not allow for optimism regarding the
future of the ICTY's cooperation with the Russian
Federation.

It is also worrying that a sister organization of the
Tribunal, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), refuses to cooperate
fully with the Tribunal. These days, my Office has
more difficulties gaining access to documents
belonging to UNMIK than it does gaining access to
documents in any other place in the former Yugoslavia.
Furthermore, UNMIK's leadership is encouraging a
climate that deters witnesses from talking to my
investigators when it comes to the Albanian
perpetrators. Very recently there have been some
indications that UNMIK is willing to take a more
constructive attitude in its relations with my Office.

In my last report I explained at length why
Karadzic and Mladic are still at large more than 10
years after they were first indicted. My assessment
remains the same today. Serbia has to do much more to
arrest and transfer Ratko Mladic. The arrest of
Radovan Karadzic is a shared responsibility of Serbia,
Republika Srpska, NATO and the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR).

It is pathetic that today nobody is actively
searching for Karadzic. The planned downsizing of
EUFOR will further aggravate the situation. Since no
one else seems to have the political will to locate and
arrest Karadzic and Mladic, I will have no choice but
to seek from the Security Council the powers to arrest
fugitives wherever they are and to allocate to my
Office the resources necessary for that. Ultimately, I do
not see any other way for the ICTY to fulfil its
mandate and satisfy the victims' legitimate
expectations of the United Nations.

