Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this innovative and important open
debate on the theme "War, its lessons and the search
for permanent peace". Let me also thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his invaluable contributions to our discussion.

At the outset, allow me to affirm that this is the
right place to have this kind of debate. We all know
that the United Nations - especially its Security
Council e came into existence to rectify the
inefficiencies of the League of Nations, which failed
to stop the Second World War. The United Nations was
established in response to the magnitude of the threat
to peace and security and was another international
collective determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. While there has been no other
world war in the nearly 69 years of the United Nations
existence, there have been hundreds of inter-State
and intra-State conflicts, particularly on the African
continent.

It is unfortunate that, like its predecessor, the
United Nations has failed to prevent conflicts. It is at
least very true for the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda - a genocide all of us know was preventable.
The Security Council chose not to heed the call of
its people on the ground, and the troop-contributing
countries opted to pull out their peacekeepers and their
expatriates, in some cases leaving defenceless people
who had sought refuge in their camps in the hands of the
Interahamwe militias. As a result, more than 1 million
people were mercilessly killed in only 100 days. As we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the 1994
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, we are constantly
reminded of the United Nations peacekeepers standing
by when our families were slaughtered.

While we successfully pulled ourselves up from
the lowest point, the main question is whether the
international community, including the United Nations,
has learned something that will motivate it to play a
more vigorous role in the future. Although we have seen
some progress in the past years, including through the
doctrine of the responsibility to protect, the conflicts
in Darfur, Libya, Syria or the Central African Republic
remind us that much more needs to be done today.

You referred in your statement, Mr. President, to the
United Nations Operation in the Congo (ONUC). I think
that the role of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a perfect illustration of its
failure to reach a permanent peace in that country.
As you said, Sir, the United Nations was in the Congo
right after its independence, through ONUC. But
unfortunately, 54 years later, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is still confronted with deep conflict, not
only in the east but also in other regions of the country.
In endeavouring to repair the failure the United Nations
had there, let us try to avoid shortcuts by looking for
scapegoats for the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, on the contrary, go deeper, to the root
causes of the problem. We should do so if we really
mean it, if we really want to help the Congolese people.
This could be very important for our future.

For Rwandans, the memory of the past 20 years
has shaped our understanding and allowed us to
forge a new nation that is successful in restoring
trust in State institutions, engaging Rwandans in the
reconstruction of sustainable reconciliation, building
a competitive economy, promoting development and
restorative justice and overcoming ethnic divisions. We
believe that those are the foundations of any preventive
efforts at the national level, which in turn may shape
regional and international approaches to the search for
permanent peace. As the concept paper (S/2014/30, annex) outlined, there is a need to share experiences of
meaningful reconciliation and best practices to cement
lasting peace.

Rwanda went through a number of processes with a
view to aligning our country's needs with our national
realities, and adopted homegrown solutions such as the
gacaca courts, which is a grass-roots form ofrestorative
justice. For Rwanda, justice and reconciliation in post-
conflict societies are inextricably linked. The people of
Rwanda came to embrace that homegrown system as a
reconciliatory justice mechanism. The gacaca courts,
which closed their doors in June 2012, handled about
2 million cases in 10 years. Meanwhile, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), while
establishing useful jurisprudence in the punishment
of genocide and other war crimes, has handled only
75 cases in 17 years, at a very high cost. Ifl may put
this in context, as numerous as the causes of conflict
are, it is important for communities and stakeholders
to be more specific in the prescription of solutions
and take into account the specificities of not only the
conflict but also the community to be restored. We are
in a position today to share this unique experience with
other post-conflict societies as a means of fostering
reconciliation and preventing further conflict.

Another milestone on the Rwandan path towards
solid unity and reconciliation was the adoption of the
so-called Ndi Umunyarwanda programme, which,
literally translated, means "I am a Rwandan", as part
of our healing process. Rwandans understood that if
we really needed to build sustainable development, we
must build on a strong foundation, free of any mistrust.
The Ndi Umunyarwanda is therefore an initiative aimed
at looking beyond what divided Rwandans to achieve a
nation built on trust, with open dialogue, truth-telling,
repentance, forgiveness and healing, to strengthen the
culture of accountability, to put an end to impunity and
to ensure reconciliation and unity.

The concept paper that you shared with us,
Mr. President, highlights the role of history and
archives in the aftermath of a conflict and how the
United Nations can help in changing historical realities
into a shared understanding of the past. That brings
me to the question of the ICTR archives. We believe
that those archives should be transferred to Rwanda
because they constitute an integral part of our history.
They are vital to the preservation of the memory of
the genocide and will play a critical role in educating
future generations to guard against genocide denial
and revisionism, thereby contributing to the permanent
peace in Rwanda.

Given the subject matter under discussion today, I
would not end my statement without highlighting the
role of regional and subregional organizations. Due to
the evolving nature of modern conflicts and warfare,
States and the wider international community have
been forging new ways to respond to conflict. The
United Nations has recognized the growing role of
national and regional actors in conflict prevention. That
is so relevant that Governments, regional organizations
and the international community are now shifting their
focus to addressing the underlying causes of conflict,
while increasing the capacity to streamline and
implement their efforts to intervene when civilians are
endangered.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the call that
we made last April during Rwanda's presidency of the
Council (see S/PV.6946) for the Security Council to do
more to prevent conflicts instead of managing them.
As we come to grips with our responsibilities to protect
people from the genocidal Governments, it is essential
not only to strengthen early warning systems but also
to deploy important tools, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, preventive diplomacy and other good
offices. Equally important is the need to invest in
the development of strong institutions at the national
level, including legislative and judicial bodies, which
establish the foundations of good governance based
on the rule of law, democratic principles and values
and accountability. All those elements contribute to
building societies that are resilient to violence and wars.

Before ending, I would like to thank the Ambassador
of France, our friend Gerard.

(spoke in French)

His was a great statement. I hope that we can draw
lessons from it and expand the experience of France to
a number of other countries.

