Mr. Powles (New Zealand): May I begin by saying
how grateful my delegation is to have this opportunity to
take part in an open debate of the Security Council on this
most important matter. I would also like to congratulate
you, Sir, as the representative of Canada, on your country's
leading role at the present time in focusing the attention of
the international community on the need for an adequate
response. In addition, I would like to express my thanks to
the heads of the various agencies who have briefed the
Council in open meetings over recent weeks. The facts they
have laid before us emphasize the urgency of the task
before the Council.

I will not repeat what the experts and others have said
previously about the scale of the problem of protecting
civilians in the conflicts at present raging in Africa and
Europe in particular. No one disputes the appalling
statistics we have heard. Instead, I want to go straight to
how New Zealand thinks the United Nations should
address the issue. We see two key aspects to the issue:
the legal framework and the functioning of the Security
Council.

The distinction between combatants and those taking
no active part in the conflict is one of the oldest and most
fundamental principles of international law. I agree with
the observation made by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia, at the briefing on 12 February, to the effect that
our basic premise should be that current humanitarian law
comprises all the necessary principles and basic rules.
We have the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
especially the Fourth, and the two Protocols of 1977. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child also bears on the
problem. There are also new standards, such as the code
of conduct on displaced persons elaborated by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which need to
be implemented and incorporated into the body of
international humanitarian law.

A recent positive development has been the entry
into force of the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. Its true effectiveness
will, of course, depend on its wide acceptance, and we
urge those Member States that have not yet signed the
Convention to do so. We are also interested in
suggestions made on several occasions during the two
briefings of the Council on the need to broaden the scope
and application of that Convention, in particular to cover
humanitarian workers, by means of a protocol. We would
welcome further discussion on this point.

The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court is an essential step forward in promoting
the protection of civilians. It holds the promise of an end
to impunity. The establishment of the Court will send the
strongest message to perpetrators of attacks on civilians
that they will be held accountable. What we have heard
in the briefings given to the Council and in today's debate
so far only adds urgency to the need for early ratification
and the widest possible participation by the international
community. Obviously, we must together bring the work
being done in the Preparatory Commission, as we speak,
to an early and positive conclusion, so that the Court may
become a reality as soon as possible. Overall, we
welcome the growing acceptance of the fact that the
protection of individuals transcends the domestic affairs

 

of States. National sovereignty is not an absolute in this
context.

With one or two exceptions the basic legal framework
is sound. The international community now needs to turn its
attention to the effective implementation of the law. A first
step is to achieve greater adherence, for example, to the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions. We need
also to generate greater understanding of the role of
customary international law in this area. Finally, and of
fundamental importance, the dissemination of international
humanitarian law needs our fullest support, so that the
knowledge of the basic rules governing armed conflict and
human rights spreads to all those who bear arms. The work
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is
often dangerous and thankless, but always vital, and I take
this opportunity to put on record my Government's
gratitude for the tremendous job it does.

It is appropriate that we address these issues in a year
which represents the centenary of the Hague Peace
Conference and the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions. The meetings in The Hague and St.
Petersburg, as well as the twenty-seventh International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in
November, will provide further opportunities for the
international community to develop ideas and find practical
solutions to these problems.

I would like now to turn to the practical steps we
believe the Security Council should take towards the
protection of civilians in carrying out its mandate to
maintain or restore international peace and security.

Two of the largest peacekeeping operations ever
undertaken by the United Nations in fact had a strong
humanitarian purpose. In Somalia, for instance, the United
Nations peacekeeping operations began with efforts to
facilitate humanitarian aid to people trapped by civil war
and famine. In Bosnia the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) assisted in the provision of humanitarian aid
in the midst of a vicious war and sought to impose
constraints on the belligerents, including through the
establishment of such measures as safe areas for civilians.

In the first half of the 1990s and in the new spirit of
cooperation following the end of the cold war, the Council
showed it was ready to attempt solutions to humanitarian
problems in high-risk environments. Failure was a constant
prospect, and the two operations to which I have referred
are in the conventional wisdom these days indeed counted
as failures. I believe nevertheless there is much to be
learned from them that could be highly relevant today.

For example, let us look at the safe areas in Bosnia,
which were established as an emergency and temporary
measure in May 1993 after the Council sent a fact-finding
mission of its own members into the field. UNPROFOR
was subsequently given the task of deterring attacks upon
these areas, and the use of NATO air power to support
UNPROFOR was also authorized by the Council. These
areas were held for more than two years, sheltering
thousands of civilians, albeit in dire conditions and with
continuing problems regarding their demilitarization.
Disaster finally struck at Srebrenica in July 1995 when
the UNPROFOR positions were overrun. The appalling
extent of the atrocities committed is still being revealed
as new mass graves are exhumed.

Was the original decision to establish the safe areas
a mistake, even morally questionable, given the false
sense of security they may have engendered? I do not
believe so. There were many other contributing factors,
particularly the failure to provide the necessary numbers
of troops to sustain the deterrence role, which I will not
detail here.

The transfer of authority from UNPROFOR to the
Implementation Force (IFOR) in Bosnia on 20 December
1995 in my view marks a watershed in the Council's
approach during this decade to its responsibilities. I still
recall reports of the handover occasion when, at the
appointed hour, troops designated to stay on with IFOR
put on their national headgear, some of them stamping
their blue berets into the ground. Such was the frustration
ordinary soldiers had felt at the ambiguities implicit in the
UNPROFOR operation.

Since that time it seems the Council has become
increasingly unsure of itself in the face of the
humanitarian disasters before it. As Mr. Sommaruga, the
head of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
asked at the beginning of his statement to the Council on
12 February, does the Council's interest in humanitarian
affairs not perhaps mask a certain feeling of impotence at
the magnitude of the task that confronts us?

I believe we need a reassertion of leadership from
the Council, including a willingness to attempt innovative
solutions. This includes at the conflict prevention stage
where, for example, the United Nations can take pride in
the successful and critically important United Nations

 

Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

If I may offer an example of an innovative approach
from my own region in which the United Nations now also
has an important role, I would like to talk very briefly
about Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. During a little-
reported conflict which lasted nine years from 1989, it is
estimated that as many as 10,000 people, the vast majority
civilians, may have died. Following a series of peace talks
in New Zealand, a truce-monitoring group, and
subsequently a peace-monitoring group, including personnel
from my own country, Vanuatu, Fiji and Australia, were
deployed.

Stationed throughout the island, members of the truce-
monitoring group and the peace-monitoring group have
literally had to trek through miles of mountainous jungle to
spread the message of peace and monitor the process. Their
job has not been easy. Language barriers, the heat and the
sheer ruggedness of the terrain have proved challenging.
But perhaps the most remarkable thing about the conduct of
this operation on an island where so many lives have been
taken is that our forces took the conscious decision to
deploy without any arms. This was to show that they meant
no harm and posed no threat to anyone. Indeed, there were
already enough guns on the island. So far the peace process
remains on track. New Zealand has welcomed the
establishment of the United Nations Political Office on
Bougainville and is encouraged by the positive role United
Nations officials are playing in support of the process.

Finally, the Security Council has perhaps the most
difficult job in the world. The matters it is called to deal
with include some of the longest-running and bloodiest
conflicts since the Second World War. Some of them, for
example Angola, are orphans, as Ambassador Amorim
recently put it, in that their former international sponsors
have no further use for them. The toll on civilians is
horrific. The Council must strive to identify solutions,
however, and, critically important, it must remain the
ultimate and essential source of authority for collective
security action. We look forward to a positive outcome
from this important initiative on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

