Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): Let me thank
Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and Ms. Sima Samar for their detailed
briefings on the current situation in Afghanistan. I also
thank Ambassador Adela Raz for her statement.

We stress the central role of the United Nations
in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan and
express appreciation and strong support for all the
efforts of the Secretary-General and UNAMA, in
accordance with resolution 2405 (2018). We welcome
the achievements of the National Unity Government
in political, economic, governance and social reforms,
in the management of the transition, as well as in the
organization of the parliamentary elections in 2018.
We hope that the presidential elections in Afghanistan
in September will be another important step towards
democracy in the country.

Unfortunately, despite the positive changes that
have been made, the political situation in Afghanistan
remains unstable. First of all, it is characterized by
the continued activities of armed anti-Government
and international extremist and terrorist groups, and
illegal human, arms and drugs trafficking. We are
also concerned about the situation in Afghanistan
and the region with respect to foreign fighters and
terrorists returning from conflict zones. In that regard,
Kyrgyzstan welcomes the steps taken by the Government
of Afghanistan to promote peace through the offer of
talks, and expresses full support for its peace initiatives
aimed at establishing stability in Afghanistan.

On the other side, Kyrgyzstan is ready to
contribute to the development of the peace process in
Afghanistan within the United Nations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Moscow format, the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Kabul Process and
other international platforms. The Kyrgyz Republic
is interested in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan
and calls for further cooperation with Afghanistan
and the development of regional cooperation and
confidence-building measures to resolve the situation
in the country.

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2019/493), the meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group, held in
Bishkek in April, was co-chaired by Afghanistan.
Participants discussed cooperation with Afghanistan,
as well as progress on the Afghan peace process,
and reviewed the Contact Group's draft road map for
further action.

My country hosted the eighth annual meeting of
the Deputy Foreign Ministers of the Central Asian
countries and Afghanistan in November 2018 in
Bishkek. The meeting was organized by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of my country and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA). We are pleased that representatives of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
also participated in the meeting. During the meeting,
the joint efforts of the Central Asian States and
Afghanistan to respond to threats and challenges in the
region on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis and
within the framework of cooperation with UNRCCA
were reviewed. In addition, the participants discussed
potential opportunities for cooperation between
Central Asian States and Afghanistan and various
joint initiatives that will contribute to the economic
development of the country.

The Kyrgyz Republic is promoting initiatives to
establish a trilateral Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan-Afghanistan
agro-industrial consortium and the international centre
for Afghan research and regional cooperation in the
city of Bishkek. We also express our readiness to
consider the possibility of teaching Afghan students in
educational institutions of our country with financial
support from foreign donors.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we support
the commitment of all Central Asian States to long-
term cooperation with Afghanistan. Along with our
international partners, we are ready to fully cooperate
to solve the tasks before us.

