Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic): Mr. President, it is a pleasant duty for me to
address you on behalf of the Algerian delegation and to
convey my sincerest congratulations on the way in which
you are directing the work of the Security Council this
month. I am quite sure that under your wise guidance the
Council will be able to fully discharge its responsibilities
with respect to the very delicate situation prevailing in the
Palestinian territories.

We should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, for the very skilful way in which he conducted
the Council's work last month.

The representative of Djibouti has set forth the
position of the Arab Group, and I will therefore confine
myself to noting certain general points.

In September 1993 the Declaration of Principles was
agreed between the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the Israeli Government. Despite the obstacles
which thus far have made it impossible to fully and
effectively implement the agreement in accordance with
the timetable which was established, the international
community was won over by the promise of peace in the
Middle East. It had expected the Israeli Government to
take confidence-building measures instead of continuing
practices which are contrary to the Fourth Geneva
Convention - collective punishment, sealing off occupied
territories and isolating Jerusalem, setting up new
settlements and enlarging existing settlements -
particularly since the Security Council had reiterated on
a number of occasions that the Fourth Geneva Convention
was fully applicable to the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem. Consequently,
Israel's continuing to change the nature of the city of
Jerusalem, its establishment of settlements surrounding it
and its isolation of the rest of Palestinian territory all
destabilize the peace process and contribute to worsening
the situation.

 

The massive presence of settlers in the Gaza Strip,
protected by the Israeli army, also destabilizes the peace
process, because it is liable to give rise to acts of Violence
and retaliation. The presence of settlements in occupied
Palestinian territories is, to a certain extent, a kind of bomb
which may explode at any minute. The most recent acts of
Violence have played into the hands of the extremists in
Israel, who are asking that the settlers be armed, that the
occupied territories be sealed off and that the armed
protection of the settlements be strengthened.

None of these factors give grounds for optimism;
rather, they make us believe that the intervention of the
international community has become necessary to prevent
a deterioration of the situation as well as its escalation and
confrontation between the parties. Therefore, we fully
appreciate the importance of the Security Council's
studying the negative developments in the Palestinian
territories as well as their negative impact on the
possibilities of peace.

The success which we so earnestly desire for the
peace process in the Middle East requires that we should
control any factors which might help to poison the
atmosphere or thwart the effective implementation of the
agreements between the parties concerned. Consequently,
the question of the settlements is the real litmus test of
whether the Israelis are really anxious to reach a genuine,
lasting and just peace with the Palestinians. It was the
settlements which gave rise to the massacre in the Al-
Haram Al-Ibrahimi mosque a year ago and the acts of
Violence and retaliation which have resulted in numerous
Victims. Since the same settlements are currently impeding
the peace process, the Security Council should consider this
question very seriously and utilize its mandate to serve
peace in this very delicate period.

