Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2327
(2016) today, renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). It is a
vital Mission, carrying out perhaps our most important
role f protecting civilians when they need it most. I
want to pay tribute to the brave men and women that
make up the peacekeeping force as they undertake their
duty in one of the world's most dangerous environments.
In many ways, they are charged with, let us be frank,
an impossible task - peacekeeping where there is no
peace to keep. Some point to progress on the ground;
that is not what I see.

Last month, we heard from Adama Dieng that
violence is ongoing and at risk of dangerously
escalating along ethnic lines. Despite statements from
the Government, the people of South Sudan continue
to risk their lives to flee the violence in their country,
with over 7,000 refugees arriving in Uganda alone in
the second week of December. So the work of UNMISS
matters, and it is painfully clear that it has much, much
more to do.

The United Kingdom calls on all South Sudanese
leaders to end the violence. All parties must genuinely
engage in an inclusive political solution. We have been
waiting far too long to see meaningful action from
leaders in Juba. We have heard the Government's
statements. It says it is pursuing peace. It says it is
agreeing to the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force, and it claims that it will allow UNMISS to fulfil
its mandates. We must now see that in its actions and
not just in its words. We call on our partners in the
region to support the United Nations efforts in South
Sudan. The conflict does not stop at its borders; in fact,
South Sudan's neighbours are the ones that know it the

best of all. They are now playing host to over a million
refugees. For peace to take root, we need to ensure that
the United Nations is acting in cooperation with the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, all pressing for the same ultimate end.

The people of South Sudan can no longer afford
empty promises. They are the ones who are paying
the highest price for this war, and they are paying for
it with their lives and livelihoods. If the Government
continues its track record of failing to deliver peace, we
can and must act. Everyone around the table knows that
we do have tools. Those include sanctions and an arms
embargo. The United Kingdom believes that those are
tools that should be used to save lives. We believe that it
is critical that this be linked to actions that undermine
the ceasefire and result in widespread violence. The
Government must not impede the Regional Protection
Force, but it must also understand that continued
disregard for its citizens will not be tolerated by the
Council. We wanted that to be explicit in the text, so I
am being very explicit now.

