The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

Ijoin delegations that took the floor before me to
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani and her team for their detailed
briefing. The Government of Equatorial Guinea
follows very closely the activities of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Syria, as well
as those of all agencies of the United Nations system
and other humanitarian organizations operating in the
country since the beginning of the war. We reiterate our
praise for the arduous and noble work they have carried
out over the past two months, together with the more
than 1,700 United Nations staff deployed throughout
the country.

As can be seen from the briefing provided by
Ms. Ghelani, the situation in Syria remains extremely
serious, not only in the Idlib de-escalation zone, which
remains under the control of terrorist organizations and
non-State armed opposition groups, but also in Aleppo
and in the south-east of Deir ez-Zor governorate. The
risk of military escalation, especially in Idlib, continues
to increase, further complicating the operating
environment for humanitarian organizations aimed
at meeting basic needs and ensuring the protection
of civilians. It should be recalled that air strikes and
intense fighting between the parties continue to have
a direct impact on educational and medical facilities,
injuring and killing dozens of civilians. There is no
doubt that, despite almost eight years of conflict and the
partial easing of the intensity of the overall violence,
the humanitarian crisis in Syria persists. We are talking
about nearly 12 million Syrians who need humanitarian
assistance, and approximately 6 million refugees still
in neighbouring countries. Such statistics are appalling
and require a collective awareness of the urgent need to
end the hostilities in Syria and the permanent spectre
of war.

Moreover, in line with the Secretary-General's
remarks, Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns
the ongoing serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights violations and
abuses committed by the parties to the conflict. In that
regard, we support the idea that the Syrian authorities
should cooperate closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
protect and promote human rights on the ground in the
current context of war.

Despite that bleak backdrop, we welcome the
progress made on the basis of resolution 2449 (2018)
and other relevant Security Council resolutions to
effectively deploy the second convoy of the United
Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to the
Rukban camp for displaced persons. That humanitarian
convoy, which the Council had called for repeatedly
and is now referred to as the largest of all time, will
help save the lives of more than 40,000 people living in
appalling conditions.

The Syrians have suffered terribly because of this
war - suffering that should prompt us to seek practical
solutions that do not become a dead letter or end up in
statements and lawsuits. In that regard, we believe that
there is still a need to ensure that the Idlib de-escalation
zone be maintained and protected in accordance with
international humanitarian law and that diplomatic
efforts be stepped up in the quest for a political
solution to the crisis in Syria, in accordance with

resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

