Mr. Fernandez-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to express thanks for the
statements made by the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation at the International Committee
of the Red Cross. But I would especially like to thank
the Argentine presidency for organizing today's debate,
particularly as it falls on World Humanitarian Day. I
congratulate you, Madam President, for contributing to
the consolidation of this issue on the Security Council's
agenda following the success of the February and July
debates (see S/PV.6917 and S/PV.7003), and ahead of
the Secretary-General's report, which I expect we will
have another opportunity to discuss again in this forum.

Spain aligns itself with the statement made by
the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union and wishes to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.

The protection of civilians is a primary responsibility
of States, which, to be fulfilled, requires the adoption
of measures that will prevent violations, protect victims
and ensure that those who have infringed the rules are
punished. Prevention, protection and punishment - or,
in other words, complying with the relevant international
regulations, guaranteeing humanitarian access and
ensuring accountability - those are the three elements
on which, in accordance with the guidelines provided
for today's debate, I will be focusing in my statement.

The necessary starting point for compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law is a commitment at the national level - the signing
and ratification of the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols, the proper incorporation of their
rules into national legislation, the appropriate training
of its armed forces and members of the judiciary on the
issue, and the promotion of its basic rules within civil
society. With that in mind, my country participated at
the Oslo Conference and fully supports the initiative
of Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross aimed at devising mechanisms to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, Spain attaches the utmost importance to
the inclusion of international humanitarian law within
training programmes for armed forces, and has done so
itself, including incorporating fundamental principles
of proportionality, precaution and distinction between
combatants and civilians, as well as rules on the
protection of civilians and specially protected people
and the responsibilities and obligations that arise
therefrom.

The General Assembly has recently approved the
Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 67/234 B), which my
country has signed and is in the process of ratifying.
My delegation is convinced that that legal instrument
will have a direct impact on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

Access to humanitarian assistance is one of the
key pillars not only of humanitarian action but also of
compliance with international humanitarian law, since,
pursuant to the latter, States 4 and all parties to a
conflict - have the obligation to guarantee rapid and
unimpeded access to affected populations. As the report
of the Secretary-General entitled "Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations" (A/68/84) acknowledges, it is
unacceptable that, still today, in certain emergencies,
some States and non-State armed groups obstruct
humanitarian access through bureaucratic hindrances
or violence against humanitarian actors, including
medical personnel. Those responsible for that, be
they States or non-State groups, must know that the
arbitrary refusal of humanitarian access can amount
to a violation of international humanitarian law, and,
as such, be punishable by the competent national and
international institutions.

Spain believes that humanitarian access should be
negotiated with all those who have the responsibility for
and the ability to grant it. Criminalizing humanitarian
engagement with non-State groups might result in
impeding humanitarian access and therefore represents
an indirect attack on the civilian population.

For the aforementioned reasons, my country
considers that the international community must use
all available means to fight those situations. Both
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council have engaged in an intense and fruitful
debate on those issues that will certainly strengthen
the doctrine. I call on the Security Council which has
the legitimacy, responsibility and means to guarantee
an adequate humanitarian response to take note of
those debates and act on that basis. The presidential
statement issued following the debate that took place
last February (S/PRST/2013/2) reflects that concern
and constitutes progress that we trust will be embodied
in a future resolution.

As we already had the occasion to highlight last
February (see S/PV.6917), my delegation considers
that the fight against impunity is a fundamental tool in
the protection of civilians. The Security Council has a
clear responsibility in that regard, given its impact on
international peace and security.

Spain believes that the work of the International
Criminal Court should be strengthened and used by
the Security Council as the basis of an international
criminal system, especially in those cases where States
are unable or unwilling to fulfil their responsibility
to prosecute serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Spain also supports the development
of International Criminal Court's principle of positive
complementarity and its work to build capacity and
help States to accomplish their primary responsibility
of fighting against impunity.

Over the last few years, the Security Council has
taken significant steps to fight impunity. It is essential
that it provide a follow-up of its referrals to the Court,
continue taking steps towards the detailed oversight
of the results of fact-finding missions, and explore the
possibility of setting up mechanisms such as early-
warning systems.
Allow me to conclude by saying that my delegation
agrees with the reference made by the Secretary-
General to the need to devote attention to the issue
of reparations for victims. We believe, therefore, that
the Security Council should endorse the findings of
the commissions of inquiry, ensure their effective
implementation and include that aspect in the relevant
resolutions.

