Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I would first like
to express my gratitude for this opportunity to address
the Security Council on various security aspects of
the police of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

For reasons relating to the complexity and
mulitdimensional nature of the crisis in Mali, the
implementation process for the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation faces some serious challenges.
Alliances between armed groups that are signatories
to the agreement and/or non-signatory groups, as well
as terrorist and criminal networks, are formed and
disbanded at the will and in the interests of various
players. That results in systematic attacks against
MINUSMA and Malian and Operation Barkhane forces,
which demonstrate the determination of those groups to
hamper the implementation of the Agreement.

Recurring armed rebellions in the north of Mali
have lead to the emergence of organized crime, putting
the authority of the State to the test. The security
situation in the subregion, exacerbated by the Libyan
crisis, appears to hold little promise, as demonstrated
by the recent terrorist attacks in the Niger, Burkina
Faso and Nigeria. A short while ago, terrorist acts were
concentrated in the north but have now spread to the
centre and, more recently, towards the south of the
country. We can count at least eight terrorist groups
that are officially active, without mentioning the
possibility of emerging cells in surrounding countries,
which would also have an impact on Mali.

The figures speak for themselves: from January
2014 to 10 October 2016, 1,013 attacks were recorded
against MINUSMA, non-governmental organizations,
Mali's defence and security forces and the Malian
population. During the same period, 210 incidents
of rocket and mortar fire were reported against
MINUSMA and Malian forces. In the past month, 66
attacks were perpetrated against MINUSMA, Malian
forces and the civilian population in the regions of Gao,
Mopti, Me'naka, Timbuktu and Kidal.
Resolution 2295 (2016) provides for responses that
address not only the threats linked to organized crime
in the Sahel region and its links with terrorism, but
also the implementation of security measures set out
in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, namely,
the establishment of reformed defence and security
institutions. In that context, Mali must play an active
role in the framework of subregional organizations,
particularly the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Joint Military Staff Committee. In that connection, the
support of partners such as the European Union through
the European Union Training Mission and European
Union Capacity Building Mission is essential.

A national strategy for the prevention of violent
radicalism and combating organized crime and terrorism
is currently being developed by the Malian authorities
with the support of the United Nations system and some
technical partners. Furthermore, Mali has established
a national centre for strategic studies on the subject.
It is crucial that the legal framework be adopted in
line with international legal instruments relating to
terrorism and organized crime. The comprehensive
strategic vision must take into account all aspects ofthe
phenomenon as well as cooperation and coordination
mechanisms between the relevant State and non-State
entities in order to prevent threats linked to terrorism at
the national, regional and international levels.

Awaiting the adoption of this strategy and so as to

mitigate the impact of terrorist activities, MINUSMA
has taken some palliative measures. I refer to the setting
up of a cell against transnational organized crime; the
establishment ofa task force on terrorism with a view to
developing synergic action and an integrated approach
among all United Nations entities; the training of a
weapons and intelligence team to deal with improvised
explosive devices; and the establishment of a police
laboratory to provide technical and scientific support
and expertise to the judiciary counter-terrorism centre
in Mali. That will be strengthened by the standing
up of legal identity units in all investigative judiciary
institutions in order to establish a centralized, viable
and fully operational system for criminal data. In
spite of all of those efforts, it is unfortunate that the
specialised judiciary investigation brigade is still
not operational.

Mindful that intelligence is the first line of
defence against terrorism and organized crime, and
pursuant to the current mandate, MINUSMA police
have established an intelligence gathering and analysis
plan. Forty-nine projects to strengthen the capacity of
Mali's defence and security forces have been carried
out. Nearly 14,000 personnel were trained in various
technical fields. In addition, 302 civil servants
serving in specialized units, including 36 women,
received specific training. Those services benefit from
multifaceted support through the comprehensive and
coordinated approach of various MINUSMA sections,
including the rule of law and security institutions.

The implementation of resolution 2295 (2016)
has been fraught with challenges, particularly in
security sector reform, where work has been delayed.
The idea of territorial police is too contentious and
requires clarification. In the meantime, introducing
a neighbourhood policing approach should improve
confidence between the Malian security forces and the
people. One ofthe maj or challenges to the implementation
of the mandate and the support of the Malian security
forces lies in the deployment of specialized and French-
speaking individual police officers. That requires the
support of contributing States. Incidentally, such a
commitment was undertaken by the representatives of
States that participated in the Chiefs of Police Summit.
Formed police units play an important role in protecting
populations and United Nations personnel and entities
through patrols and various operational activities. It
is important to note that, in response to the security
context, the number of armoured vehicles went from 6
to 10.

I would be remiss were I not to conclude by recalling
that of MINUSMA police and other stakeholders support
the reform of the Malian security forces. However, the
plethora of terrorist attacks and other potential threats,
as well as strains on human resources and logistics, are
of utmost concern as we carry out our mandate. That
is why the MINUSMA police continues to play its role
through a comprehensive and integrated approach with
a view to maintaining peace in Mali and the subregion,

