Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on Poland's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you every success in this

endeavour. Let me also thank you for convening this
important meeting to discuss the latest developments
in my country. I would also like to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, for
her briefing.

We have followed with grief and interest the
cowardly terrorist attack on Benghazi today, which
killed three staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and injured
other personnel, as well as Libyans who were present
there. The Government of National Accord strongly
condemns such cowardly terrorist attacks. It expresses
its deepest condolences to the families of the victims
and deplores the fact that UNSMIL personnel and other
civilians were injured as a result of that terrorist attack.
We wish them a speedy recovery.

The Government of National Accord reiterates its
commitment to fighting terrorism in all its forms. We
stress our continued readiness to fully cooperate with the
international community in ending this scourge in line
with the agreed regional and international mechanisms.

Today's cowardly attack in Benghazi comes
after the abduction two weeks ago of a Member of
Parliament, Ms. Siham Sergewa, whose fate is as yet
unknown. All this refutes the claims that the so-called
Libyan Army has eradicated terrorism in Benghazi
and is working towards that end in other areas with a
view to cleansing Libya of terrorist groups. The truth is
that what is happening is the opposite: the aggression
against Tripoli and its outskirts represents a real
disaster. This aggression has led to grave human and
financial losses, displaced more than 100,000 citizens
and caused tremendous damage to the infrastructure,
leading to power outages and water shortages, and has
exacerbated the humanitarian suffering of our citizens.

In response to the initiative of Mr. Ghassan Salame'
calling for a truce during holy Eid Al-Adha, as well
as the Security Council statement of 12 August 2019
supporting that initiative, the Presidential Council of
the Government of National Accord responded and
announced that it would be willing to accept the truce
provided it includes all areas of fighting; that all direct
and indirect shooting stops; that no military advance
takes place; that all aviation activities are prohibited
from all aerial bases; that such truce is not misused to
move soldiers or mobilize powers; and that UNSMIL
guarantees the implementation of the truce and
monitors any violations thereof.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that there can be
no military solution to the crisis in Libya. Peaceful
political dialogue among Libyans who believe in a civil
State is the only way to achieve security and stability
in the country.
Before I conclude, I wish to congratulate all
Muslims on holy Eid Al-Adha.

The meeting rose at 5.55 pm.
