Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour also to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The acceding countries Bulgaria and
Romania, the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, the members
of the European Economic Area Iceland and Norway,
as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, also
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the three committee
Chairpersons for their briefings.

Each time the Council meets to hear the briefings
of the Chairs of these committees, we say that the
scourge of terrorism is still with us. That is not a
platitude; it is a grim reality. Recent events in the
United Kingdom, in Turkey and across the Middle East
are a tragic reminder of the ongoing security
challenges being faced around the world. This is an
issue that affects us all. Our condemnation of these
attacks has been unequivocal, and our message has
been clear: terrorists who seek to use violence to
impose their Views will not succeed.

The European Union will continue to support the
United Nations in its counter-terrorism efforts. In the
context of the upcoming September summit, the EU
attaches importance to including strong language in the
outcome document which condemns terrorism. We
remain fully committed to the implementation of the
EU Action Plan on Combating Terrorism. Moreover,
for our part, the EU is looking actively at this counter-
terrorism framework to establish if and where
additional measures are necessary. We intend to
complete that review by December 2005.

Turning to the work of the 1267 Committee, we
appreciate the visits Ambassador Mayoral has
undertaken in his capacity as Chair of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). EU officials were particularly
pleased to meet with the Ambassador and his
delegation during their recent Visit to Brussels.
Members of the EU, in this case the Netherlands and
the United Kingdom, volunteered to meet with the
Committee to discuss their respective national
implementation of measures under resolution 1267
(1999). The EU's anti-terrorism coordinator, Mr. Gijs
de Vries, also briefed the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) on the work
being undertaken against terrorism by the European
Union.

The EU would also like to commend the work of
the 1267 Committee's Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team. We hope to receive its
third report imminently and we look forward to the
Team's mandate being extended in the forthcoming
new draft resolution. In the context of that draft
resolution, the EU would like to emphasize its and
other States' well-known position on the importance of
respect for human rights in all counter-terrorism
policies. A greater degree of transparency would be
welcome, as would the provision of clearer guidance
on listing, de-listing and humanitarian exemptions.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the Union remains fully committed to the obligations
set out under resolution 1373 (2001) and continues to
work to ensure that they are fully implemented. We
were particularly pleased to be able to participate in the
recent Visits of the CTC Executive Directorate to
Albania, Kenya and Morocco. We look forward to
building on that cooperation. The arrival of additional
experts for the Directorate is a positive step. We
welcome the work that the Directorate is already doing
and we look forward to seeing the Directorate as a
whole becoming fully operational as soon as possible.

Turning to the 1540 Committee, the arrival of
additional experts to work with the Committee is
welcome news. We are pleased to see from the work
programme that all of the first national reports from
countries will be examined in the period covered by the
work programme. While we are pleased to note that so
many Member States have now submitted their first
reports to the 1540 Committee, we urge the remaining
States that have not done so to do likewise. The failure
to supply reports will only serve to undermine the
Committee's efforts.

The European Union will play a full role in the
area of technical assistance in the context of all three
committees. The EU will reinforce our work with
priority third countries, through increasing individual
collective commitments to technical assistance and
capacity-building, and we will endeavour to support
them, including in the area of countering radicalization
and terrorist financing.

The EU welcomes the ongoing cooperation
among the three committees and their experts. We very
much want to see that continue.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the European Union's full support for the
Secretary-General's proposals to establish a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy for the
United Nations. We therefore welcome the decision by
the Commission on Human Rights to appoint a special
rapporteur to provide guidance and advice to States on
ensuring that counter-terrorism efforts are in line with
international human rights law. We hope that decision
will be ratified by the Economic and Social Council in
the coming days.

The Union welcomes the agreement reached in
the General Assembly on 13 April 2005 on the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290). We call on all Members of the United Nations
to sign the Convention during the summit to be held in
September. We attach great and particular importance
to the early conclusion of a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism. We will work towards the
goal of its adoption during the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly.

