Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We warmly welcome you, Madam, as you
preside over this meeting. Your concern demonstrates
the attention that you and your friendly country, Chile,
devote to the grave challenges facing future
generations and the need to confront them.

We should like to thank Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their briefings this morning.
We believe that the contents of those briefings will
help us to make progress in confronting the challenge
of the plight of children in armed conflicts.

My delegation has carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/1053) now before us, and
we believe that we should all pay heed to it. We thank
the Secretary-General and all those who helped to
prepare and enrich the report.

International conventions on the protection and
well-being of children, Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the protection of children in
armed conflict and the final document of the special
session of the General Assembly devoted to children
(resolution S-27/2), held in 2002, all strengthen and
supplement international norms and should be
respected by everyone.

Progress made in the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, as described in the
Secretary-General's report, is a source of satisfaction,
and we welcome it. We have noted a strong will by the
parties concerned with this issue to face up to the
challenges before them. Nevertheless, and most
regrettably, we see no concrete progress in protecting
the children affected by the Israeli occupation of Arab
land, including the occupied Syrian Golan. The grave
situation remains and has indeed deteriorated.

The international community has been unable, to
date, to implement international provisions of the 1949
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, let alone the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions related to
the protection of Palestinian children, who, for
decades, have been living a miserable life. Let me
mention that, while we highly appreciate the reference
in the report (S/2003/1053) to the fact that the situation
of Palestinian children remains serious and
unacceptable, we had hoped that the report would
devote some ink to the issues related to the effects of
preventing humanitarian assistance from reaching
children affected by armed conflicts.

The report of the Secretary-General contains
proposals and recommendations that are worthy of
study, particularly in light of practices and lessons
learned. While we believe that there is a need for a
coordinated and systematic mechanism for monitoring
and reporting in order to present objective, regular and
accurate reports on violations by parties to armed
conflicts, we believe that such a question should not be
politicized and that selectivity and double standards
should be avoided. Furthermore, all possible means for
dialogue and negotiation with the parties concerned
ought to be used to solve all problems in accordance
with agreed norms.

Let me again stress the importance of the role of
all United Nations bodies, particularly the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in
confronting the effects of conflicts and wars on
children. In addition to the agencies and funds of the
United Nations, in particular the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), let me also stress the role
of non-governmental organizations, which are
fundamental in complementing and promoting
international efforts in the appropriate manner and in
strengthening our collective efforts to resolve this
problem.

Allow me to conclude my statement by stressing
that Syria attaches the utmost importance, at all levels,
to the issues of children. Syria was one of the first
States to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Last year, we ratified the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and the
second Optional Protocol on sexual abuse of children.
These commitments stem from our belief that such
international instruments are a fundamental basis for
the international community to take action to protect
and promote the rights of children for a better future
for mankind.

