Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): Please
allow me to begin by commending your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene today's open debate on this
critical issue. It is all the more meaningful as this year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, as well as the twentieth anniversary of
the Security Council's inclusion of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an important item on
its agenda.

Since its adoption, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict has established itself as one of the
core issues on the Security Council's agenda, and the
Council's efforts to that end have yielded practical
actions and successes. However, despite 20 years of
progress, civilians still remain disproportionately the
victims of armed conflict. The Secretary-General
reports that, throughout 2018, tens of thousands of
civilians were killed, injured or maimed due to armed
conflicts around the world. The serious impacts of
conflict on civilians, including sexual and gender-based
Violence, forced displacement and the unlawful denial
of humanitarian access, continue to persist. Against
that backdrop, I would like to stress the following
three points.

First, to protect civilians in armed conflict, we
need to focus on prevention. As the Secretary-General
has highlighted, prevention is the paradigm-shifting
approach that closes the gap between commitment and
reality. That supports the trend commonly underscored
by the reviews on peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture, and the women and peace and security
agenda. In that sense, the Republic of Korea has been
a champion of United Nations reform efforts so that
the United Nations system can effectively support
the peacebuilding priorities of Member States in
addressing the challenges on the ground in a holistic
manner. Prevention and sustaining peace were at the
heart of our efforts as Chair and Vice-Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2017 and 2018. We are
consistently increasing our financial contributions
to the Peacebuilding Fund, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the United
Nations Development Programme. That is geared
towards strengthening the international community's
ongoing efforts in the promotion of prevention and
sustaining peace.

Secondly, we must elevate our level of effort in
protecting vulnerable groups of civilians such as
women and children. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/373) highlights the fact that conflict-related
sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts, often
as part ofa broader strategy. In addition, armed conflict
continued to have a destabilizing impact on children
throughout the past year. One tragic example was in
Afghanistan, where a record high of 927 children were
killed due to conflict in 2018 alone.

In June 2018 the Government of the Republic of
Korea launched the Action with Women and Peace
Initiative, with a particular focus on protecting women
from sexual violence in armed conflict. In Seoul in July
we will be proud to host the first international conference
under this important initiative to strengthen global
partnership in combating sexual violence in conflict.
Furthermore, as a member of the Steering Committee
of the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former
Child Soldiers, the Republic of Korea is stepping up
its efforts to support the reintegration of former child
soldiers, who are also victims of armed conflict. We
believe that a more comprehensive and well-funded
reintegration programme will help to fundamentally
break the vicious cycle of violence.

Thirdly, in order to improve the implementation
of protection-of-civilian mandates in peacekeeping
operations, peacekeepers should be better trained to
engage with local communities, and training guidelines
should be expressly produced for this purpose. Korean
peacekeepers have long been guided by the conviction
that genuine peace takes root in people's minds, and
they have worked hard to win the hearts and minds of
local populations. Such efforts have helped them to
deliver on mandates while enhancing their own safety
and security. Many of today's conflicts begin with
local disputes over land, resources or authority over a
district and then escalate, and community engagement
can help to address such local conflict dynamics. In
that regard, mission personnel should be encouraged
to improve their in-depth knowledge of host societies,
cultures and institutions, as well as their command of
local languages.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the Republic of Korea's commitment to
working with the United Nations and all Member States
with a View to improving the protection of vulnerable
populations in armed conflict.

