Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Ambassadors Kim, Quinlan and Loulichki, Chairs,
respectively, of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, the
Counterterrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee,
for their briefings today. We appreciate the efforts
made by the three Committees to promote greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States.

Pakistan's comprehensive approach to counter-
terrorism is based on three "Ds", namely, deterrence,
development and dialogue. Deterrence is necessary to
impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate the terrorist
threat. Development helps to meet basic human needs,
build community resilience and prevent terrorism.
Dialogue is equally important: those who are willing to
renounce violence should be brought back to national
and societal mainstreams.

Terrorism continues to mutate into new and more
sinister forms. Terrorists use new information and
communication technologies, as well as the Internet,
for recruitment and incitement and for planning and
financing their activities. We should address the root
causes of terrorism; deprivation, marginalization,
exclusion and stereotyping often create the conditions
for a drift towards terrorism. That drift should be
halted. Our collective and national measures to counter
all forms of financing of terrorism, including through
the proceeds of organized crime and illicit narcotics
trafficking, should be made more effective. Counter-
terrorism efforts must adapt to such challenges and
develop strategies for real-time quick responses.

We agree with the Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities that
Al-Qaida still poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. The experiment of focusing the
1989 Committee's work on Africa is timely. Today, the
traditional Al-Qaida organization is a shadow of its
former self. The nature of the threat, even if diffused,
is much more complex. Al-Qaida has splintered into
disparate cells. Its affiliates thrive on local grievances;
many do not have a global agenda. Moreover, the
phenomenon of individuals radicalized by extremist
websites is not always based on their formal association
with or membership of Al-Qaida or other terrorist
groups. In many instances, terrorists do not require
elaborate financing arrangements or visits to training
camps and safe havens. All that is needed is electronic
safe havens and some websites providing inspiration
and training materials.

We hope that while addressing traditional issues,
such as travel bans and assets-freezes, in an effective
manner, the Committee will also pay attention to
the changing forms of the threat posed by Al-Qaida
affiliates and self-radicalized individuals or lone
wolves. We appreciate the recent efforts to introduce
fair and clear procedures into the Al-Qaida Committee
and to strengthen the role of the Ombudsperson. It
remains to be seen whether those changes will satisfy
courts around the world, since the legal community
is more likely to require verifiable evidence that is
acceptable in a court of law. The questions of due
process and effective remedy are at the heart of courts'
deliberations. We hope that the Ombudsperson's
positive contribution will have an exemplary effect on
other sanctions regimes. We support the work of the
Monitoring Team on updating narrative summaries
of reasons for listing, and welcome its new head,
Mr. Alexander Evans.

We support the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to build States" capacities to implement
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We appreciate
the Committee's focus on the use ofnew communication
technologies and technical assistance in the Sahel
region in its planned special events later this year. We
commend Mr. Mike Smith for his outstanding leadership
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). CTED has done substantial
work in updating the format of the preliminary
implementation assessment. Even if all questions of the
newly introduced detailed implementation survey are
not strictly based on resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), we are confident that it will prove to be a useful
diagnostic tool for facilitating technical assistance to
Member States. The CTED seminars on specific teams
and various regions have been useful. We are planning
to hold our regional seminar on counter-terrorism for
police officers, prosecutors and judges in South Asia in
Islamabad in the near future.

Pakistan has made considerable progress in
countering terrorist financing and controlling borders.
We have deployed 150,000 troops on the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border, and set up 822 posts in order to
intercept Al-Qaida and Taliban members. Pakistan
has become a party to the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and
has enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering law. A
financial monitoring unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to track suspicious financial
transactions. Hundreds of bank accounts have been
frozen. We are implementing the recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force. Pakistan is an
active member of the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering. Since the most recent briefing to the
Council (S/PV.6862), Pakistan's Parliament has passed
two new laws on counter-terrorism and a national
counter-terrorism authority.

The full and effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) by all States remains one of the key tools
for preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
and its Group of Experts play an important and
complementary role in relation to the treaty-based
regimes and international organizations in the field of
non-proliferation. We support the efforts undertaken
by the 1540 Committee and its experts in areas such
as awareness-raising, outreach implementation and
assistance in capacity-building. We commend the Group
of Experts' valuable assistance to the Committee, and
particularly recognize the professional contribution of
Mr. Terence Taylor and his able associates.
In our view, the long-term impact and success
of the 1540 Committee will depend on the role
it can play in mobilizing assistance to Member
States. Assistance in capacity-building should be
the Committee's cornerstone for ensuring effective
national implementation by States. We support efforts
to promote cooperation and coordination among the
subsidiary bodies of the Council. That objective is best
served when such joint activities are consistent with the
mandate, independence and nature of the work of each
subsidiary body and group of experts.

