Mr. Prosor (Israel): Israel deeply appreciates the
work carried out by the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). The international
community must continue to support its mission, which
remains an important component of stability in our
region.

As we witness unprecedented turmoil in the
Middle East, the need for all parties to fully respect the
disengagement line between Israel and Syria has never
been clearer. Yet after decades of relative quiet, we
have witnessed several brazen attempts to breach the
line from the Syrian side and raise tensions in our
region.

On 15 May, a large organized group of protesters
tore down the Alpha fence in Syria, breached the
disengagement line with Israel and carried out acts of
violence against Israeli Defence Forces in the village
of Majdal Chams. On 5 June, we saw another act of
provocation on the line. Hundreds of individuals
sought to breach the disengagement line with Israel in
the areas of Majdal Chams and Quneitra. They tried to
break through the fences in the area, threw Molotov
cocktails and other large objects at the Israeli Defence
Forces, and used other modes of violence to advance
their goals.

Despite its clear responsibilities, the Syrian
regime did not prevent demonstrators from arriving at
the disengagement line, or the attempts to cross it. To
the contrary, these incidents, which could not have
taken place without the knowledge of the Syrian
authorities, reflect a blatant attempt by Syria to distract
international attention from its violent repression of its

own people. The Syrian regime's fingerprints are all
over these protests; to my mind, one does not have to
be a New York City Police Department forensics expert
to detect it.

The events that followed the 5 June protests in
the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in Syria provide
one glaring example of Syrian involvement in the
demonstration. I think Bashar Al-Assad is the only
ophthalmologist I know who is actively engaged in
blackening the vision of hope of his own people and,
indeed, of the whole region.
8

The Syrian-Israeli disengagement line has been
quiet for decades. The Syrian regime cannot be allowed
to disturb this quiet just because it does not want the
cries of its own citizens to be heard. I want to thank, on
behalf of the State of Israel, the President and all the
people who have worked tirelessly in UNDOF over the
years because their work, as I said, is an important
component in the stability of our region.

