Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Like previous speakers, I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this public meeting. It gives us
an opportunity to assess our progress in the implacable
fight against the threat that terrorist acts pose to
international peace and security. Those acts, which
indiscriminately strike individuals and institutions,
plunge men, women and children, as well as States into
a permanent state of fear.

In order to be effective, the fight against terrorism
must be sustained over a long period of time. It must be
founded on a clear, mobilizing strategy based on
commitment, solidarity and cooperation among all
members of the international community and all the
peoples of the United Nations. It requires an ongoing
flow of information and an organized exchange of
experiences among the various bodies that deal with
terrorism. It is fortunate that resolution 1373 (2001),
which is our obligatory road map on the issue,
responds to those concerns.

My delegation pays tribute to you, Sir, for the
skill, tact and determination with which since April
2003 you have chaired the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which is the principal instrument of
resolution 1373 (2001). Relying on the three
Subcommittees and on a team of experienced experts,
you continue to carry out the principal tasks assigned
to the Committee: to increase the since April 2003
since April 2003 capacity of Member States in their
efforts to combat terrorism; to strengthen international
cooperation; to update national legal frameworks to
combat terrorism; to study the reports on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) that have
been prepared by Member States and the relevant
international organizations. We welcome the fact that,
as of today, more than 385 reports have been evaluated.

What should we make of the progress of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee since its inception?
What should we say of its short but rich existence?
There are three fundamental areas of action. First, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee has enabled almost all
members of the international community to become
better aware of the extent of the insidious and harmful
threat posed by terrorism to international peace and
security.

Secondly, the Committee has become a tool to
encourage and to coordinate dynamic cooperation
between States and international regional and
subregional organizations. It has managed to establish
an open and transparent dialogue with all actors in the
international community that are involved in combating
terrorism.

Thirdly, it has intensified contacts with
international regional and subregional organizations
through its periodic meetings. In that context, I
welcome the upcoming meeting to be held in
Washington on 7 October with international
organizations under the auspices of the Organization of
American States. Such meetings, which have opened
up new prospects for the Committee's involvement,
have especially underlined what needs to be done
beforehand or simultaneously in order to establish or to
build capacity for those actors- States and
international organizations - that are involved in
combating terrorism. We now understand the
importance of cooperation and technical assistance,
which Cameroon has been consistently calling for. In
that context, we believe that the French delegation's
proposal for the establishment of a special fund
deserves particular attention and reflection.

In a few months, the Committee will have
completed two years of existence. The progress made,
of which we have just heard, is certainly cause for
admiration, but given the challenges to be confronted,
we also need to reflect. How do we adapt our
Committee to the real contours of the broader fight
against terrorism? How will the Committee ensure
compliance with the major directives contained in
resolution 1456 (2003)? How do we ensure the
implementation of those recommendations that have
resulted from the Committee's meetings with other
international organizations? Finally, how do we create
genuine synergy among Security Council committees
whose activities overlap with those of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee? The route taken through the
contact between the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) is worthy of pursuing. We welcome the
statement of commitment to strengthening that
cooperation made by my colleague, Ambassador
Mufioz of Chile, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Committee established by resolution 1267 (1999).

The new programme of work for the next 90
days, which you, Sir, have just presented to the Council
in your capacity as chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, will certainly allow us to complete actions
under way by strengthening dialogue and cooperation
among the various actors, as well as assistance for the
countries that require it. That step is in our interest, and
we give it our full support.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm
Cameroon's commitment to combating, alongside the
other members of the international community, the
threat to international peace and security posed by
terrorist acts, but also by poverty, injustice and
intolerance, which are often the root cause of those
acts.

The various reports already submitted by my
country are clear testimony of our resolve, which must
be fortified by assistance in the area of capacity-
building to combat terrorism. Only with this
assistance - the result of unified cooperation - will
Cameroon be able to mesh its efforts with those of the
international community to vanquish the scourge of the
current century.

