Mr. Shearer: It is my pleasure to brief the Security
Council on the two overarching areas of focus of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), namely, building durable peace and
protecting civilians in South Sudan.

The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues
to hold and, except for areas in Central Equatoria, the
ceasefire is in process. Just that one simple reality of
peace has produced significant change. The drop in
political violence, based on the trend of past years,
has meant that hundreds, if not thousands, of people
are alive who would otherwise not be. Many displaced
families have decided it is safe and time to return to
their homes. Since the signing of the peace agreement,
according to the International Organization for
Migration, more than half a million people have done
gone home, including more than 210,000 who have
returned from neighbouring countries.

Humanitarian partners report improved access
to areas of need, although bureaucratic impediments
continue to dog some operations. Their efforts have
been assisted by the rehabilitation of 2,500 kilometres
ofroads by the five engineering companies ofUNMISS
and World Food Programme (WFP) projects. That has
enhanced the ability to move food to remote locations
in advance of the rains and cut down on expensive
airdrops. Together with opening of river corridors and
a reduction in illegal checkpoints across the country,
WFP reports cost efficiencies of up to $113 million.

The most recent food security analysis, however,
remains dire. Seven million people are facing crisis, or
worse. But, for the first time in years, some counties saw
slight improvements, where relative calm has enabled
households to resume cultivation. Those positive signs
come from a very low base. But it is a glimmer of what
is possible with peace. It is vital that that trend continue.

Since the signing of the peace agreement, more
than 110 rapprochements have occurred in communities
around the country. UNMISS has directly facilitated
more than a quarter of them. I attended a number of
those meetings, including a recentjoint delegation with
the Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for South Sudan and the Chair
of the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission. Helicoptering into Panyume in Central
Equatoria - a proposed opposition cantonment site
where tensions remain high - we were met by dozens
of opposition soldiers. Their welcome was warm and
we sat under mango trees together with hundreds of
local people to talk reconciliation. We then flew to
Yei, where we met with Government authorities, youth,
women and religious leaders.

The visit showed that, while groups are on opposite
sides of the political divide, their experiences of war
and hopes for peace are the same. That one example
matches what my colleagues and I witnessed on many
occasions in recent months across the country where
the sides have come together. The desire for peace is
palpable, and there is a fierce aversion to any renewed
fighting. My observation is that the pace of dialogue and
peacebuilding at the grassroots level is moving much
faster than among the elites negotiating nationally. The
country's politicians need to listen to the mood of the
people and follow the lead set by the local communities.
In that vein, it is a shame that the national dialogue
process has so far failed to achieve the inclusivity
required for a true consultative process.

The strong desire for peace is echoed in results
of a perception survey that we carried out, which
interviewed 2,400 people in 10 different locations. The
survey exposed the shocking impact of the conflict:
79 per cent of the people interviewed reported that
members of their family had been killed. The same
proportion reported family members forced to flee
violence. And yet, remarkably, 89 per cent of those
interviewed believe there will be lasting peace by the
end of the year. We should be frank. The fighting has
stopped because the leaders ordered their soldiers to
stop. If it resumes, against the will of the people, it will
be because those same leaders want it, and ordered it,
to happen.

In May, the parties unanimously decided to
extend the pre-transitional period, thereby delaying
the formation of a transitional Government until
12 November. While the postponement is disappointing,
it does give time to resolve outstanding issues that might
have otherwise derailed the peace deal. Implementation
is frustratingly slow. Many benchmarks are still to be
met. More compromise is needed, particularly from the
Government, which holds the much stronger position.
The transitional Constitution, which incorporates the
peace agreement, has been returned to the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee for further
updates. The Independent Boundaries Commission
reported back last week; How its conclusions play out in
the coming weeks remains to be seen. Security reform
and the unification of armed forces has been sluggish,
despite the much-appreciated efforts of IGAD Special
Envoy Ismail Wais. UNMISS is providing political and
technical guidance to help the parties in line with its
new mandate.

A fundamental challenge is the lack of regular
face-to-face meetings between President Salva Kiir
and opposition leader Riek Machar. If former bitter
enemies can put the past behind them and reconcile
at the local level, their national leaders must do the
same. Leader-to-leader meetings, preferably held in
Juba, are critical because trust and confidence cannot
cold-start the day a new unified Government is formed.
The Government should also meet its commitment to
release the funding it pledged for implementation, as an
example to other donors.

The African Union, IGAD and the United Nations
have been working collectively to support the process.
We are strongly unified in our position that the most
recent six-month extension should be the last one. We
accept that some tasks may not be entirely complete
by November- however we define "complete" - but
that should not delay the formation of the transitional
Government. We should see the peace agreement
as a living document, not set in stone. There are no
pre-transitional tasks that cannot be achieved within
a unified transitional administration. In fact, there are
many advantages to decisions made collectively within
a transitional Government, because they will be made
collectively and transparently and parties will be better
held to account by citizens.

The decision of the United Nations in 2013 to open
its gates to people fleeing for their lives was one of the
most noble actions the Organization has ever taken. It
saved tens of thousands of people and remains at the
heart of our protection of civilians mandate. However,
our mandate also stresses the importance of supporting
conditions for the safe, informed, voluntary and
dignified return of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees. So far, actual numbers of returns are
relatively small compared to the 2.3 million refugees
and the 1.9 million internally displaced, but there is a
growing trend of return.

Prior to the signing of the peace agreement, the
number of people returning home each month averaged
about 18,000. Since the peace deal was signed, that
number hasjumped to 76,000 each month. Some families
have returned under their own devices, but thousands
of others - particularly those living in protection of
civilians sites - will need assistance. Most wanting to
go home are women and children without the ability or
resources to leave without help. UNMISS, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and humanitarian partners are providing that support
in line with international humanitarian principles and
are following guidelines agreed by the humanitarian
country team.

A key challenge ahead is the lack of basic services
within communities of return. Today, the reason
most commonly cited by IDPs for not wanting to
leave a protection of civilians site is a reluctance to
take their children out of school, not insecurity. In
parallel, UNMISS is shifting its focus from static
duties - guarding protection of civilian sites - to
more long-range patrolling, concentrating on areas of
return. A substantial component of UNMISS's effort is
now devoted to protection of civilians site protection.

Despite the reduction in political violence,
fighting continues in Central Equatoria, causing
ongoing suffering. Early next week, UNMISS will
release a human rights report on the situation. Our
investigations reveal atrocities committed by all sides
against civilians, including killings, rape, abduction
and looting. In response, UNMISS has beefed up
its presence in Yei and matched that with political
engagement. The protection of civilians will continue
to be a top priority, but our protection role will naturally
diminish if there is peace. We can then look to adjust
our troop requirements accordingly, while continuing
our mediation and peacebuilding efforts.

In two weeks, South Sudan will celebrate its
eighth anniversary of gaining independence. With
that sovereignty comes responsibility - an obligation
that is acknowledged only rarely and that includes
the leaders' use of the country's resources in the best
interests of their citizens, not their own. The message
from the people of South Sudan that we have heard in
that regard is very clear. Leaders must live up to their
responsibilities and give the people peace.

