At the outset, I wish to thank the Russian delegation for presiding over this meeting and for the leadership role that Russia has played in pursuit of peace in the Middle East. Let me also thank my brother Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti for participating in today's meeting, and to welcome Mr. Dang Minh Khoi. I also want to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. It is time to drop the old talking points. It is ridiculous to claim that the Palestinians "never missed an opportunity to miss an opportunity", when in fact the Palestinian Liberation Organization signed an agreement with Israel just months after the start of the first-ever negotiations between the two sides, despite all the shortcomings of those accords, which history has proven. It is preposterous to consider that Israel's right to security could justify its occupation and oppression of an entire nation for decades, or denying us our right to self-determination and to a sovereign and independent State, or negating our own right to security. It is absurd to claim that it is the Palestinian side that does not want negotiations, when Israel is the one trying to illegally pre-empt the negotiations on all final-status issues on the ground every single day. It is ludicrous to claim that the obstacle to peace is Palestinian intransigence, when our positions are actually aligned with the international consensus and the resolutions of the Security Council, while Israeli positions and policies are flagrantly in breach of international law and United Nations resolutions. By 1999, the parties had identified final-status issues that should be negotiated based on internationally agreed terms of reference and parameters. Here is Netanyahu's stance on these issues: Jerusalem, including occupied East Jerusalem, shall be Israeli; illegal settlements shall remain in place; refugees shall remain refugees; Israel shall continue to control our borders; and Israel shall control all of the Jordan Valley, and with it most of our natural resources. These positions are contemptuous and unlawful, and they translate into a simple truth: Israel does not want to end its illegal occupation; it wants to make it permanent. Why are we the ones who are labelled "intransigent"? It is time to abandon the failed recipes of the past. We cannot allow Israeli unilateralism to prevail while the world continues to call for bilateral negotiations. It is no longer enough to call on the parties to negotiate. This call must be accompanied by measures to incentivize respect for obligations and to dissuade the adoption of illegal unilateral actions. It is no longer enough to say settlements are illegal. One must ensure accountability, distinction and non-assistance. It is no longer enough to speak of a two-State solution. It must be accompanied with the recognition of the State of Palestine and support for its sovereignty over the territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem. We could have tried to find answers to Israel's violence through violence, to be heard and considered relevant. We did not. We could have adopted disruptive behaviour, since constructive behaviour is underrated these days. We did not. We could have contributed to transforming this political conflict into a religious one, fuelling it so we were not the only ones to feel its flames. We did not. If we have been punished while making such choices while Israel, on the other hand, is rewarded, what is being encouraged, peace or violence? Despite decades of oppressive Israeli policies and measures aimed at bringing us to our knees politically and financially, President Abbas, in his message to the General Assembly (see A/75/PV.10), called on the Secretary-General, as he has done before the Security Council in the past, to undertake, in cooperation with the Security Council and the Quartet mandated by this body to advance peace, preparations to convene an international conference with the participation of all concerned parties early next year, in order to engage in a genuine peace process, based on international law, United Nations resolutions and the relevant terms of reference. This call is the ultimate demonstration of our commitment to peace and to a path based on inclusion not exclusion, legality not illegality, negotiations not diktats, and multilateralism not unilateralism. I know many countries represented in the Council have already expressed support for President Abbas' initiative, and we look forward to continuing to work with everyone to see it materialize, including through meetings of the Security Council such as today's, which is being held under the presidency of the Russian Federation. Only under pressure did Israel decide to freeze its plans for formal annexation of areas beyond occupied East Jerusalem. However, it has not renounced its decades- long policy aimed at controlling the amount of Palestinian land with the least number of Palestinians - in other words, maximum Palestinian geography with minimum Palestinian demography. Its de facto annexation continues with the advancement in recent days of 5,000 settlement units deep into the West Bank, including in and around occupied East Jerusalem. The international community must act to salvage peace, or we will all bear the consequences. As long as Israel does not bear the cost of occupation, but instead continues to reap its benefits, it will never negotiate in good faith. The international community must address the shortcomings of the past by linking its relations with the parties to their respect of their obligations under international law and the peace process, by helping them reach an agreement and implementing it and by enforcing a binding time frame. The international peace conference can generate the momentum necessary and mobilize the international community at large to help the parties negotiate a peace agreement that will forever change our region. Anything else is volatile - and futile. Two thirds of our people were forced into exile, and we did not surrender. Tens of thousands were killed, and we did not surrender. Hundreds of thousands were displaced, and we did not surrender. The equivalent of half of our male population - over 800,000 Palestinians - has been arrested, and we have not surrendered. What makes anyone think we would surrender now? Israel often wonders why we enjoy such international solidarity. It is because former colonial Powers and liberation movements alike know these colonial policies well: violence, subjugation, intimidation, mass arbitrary imprisonment, discrimination, humiliation, fragmentation of land, confinement of the occupied people, expansion of illegal settlements and exploitation. They cannot support such actions. History has taught them better. International consensus, the mandate and role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Palestinian people's resilience have all been sorely tested, and yet they prevail. It is now time to take the initiative. There is not a people too many in the Middle East, but there is an independent State missing. The Middle East equation cannot be solved by denying this fundamental factor. This conflict cannot be ended without freedom for the Palestinian people. Our freedom will never be compatible with Israeli soldiers in our streets, Israeli drones in our skies and Israeli control over our borders. Ask Maher Al-Akhras, who has been risking his life in a hunger strike for over 90 days in order to denounce the most arbitrary form of detention, the so-called administrative detention. Ask Amer Snobar, who, barely 18, was beaten to death yesterday by Israeli soldiers who had apprehended him and kept hitting him on his head and neck with the butt of their rifles until he could no longer breathe. Ask the mother of the child killed on his way to school, the athlete whose leg was amputated after a sniper acted as if he were playing a video game, the owner of a house built through years of sweat and destroyed in an instant, and the farmer whose crops were burned by settlers. All of them will say: "we will not coexist with occupation". We want to end occupation so we can coexist, so we can know justice, so we can be free and so our region can know true peace and security.
