The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the further
report on the situation of human rights in Croatia pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1019 (1995), document
S/ 1997/ 195.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 5 March 1997
(S/ 1997/195) on Croatia, submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1009 (1995) and
1019 (1995). It also recalls the statement by its
President of 20 December 1996 (S/PRST/ 1996/48).

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned
that, although the Government of Croatia maintains
that it has deployed the necessary number of police
officers, Croatian Serbs continue to live in conditions

of serious insecurity throughout the areas which had
been designated United Nations Protected Areas
(UNPAs) and were known as Sectors West, North
and South, particularly in the area of former Sector
South around Knin. It calls upon the Government of
Croatia to take further steps to restore a climate of
law and order in those areas.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact that
difficult living conditions for remaining Serbs have
been considerably eased during recent months by
intensive humanitarian programmes conducted by
international organizations. In this context, it calls
upon the Government of Croatia to assume fully its
responsibilities, in cooperation with all relevant
international organizations, to ensure that the social
and economic situation of all inhabitants in the
former Sectors improves.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that there continues to be little progress with regard
to the return of Croatian Serb displaced persons and
refugees to the areas. It calls upon the Government
of Croatia to accelerate its efforts to improve
conditions of personal and economic security, to
remove bureaucratic obstacles to the rapid issue of
documentation to all Serb families and to resolve
promptly the property issue, by a return of property
or just compensation, in order to facilitate the return
of Croatian Serbs to the former sectors.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Croatia to remove uncertainty about
the implementation of its amnesty law, in particular
by finalizing without delay the list of war crime
suspects on the basis of existing evidence and in
strict accordance with international law, and to put
an end to arbitrary arrests, particularly of Serbs
returning to Croatia.

"The Security Council recalls the obligations of
Croatia arising from relevant universal human rights
instruments to which it is a party. It welcomes the
commitments undertaken by the Government of
Croatia in relation to the Council of Europe,
including its signature of the Framework Convention
for the Protection of National Minorities, and
expects that the Government of Croatia will
implement those commitments fully.

"The Security Council is concerned that the
Government of Croatia continues to withhold its full

 

cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. It underlines the obligation of the
Government of Croatia in accordance with resolution
827 (1993) to respond promptly and in full to all
requests from the International Tribunal. It also calls
upon the Government of Croatia to conduct
investigations into and the prosecution of persons
accused of serious violations of international
humanitarian law, especially those committed in the
course of military operations in 1995.

"The Security Council stresses the importance of
the effective implementation of the measures outlined
in the paragraphs above for promoting confidence and
reconciliation in Croatia as well as for the peaceful
reintegration of the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium. In this context, the
Council requests the Secretary-General to continue
to keep it informed on a regular basis and to report
again on the humanitarian and human rights situation
in Croatia within his report to be submitted by
1 July 1997, as referred to in paragraph 6 of
resolution 1079 (1996)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

