Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you for holding this open debate on
children and armed conflict. Given the gravity of the
situation, as described by the Special Representative,
Mr. Otunnu, in his moving statement, I believe that
today's debate is indeed timely.

The Secretary-General's report has provided us
with a useful basis for our deliberations. The report
rightfully gives detailed information on compliance
and progress regarding situations on the agenda of the
Security Council. These are also situations that have a
direct impact on peace and security - matters for
which the Security Council has primary responsibility.

Like others, we are deeply concerned by accounts
in the report of sexual abuse by United Nations
peacekeepers. We also share the concern regarding the
report's suggestion of initiating direct contact by
United Nations actors with non-State actors. While this
may be useful in some situations, the general
application of this in all situations, would, in our view,
be counter-productive.

We are glad to see that, in preparation for this
year's report, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General had held a number of briefings and
had also made himself available and responded to the
queries of Permanent Missions, for which we are
grateful. We regret, however, that no real consultations
took place with those Member States which are not in
the Security Council.

We are also dismayed that the report continues to
retain a high degree of selectivity and double
standards.

It is widely known and accepted that insurgent
groups in Myanmar extensively recruit and use child
soldiers. The Government, on the other hand, has been
taking measures not only to prevent children from
being recruited into the insurgent groups but also to
ensure that no under-age children are recruited into the
Tatmadaw, the Myanmar Armed Forces. Tatmadaw is
an all-volunteer army, and the minimum age
requirement for recruitment is 18 years. The
Government is taking effective measures so that no one
below that age is recruited into the military. To that
end, a high-level Committee for the Prevention of
Military Recruitment for Under-age Children was
established. Stringent monitoring is carried out, both at
the recruitment stage and again at the training stage.
Applicants who do not meet the minimum age
requirement are turned away at the recruitment stage.
Additionally, those who are found to be under 18 at the
training stage are discharged from the military.

To ensure transparency, and in a spirit of
cooperation, the Government arranged a visit by the
Resident Coordinator and a representative of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) to the two
main recruitment centres in Yangon and Mandalay, and
they were able to interact freely with the recruits.

The Government, of its own volition, has drawn
up an action plan which includes the protection of
children's rights, preventive measures, promoting
public awareness and coordination with UNICEF. The
action plan also incorporates provisions for the
discharge of children under 18 from military service
and for their reintegration into their families and
communities. The United Nations country team has
duly reported these positive developments, and, as the
Special Representative himself has acknowledged, they
had recommended that Tatmadaw Kyi be taken out of
annex II. I appreciate the fact that these positive
remarks were also mentioned by a number of
delegations this morning.

The report, however, not only retained Tatmadaw
Kyi in annex II, but also lumped Government armed
forces together with insurgent groups as recruiting and
using children, citing reports from embassies and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) - the only
instance in the report where embassies and NGOs are
quoted as a source. We are also sorry to witness a
degree of politicization and double standards in
deciding on inclusion and exclusion from the list under
annex II.

We all know the difficulty that last year's report
created in the adoption of resolution 1539 (2004). But
a report of the Secretary-General that comes before the
Security Council, particularly in an era of application,
must be based on information that is verified, and it
must have credibility and, above all, objectivity. The
report should not be tailored to the envisaged
resolution.

On the question of the resolution, it is our
strongly held view that any resolution that is
contemplated should be focussed on situations that
affect peace and security - situations that for that very
reason are on the agenda of the Security Council. Such
a resolution should encourage and take a cooperative
approach towards those parties that have taken
effective measures to address the issues in cooperation
with the United Nations. We hope also that such a
resolution would avoid duplications and redundancies.

Myanmar has managed to put an end to armed
conflict and to bring peace and stability to the country.
This has enabled us to better promote and protect the
rights of our children. My Government will resolutely
continue in this important endeavour.

