Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
extend my welcome to His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative and Special Representative
of the European Union (EU), and to thank him for his
briefing and report (see S/2011/682). Croatia aligns
itself with the statement of the EU, but allow me to
deliver a statement in my national capacity as well.

Historically, the EU enlargement process has
shown itself to be the most effective political
instrument for bringing peace, stability and prosperity
to the European continent. Today, Croatia's example
testifies to the fact that the perspective of EU and
NATO membership brings to a national political life a
strong motivation to find the way forward. The only
region that is still far from the real benefits of the
enlargement process is the Western Balkans. Croatia
has consistently advocated membership in the
European Union and NATO as the best framework for
stabilizing its South-East European neighbours. We
will continue to provide our political and technical
support in that regard to all the countries of the region,
especially Bosnia and Herzegovina.

For Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Dayton Peace
Agreement brought peace but not stability or
prosperity. The country today yearns for a more
functional political system. This change must come
from within and must not be introduced at the expense
of democracy. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country of
two entities and three constitutive peoples. The State
itself can be strengthened only by respecting the
equality of the three peoples in all possible aspects of
life. At the highest political level this requires the
legitimate representatives of each people - those who
carry the majority of votes of its people - to be
acknowledged as such. Our frustration with the
inefficiency of the political system of Bosnia and
Herzegovina makes it tempting to forget this basic
democratic principle, but as the Arab Spring has
demonstrated lately, building and cherishing
democracy is the only way forward in the search for
long-term stability.

We are today faced with two grave challenges to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. One is the rhetorical flirtation
with the breakup of the country. The international
community and all countries of the region must send a
clear message that such rhetoric is unacceptable. The
other serious challenge is the position of Croats in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As recent history has shown,
they - as the least populous of the three peoples -
have serious difficulties in electing their
representatives within the existing system. When
addressing this problem, we should not forget that
citizens' identification with their country is in strong
correlation with its democratic process. We must
therefore make sure that the democratic will of Croats
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the least populous
people, is fully respected.

Our emphasis today on Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not based on ethnicity. It is based on
our firm belief that the unity and stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina depend primarily on the actual
equality of Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs. Treating the
smallest and the most vulnerable constitutive people as
a minority equals giving up on the viability and unity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In a country in which
division into two entities represents a real obstacle to
inner integration, reducing the number of constitutive
peoples - be it de jure or de facto - could lead to the
breakup of the country that would create a scenario
with dire consequences.

Instead of such an approach, we should support
the democratic process itself, bearing in mind that
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina starts with
ensuring equal rights for all three constitutive peoples.
Democracy brought stability to the countries of the
Western hemisphere, and it will bring stability to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of all the
complexity it implies there.

Croatia is especially eager to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina embark on the process of integration into
the EU and NATO. We are more than ready to share
our unique experience with the leadership and
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of
their ethnicity. We know how demanding and
challenging these processes are and how detrimental
any sort of democratic deficit can be at every step of
the way. Any doubt about whether the EU-based
reforms will be beneficial to all three peoples equally
may be fatal to the process. We all agree that the
present state of internal integration is not particularly
conducive to Bosnia and Herzegovina's successful
accession into the EU or NATO. That fact should not
be a reason for giving up on the accession process; we
should rather consider a new tailor-made accession
process designed specifically for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Some believe that we should move away from the
so-called ethnic approach and that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can move forward only if ethnicity - that
is, nationality - gives way to common citizenship.
Although this at first glance may seem to be a solution
to many of Bosnia and Herzegovina's problems, it is
not. However seductive the idea of quickly reaching a
functional State on that base may be, we must not
forget that ethnic-national affiliation is a very strong
component of individual identities in that country, and
perhaps even more so than in most European countries.

We should not underestimate or disregard as
antiquated the legal/constitutional and deeply-rooted
political traditions of Yugoslav federalism, which was
founded on the rights of constituent peoples. It is
realistic to think that successful affirmation of the
concept of a constituent citizen achievable through
prior affirmation of the concept of constituent peoples.
Bypassing the issue of ethnic and national identity,
instead of solving it, would shortly get us back to the
beginning and would constitute a heavy burden in the
process of Euro-Atlantic integration.

Croatia thus advocates an accession and
integration process into the EU and NATO that would
22

link together, under well-defined and tight
conditionality, national institution-building, democratic
practices and a free market economy. However, first
and foremost, there should be constitutional reform,
which would assure all three peoples that their credible
voices are heard and respected. Only a political
leadership, be it at the State, the entity or the cantonal
level, accountable to all three constitutive peoples can
lead Bosnia and Herzegovina through the long-awaited
reforms to a better future.

