Mr. Schori (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the manner in which you are handling this meeting.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus and
Malta, as well as the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area
Iceland, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union remains committed to the
full implementation of all Security Council resolutions
pertaining to Iraq. In particular, the European Union
calls for the implementation of all the provisions of
resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999). Those
resolutions specify the obligations of Iraq in several
areas, including weapons of mass destruction, and
define the way to suspension and lifting of the
prohibitions imposed by the Council. There can be no
doubt that the key to suspension and lifting of
sanctions lies in the hands of the Government of Iraq.

The European Union looks forward to the future
reintegration of Iraq into the international community
and to a more prosperous and dignified life for the Iraqi
civilian population. We reiterate that Iraq must fully
comply with its obligations as provided for in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and we call on
the Government of Iraq to cooperate to that end. The
European Union also welcomes the dialogue between
the Secretary-General and the Government of Iraq.

The European Union regrets that, as a result of
Iraq's failure to fulfil its international obligations, the
conditions do not exist which would enable the Council
to lift the prohibitions imposed under resolution 687
(1991). The European Union urges Iraq to cooperate
with the United Nations in all respects, and reiterates
the demand that Iraq allow the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency to
undertake the responsibilities mandated by the Security
Council and to enable them to initiate their work in
Iraq as soon as possible.

Until the fulfilment by Iraq of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, there is a clear need, as a
temporary measure, to provide for the civilian needs of
the Iraqi people. The European Union has strong
sympathy for the fate of the Iraqi population, and
remains the largest contributor of humanitarian aid and
assistance to Iraq.

The European Union notes that, though not meant
to meet all the needs of the Iraqi people, the United
Nations humanitarian programme, as reported by the
Secretary-General on 18 May (S/2001/505), has
contributed not only to arresting the decline in the
living conditions of the average Iraqi, but also to
improving them. Important measures have also been
taken lately, including in resolutions 1284 (1999), 1302
(2000) and 1330 (2000), to further improve the
implementation of the oil-for-food programme.
However, the humanitarian situation in Iraq remains
alarming, calling for ambitious measures aimed at
alleviating the suffering among the population. In
particular, measures to stimulate normal activity in the
civilian sectors of the Iraqi economy are vital.

Lasting security and stability in the region, as
well as the living conditions of the Iraqi population, are
the prime considerations that must guide the Security
Council's actions. In that regard, the European Union
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 1352
(2001) on 1 June 2001. We find particularly important
the commitment by the whole Security Council
membership to consider new arrangements for the
supply of commodities and products to Iraq and for the
facilitation of civilian trade and economic cooperation
with Iraq in civilian sectors. The two principles
outlined there have full European Union support: that
such a system should, first, improve the flow of
commodities and products to Iraq, with the exception
of those covered under resolution 687 (1991) and those
included in the so-called goods review list, and,
secondly, improve the controls to prevent the sale or
supply of items prohibited and unauthorized by the
Council and to prevent the flow of revenues to Iraq
outside the escrow account. The European Union hopes
that this new system will enhance transparency and
allow Iraq to import the full range of civilian goods
with the minimum of restrictions necessary to ensure
that military-related items are not exported to Iraq.

The European Union welcomes the intention by
the Security Council to adopt and implement such
arrangements for a period beginning on 4 July. We
strongly support the ongoing deliberations within the
Council with the purpose of alleviating the predicament
of the Iraqi civilian population. We encourage the
Security Council to adopt, in accordance with
resolution 1352 (2001), a decision on the new
arrangements as soon as possible.

