Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his presence and briefing today. We thank him
for his frank assessment and strong message, and
we appreciate his untiring efforts to facilitate peace
in the Middle East, specifically on the Palestinian
question. I also acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully. Malaysia appreciates
New Zealand's persistent commitment to pushing for
Council actions to create the necessary conditions for
peace in the region.

My delegation decided to take the floor today
to echo the Views expressed around the table for the
need for the Council to take decisive and concrete
action on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in line with
the Council's responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations.

For far too long, the Council has been in a state of
inertia when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which belies the worsening situation on the ground.
Malaysia reiterates the need to create the necessary
conditions for peace and to push the parties in the right
direction in order to salvage the two-State solution.
Clearly, doing nothing is not an option for the Security
Council as an organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. We must take urgent,
effective actions to hault and reverse illegal settlement
activities and end illegal occupations, which are
fuelling radicalization in the region and beyond.

Over the years, we have heard repeated warnings
from the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, about the expansion of
settlement activities that threaten to bury the two-State
solution. And yet, Israeli settlement activities have
kept growing, despite their undeniably illegal nature
under international law, the clear recommendations of
the Quartet report and the widespread condemnation
of the international community. Recent developments
have led to a new sense of urgency, especially the
unprecedented attempt by the Israeli parliament to
pass a bill to legalize outposts, including on private
Palestinian lands. Furthermore, just last week, Israeli
authorities decided to proceed with a plan to build 770
housing units in the illegal Israeli settlement of Gilo, in
East Jerusalem.

As we have heard from the speakers at the Arria
Formula meeting on settlements last October, the
impact of settlements on the Palestinians are far-
reaching. Settlement expansion has led to an increase
in settlers' Violence, demolitions of Palestinian homes
and structures, confiscations of Palestinian lands,
discriminatory policies and denial of development
infrastructure and natural resources. Palestinians are
even prevented from burying their dead relatives in
the Muslim cemetery adjacent to the Al-Aqsa Mosque
because Israeli authorities have seizedthe cemetery land.
Since the beginning of this year, Israel has demolished
866 Palestinian structures in Area C of the occupied
West Bank, affecting over 5,000 Palestinians of whom
over 1,200 have been rendered homeless, including
586 children. The widespread anger, frustration and
despair inevitably fed into further radicalization of the
oppressed population that has nothing more to lose.

Settlement activities constitute the single biggest
threat to peace and the two-State solution. That
threat has multiplied and become entrenched over the
decades because of the Council's inaction. It is long
overdue for the Council to assume its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security and strive to reverse
the negative trends that are threatening peace and
the two-State solution. The Council is responsible for
the current predicament in the occupied Palestinian
territory, but we can also undo that damage if we stay
true to the values and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and uphold international law and
international human rights standards.

I reiterate that the Council has various tools at
its disposal, which it has not shied away from using
in various conflict areas in the world. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict should be no exception. We have
seen how providing incentives, whether in the form of
the comprehensive Arab Peace Initiative or the billions
of dollars in military aid sent to safeguard its security,
have done nothing to persuade Israel to move in the
direction of peace or led it to grant any concessions to
uphold the two-State solution. Instead, it has further
emboldened Israel to intensify its settlement activities
and entrench its repressive occupations.

We need to stop rewarding illegal behaviour
that threatens peace and security in the region and
beyond. We need to stop shielding those who have
continually violated Council resolutions, international
law and human rights standards. The Council has a
moral, legal and political responsibility to end Israel's
repressive occupation and sanction its settlement
activities, apartheid policies and gross Violations of
human rights, as well as to ensure accountability and
support the fundamental right to self-determination.
The Council should not be left high and dry, waiting for
another resolution.
