Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Indonesia
for bringing up this important aspect of peacekeeping
for discussion in the Security Council. Incident reports
have demonstrated the extent to which training and
related issues are key to the responses that must be
provided. The statement made by the Secretary-General
earlier also illustrated the importance of this issue for
the Secretariat. The Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative is the matrix on which we must
base our work.

I would like to address three points: first, the
primary responsibility oftroop- and police-contributing
countries for training their contingents; secondly, the
importance of pursuing such training through specific
and needs-based initiatives; and, thirdly, the importance
of adequately training contingents on the specific issue
of children in armed conflict.

The primary responsibility for training uniformed
personnel deployed in peace operations lies with troop-
and police-contributing countries. In that regard, it is
important for the Secretariat to ensure that contingents
are operational following predeployment training.
Before taking up their posts in a given peacekeeping
operation, Blue Helmets and police officers should be
operationally prepared and fully aware of the reality
that they must face.

In addition to general mandatory training, the
specific content of the training package should be
determinedbythepersonwhoknowsbestwhatisneeded,
namely, the Force Commander. Belgium supports
the Secretariat, in particular the Integrated Training
Service, in its mission to provide troop-contributors
with comprehensive and up-to-date training material.
In particular, Belgium assists in translating training
manuals into French, as it is aware of the importance of
conducting training in the language ofthe contingent or
of the duty station.

Secondly, with regard to training and related
issues on the ground in the theatre of operations,
uniformed and non-uniformed personnel should receive
theatre-specific information and, where appropriate,
should participate in exercises that will enable them to
carry out their specific mission more effectively.

One post-deployment training tool for continuing
training is the use of mobile training teams, which
the Secretary-General mentioned earlier. Belgium is
currently providing such teams to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali for four six-week periods in order to deliver
targeted needs-based training, including primary
emergency assistance. The partnership involves the
Secretariat, the country providing instructors and the
troop-contributing countries, in close cooperation
with the Mission. We are counting on the Secretariat
to quickly facilitate the operationalization of a light
coordination mechanism.

Thirdly, for a soldier, even one who has operational
experience, facing an armed child can be overwhelming.
In an ideal world, we should not have to train our
contingents how to react when confronted by a child.
Unfortunately, the situation on the ground is sometimes
very far removed from our ideals, and the reality is that
some unscrupulous groups continue to arm children.

More generally, given the many different
situations they have to deal with, the members of peace
operations must be made aware of child-protection
measures. As mandated by resolution 1612 (2005)
and related resolutions, including resolution 2387
(2017), it is important that mission personnel receive
sufficient training in that area. I would like to take this
opportunity to commend Lieutenant General Martins
Filho on the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the results achieved in that area, which the
Force Commander mentioned earlier.

In conclusion, Belgium will remain committed to
the continuous process of improving the performance
of peace operations.

