Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this debate on Timor-Leste. We join other
Council members in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. J ose Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste, to the
Security Council. I would also like to offer heartfelt
condolences upon the demise of his brother-in-law. We
also thank him for inviting the Council to visit Timor-
Leste.

We would also like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for her comprehensive briefing.

The year 2012 marks the tenth anniversary of the
restoration of independence of Timor-Leste. During
this period, the country has made remarkable progress
overall and will soon transition to being a fully
independent and sovereign nation. Pakistan has made
significant contribution to this transition. As a
contributor to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor and the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
over the past 10 years, Pakistan considers itself a
stakeholder in the peace and stability of that country.
Currently, there are 127 Pakistani police personnel
serving in UNMIT. One of them, Ms. Shahzadi
Gulfam, was awarded the 2011 International Female
Police Peacekeeper Award in recognition of her
outstanding performance as the team leader of the
Vulnerable Persons Unit in Dili. Pakistan is fully
committed to contributing to the completion of the
mandated tasks during UNMIT's remaining
deployment period, in what should be the Mission's
last extension. I would like to touch upon four issues.
First, the successful holding of presidential and
legislative elections will be a major milestone in the
transition in Timor-Leste and a key test of the viability
of its State institutions. We are pleased to note from the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/43) that steady
progress has been made in the preparations for the
elections. We commend the efforts of President Jose
Ramos-Horta to hold a dialogue among national
leaders to create a positive atmosphere for the
elections. It would be important to hold peaceful
elections in accordance with the Constitution of the
country. UNMIT and the bilateral partners of Timor-
Leste should extend maximum support for the
attainment of that objective. The maintenance of law
and order before and during the elections will be
critical. The operational and logistical gaps faced by
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), as
identified in the Secretary-General's report, must
therefore be filled in a timely manner.

Secondly, the implementation of the Joint
Transition Plan, signed between the Government of
Timor-Leste and UNMIT on 19 September, will be
critical to the smooth transition of the Mission and the
continued development of the country. In accordance
with the Plan, the transfer of UNMIT functions and
assets to the Timorese Government must take place in a
systematic and coordinated manner, while ensuring that
national authorities have the required capabilities to
take over functions that are being transferred to them.
There is a need to maintain momentum in that exercise,
even as the country prepares to hold the elections. We
look forward to the determination of the United
Nations post-UNMIT engagement in Timor-Leste, from
among one of the four options identified in the Plan
and based on close consultations with the Timorese
authorities. The international community must continue
to assist the country for the duration of the Transition
Plan.

Thirdly, the presence of effective security forces
is critical for maintaining the stability of the country.
We note with satisfaction that the security situation in
the country has remained stable following the transfer
of policing responsibilities to the PNTL. UNMIT must
continue to support the PNTL in its capacity-building
in accordance with the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan. The PNTL continues to face a
shortage of equipment and resources. In that regard, we
commend the steps taken by the Government to
increase the budgetary allocation for bridging the

capacity gaps faced by the PNTL. The bilateral
partners of Timor-Leste must also assist the country in
addressing those gaps through the provision of
resources and expertise. Simultaneously, the authorities
must take steps to build and consolidate judicial
authorities and institutions in order to ensure
accountability and prevent impunity.

Fourthly, we are encouraged by the economic
performance of Timor-Leste. As underscored in the
Secretary-General's report, the Government must make
further efforts to promote inclusive, equitable and
sustainable growth in the country. The international
community has played its part in helping the people of
Timor-Leste. It is now up to the Timorese leadership to
seize the opportunity and build a better future for the
country.

Finally, we would like to commend the efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq and her team in helping make UNMIT a
success story for the United Nations. Let me once
again assure the Council of Pakistan's support to that
endeavour

