Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania wishes to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and through you the Republic of
South Africa, on holding, in a very successful manner,
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March 2007. We thank you very much for organizing
this important debate on a subject that is of great
significance for the work of this body and of major
concern and interest in Africa.

My delegation highly commends the Security
Council and the entire United Nations family for
having already invested such great energy and
resources in an effort to build and develop a systematic
and well-coordinated partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union. However, there is still room for
improvement.
The objective in all those efforts has been, and
essentially remains, to ensure that the framework set
and the practices devised contribute to, and reinforce,
the cooperation partnership between the world body
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security in the various regions
of the world. In fact, it is to those efforts that we can
proudly attribute the success stories of Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Southern Sudan.

There have been previous debates and
deliberations in the Security Council as well as in the
General Assembly on how to strengthen and deepen the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations - and in particular between the Council
and the corresponding organs of regional organizations.
Today's debate should promote that effort. I wish to
focus on those aspects of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union in the areas of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

First, the newly constituted African Union and
the practices of the former Organization of African
Unity offer an elaborate architecture and tested ways of
conflict prevention, combining formal quiet diplomacy
and best practices of wise counselling, peer
consultation, mediation and reconciliation. The African
Peer Review Mechanism is yet another innovative way
to establish norms of cooperation and conflict
prevention. The Security Council should take a keen
interest in those initiatives and practices in the African
continent. Already, there are encouraging signs of
support for subregional initiatives - as was the case in
the conflicts in Southern Sudan and Somalia,
negotiated under the auspices of Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union. The
proposed mediation support facility to be established in
the Secretariat should be given attention and formal
support by the Security Council.

Secondly, in the area of conflict resolution, the
partnership between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union has
produced Visible dividends. The combined moral
authority of the two organs, especially when backed by
unanimous resolutions, is a powerful message to
protagonists in African conflicts. The two councils
have evolved a way of sequencing, synchronizing and
complementing their decisions to lend maximum effect
to the appropriate actions to be taken. However, those

political efforts by the two organs are sometimes ad
hoc and not timely enough. There is room for periodic
consultations, as was the case during the first meeting
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council held in Addis Ababa in June 2006,
when the Council visited Eastern Africa, and the
second meeting, held in November 2006, again in
Addis Ababa, to jointly deliberate on Darfur. The latter
led to the signing of a memorandum of understanding
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.

Thirdly, peacekeeping probably has the greatest
potential for cooperation between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union. The African Union has proved to be quick in its
deployment, with minimum resources, and has made
great contributions in holding conflicts at bay before
the United Nations comes in - as was the case in
Burundi and in West Africa, where forces of the
Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group, supported by the African Union,
were deployed in Liberia and Sierra Leone ahead of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions there. The latest
discussions on how to address the Darfur crisis raise
new possibilities for strengthening political and
technical cooperation for joint deployment in Darfur,
with the support of the international community.
Understandably, the underlying political issues must
still be resolved jointly by the two Councils and Sudan.
The latest challenge calling for partnership in Africa is
to deploy a peace support mission in Somalia.

Fourthly, peacebuilding falls squarely in areas of
interest to both the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. Post-conflict
reconstruction begins when peacekeeping missions are
still in place, and in most cases will overlap for some
time the mandates of the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in a
given post-conflict situation in Africa. There is need
and room to strengthen the country configuration of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, with the active participation of the
United Nations and the African Union. Successful post-
conflict reconstruction is a sure way of not only
preventing a relapse into conflict, but also of laying the
foundation for sustainable peace, development and the
institutionalization of human rights in post-conflict
situations in Africa.
13

We hope that those four areas of cooperation

between the two bodies will be reflected in the

outcome of this debate and will continue to be the basis

of further consultations on strengthening the

partnership to promote and maintain international
peace and security in the African continent.

