The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremie
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.

As this is Mr. Zannier's first briefing to the
Security Council, I should like, on behalf of the
Council, to congratulate him on his appointment and to
wish him all the best in his new assignment.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
2
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/458, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. I now give him the floor.


