Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to join others in
thanking Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Ambassador
Ertugrul Apakan for their briefings, respectively, on the
latest report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
(S/2010/318) and on the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan. We sincerely appreciate Ambassador
Apakan's able leadership. We commend Mr. De Mistura
for the admirable work he has carried out in a very short
time and under challenging circumstances.

I also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his
remarks and, through him, the Afghan Government and
people for the hospitality extended to the Security
Council delegation. The Secretary-General's report and
the first-hand comments gathered from Afghan
interlocutors last week highlight the progress made
since the London Conference, as well as the challenges
still ahead in building a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan. Today I would like to address some of
these challenges, namely, security, reconciliation and
reintegration, regional cooperation, elections and aid
coherence.

On the security side, the progress in the force
generation and training of the Afghan National
Security Forces - slightly ahead of the interim targets
spelled out in London - is encouraging. The level of
coordination of Afghan and international security
forces that the Security Council mission witnessed both
in Kabul and in Jalalabad is also to be commended. In
order to promote a sustainable and successful transition
to full Afghan responsibility, the international
community should further enhance the quality of the
training of the Afghan forces and provide them with all
the necessary equipment and enablers in a timely
manner.
Despite the progress made towards fulfilling the
London commitments, the significant rise in insecurity,
especially in complex suicide attacks and incidents
involving improvised explosive devices, remains a
cause of concern. Curbing the upward trend in violence
is key. Improving the capacity of the Afghan national
and sub-national authorities to provide not only
security but also governance and development to the
affected populations can certainly contribute to that
end.

We note with appreciation that the efforts of the
international forces to reduce civilian casualties
continue to bear fruit. These are steps in the right
direction that must continue, including with regard to
escalation-of-forces incidents and practices, such as
night raids, that deeply affect the sensitivities of the
Afghan people.

The armed opposition continues to be responsible
for the largest majority of civilian casualties, including
those of United Nations staff. Perpetrators should be
stopped. We strongly condemn the most recent attack
on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We are saddened by the loss
of another United Nations staff member in an attack in
the streets of Kabul yesterday. We reiterate our support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhance
Mission staff security.

The Consultative Peace Jirga resulted in strong
support and several recommendations from the Afghan
people for an Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration process. It is clear that the Afghan
conflict cannot be solved by military means alone and
that most low- and middle-ranking insurgents can be
reintegrated.

At the same time, as the Council delegation could
see first-hand, there are divergent views as to when,
how and with whom to pursue reconciliation talks. We
believe that President Karzai laid out important criteria
in his inauguration speech. Peace should not come at
the expense of either the fundamental rights of Afghan
women and men or accountability for egregious
crimes.

Afghanistan's long-term stability and prosperity
depend as much on internal reconciliation as on
regional cooperation underpinned by mutual respect
and non-interference in internal affairs. Brazil is
encouraged by the several trilateral and regional
initiatives to that end. In this context, we welcome the
launching of the Kabul Silk Road initiative.

The Security Council mission to Afghanistan
coincided with the beginning of the official launching
of the campaign for the Wolesi Jirga. We welcome the
adoption of the implementation guidelines for the
electoral process. Those guidelines reinvigorated
electoral institutions and led to a number of women
candidates that was even higher than in 2005.
Provincial electoral complaints commissions are being
set up in order to respond more swiftly to possible
irregularities. Such measures help us to draw practical
lessons from the 2009 polls. Ensuring the security of
the campaign and the polling is now crucial, as was
emphasized by Mr. De Mistura. We call on the Afghan
National Security Forces and the International Security
Assistance Force to redouble their efforts in this
regard.

On aid coherence, the Secretary-General's report
once again notes significant progress in prioritizing the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and in
improving the financial and managerial capacity to
implement it. The development cluster system, in
particular, is exceeding the initial expectations of the
London Conference. The donor community should
match these achievements with comparable progress in
its commitments to channeling aid through the Afghan
budget. Donors should do their best to realign their
assistance behind Afghan-led priorities and projects
and improved transparency on off-budget aid. The
attachment to national ownership and mutual
accountability must be measured in deeds.

The very initiative of holding the Kabul
Conference, the first international meeting on
Afghanistan to be held in Afghan territory, sends a
strong message of increasing ownership by the Afghan
Government and its people of their future. The
Conference is being envisaged as a contract between
the Afghan Government and its people that the
international community will be called on to support.
The international community has a fundamental role to
play in assisting the Afghans, whose stability and
prosperity are linked to those of its neighbours, near
neighbours and allies. We should all remain steadfast
in our long-term commitment to Afghan stability.

