Dr. Kiyonga (Uganda): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
the Council on this very important subject, HIV/AIDS. In
the interest of brevity, I will try as much as possible to
summarize my speech.

Since Uganda has been cited as one of the countries
that has made some progress, I think it is only fair to
members of the Security Council that I give a bird's eye
View of the country, as well as the efforts that we have
made that have led to some modest changes.

Uganda has a population of about 20 million people,
with a growth rate of 2.5 per cent annually. Most of our
people live in the rural areas; only about 12 per cent of the
population are urban dwellers. Uganda is one of the
poorest countries in the world, with a gross domestic
product per capita of $300. Although we have made
progress over the last 10 years in growth and
macroeconomic stabilization, our situation remains very
difficult as far as resources are concerned.

The average life expectancy has been drawn down
by AIDS, and now stands at about 47 years. The infant
mortality rate is still very high at 97, and the maternal
mortality rate still stands at 504 per 100,000 live births.
Access to health care is generally very poor, and only 50
per cent of our population are within five kilometres'
radius from some form of health facility.

The AIDS pandemic hit our country as far back as
1983, and we estimate that about 2 million of our people
are HIV/AIDS- positive. Of these, 92 per cent are adults,
and 12 per cent are children under 12 years old. The
urban populations are much more affected than their rural
counterparts. As has been said by other countries, there is
a higher prevalence of HIV infection among young
females as compared to males. This, coupled with the
predominance of heterosexual transmission, has
implications for mother-to-child transmission of HIV. It
is estimated that with a national seroprevalence of 10 per
cent in Uganda, and a mother-to-child transmission rate
of 25 per cent, a total of 25,000 children every year are
born who are already HIV-infected.

The HIV epidemic in our country has contributed
significantly to the re-emergence of tuberculosis, which
we had otherwise controlled. About 60 per cent of the
tuberculosis patients in the country are HIV-infected. We
have also noticed that people who are HIV-positive and
tuberculosis-infected tend to respond less satisfactorily to
tuberculosis treatment.

HIV/AIDS threatens our security and our
development. The country has already lost more than half
a million people to this disease over the last 10 years. A
large number of children have been orphaned due to
HIV/AIDS. These children are now being cared for by
their weak and aged grandparents or fellow children.
AIDS is affecting the most active members of the society,
including highly skilled people, such as doctors, engineers
and administrators. HIV/AIDS therefore threatens to
reverse the socio-economic gains made in the country in
the recent past.

What has been our response to this pandemic within
the country? President Museveni's leadership and the

 

commitment to control the epidemic has provided the
platform for a strong coalition of national and international
forces to fight HIV/AIDS in Uganda. Accordingly,
academic, political, religious and cultural leaders and
communities have formed a broad response to this disease.

Sexual AIDS-control programmes have been
established in key sectors of government, including the
armed forces, the educational sector, the agricultural sector
and the ministry responsible for labour affairs. Church and
other non-governmental organizations, as well as
community-based organizations, have made useful
contributions to the fight against HIV/AIDS. By 1994, over
4,000 non-governmental organizations had been registered
to provide programmes for HIV/AIDS care, prevention and,
often, support. One of the key interventions that we have
used has been the high-profile public-health education
carried out through radio, television, drama, songs and
billboards. It is important to mention at this stage that the
people in Uganda living with HIV/AIDS have made
significant contributions to this approach by openly
declaring their serostatus and advising the rest of the
population to avoid the infection.

Under the drug-access programme sponsored by the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
which began in 1997, only about 1,000 Ugandans have
benefited from HIV/AIDS anti-retroviral treatment. This is
mainly due to the high cost of drugs. It is estimated that a
monthly supply of drugs costs about $12,000 per patient per
year. With the estimated 2 million Ugandans infected with
HIV, universal access would cost us $24 billion. This is in
contrast to our annual budget of $2 billion. Clearly, this is
unaffordable to a poor population like Uganda's.
Although some efforts have been made towards
support programmes for people living with HIV/AIDS in
health-care facilities and in the community, large gaps
remain. The ultimate goal of these programmes is to restore
hope and to encourage the sick to seek health care.

The political will that I talked about and the openness
that has emerged about HIV/AIDS in our country have
contributed immensely to Uganda's participation in HIV
research efforts. International research collaborations with
the best United States and European institutions have
helped build research capacity in Uganda. There has
emerged a core of well-trained research scientists in
epidemiology, behavioural sciences, HIV virology,
immunology and molecular biology. These scientists have
characterized the epidemiology of HIV and the behavioural
risk factors contributing to its spread. As a result of these
research efforts, a number of well-designed cohorts have
been established and, in addition, every effort is being
made to strengthen HIV/AIDS research laboratories
within the country.

Recently, research in Uganda has made a promising
breakthrough in the search for a drug to prevent mother-
to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS. The best United
States scientists, working with their colleagues in Uganda,
have determined that a drug called Nevirapin has the
potential of reducing mother-to-child transmission by a
factor of 50 per cent in comparison to AZT. With this
efficacy, it is estimated in the case of Uganda that 12,500
babies could be born free of HIV infection. Nevirapin is
estimated to cost about $4 per woman for the drug alone,
not counting the administration and supply costs. This
contrasts sharply with the cost of $150-$200 for treatment
of the mother-baby pair with the AZT that is currently
being used in the developed world. Use of Nevirapin
therefore promises to be the most appropriate and
sustainable strategy for the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission in resource-poor countries like Uganda.

Uganda, in its efforts to join the rest of the world in
search of a solution to this disease, has started to test
vaccine candidates. This, again, has been in collaboration
with the best scientists in the United States of America.
During the course of this meeting, the Council has heard
that Uganda has made some breakthroughs and I now
take this opportunity to try to cite just three incidences in
which we think Uganda has had some success.

The first has been in respect of behaviour change.
The Ugandan demographic and health survey of 1995
established that close to universal awareness about
HIV/AIDS had been achieved in Uganda. In that respect,
we have observed that a large number of our people are
now sticking to one partner and also using condoms,
which, at the beginning of the pandemic, were considered
taboo to talk about in our country. Now, however,
condoms are available everywhere and are being used
liberally.

As to our second achievement, we have been able to
destigmatize HIV/AIDS. The evidence for this is finding
that the people living with HIV/AIDS themselves are
standing up and declaring their serostatus, relating their
stories and advising fellow citizens to avoid the pitfalls
into which they fell. Many people are turning up to be
tested so that they can know their seropositivity. As a
result of this behavioural change and the destigmatization
that we have observed, between 1991 and now we have

 

observed declining prevalences of the disease in our
country.

That notwithstanding, we still see huge challenges
ahead. First, the epidemic is still very high at a
seroprevalence rate of 10 per cent and 2 million people
being infected. But clearly, we want to move ahead and
deepen the programme. One way is to further deepen
behaviour change. We have seen that the long-established
cultural norms in some of our ethnic groups do favour
transmission of HIV/AIDS and we want to strengthen the
programme so that this behavioural change can be
enhanced.

We lack resources. We are a poor country. Both the
extended-family and government support systems are being
overwhelmed by caring for orphans and the people living
with AIDS. As the Council has already been told, the cost
of providing anti-retroviral drugs is unaffordable in a
country like ours and we do hope that the international
community can come to our assistance in this respect. We
are glad to indicate that Nevirapin is likely to stem the
transmission from mothers to children and our country
intends, with international assistance, to move very fast to
start using this drug on a wide scale. In the final analysis,
I must emphasize that what will ultimately stem this
pandemic is the finding of an effective and low-cost
vaccine against HIV/AIDS. International solidarity on this
matter must therefore be called into action.

In conclusion, I want to inform fellow representatives
that Uganda's huge HIV/AIDS epidemic threatens national
development and may worsen the poverty situation.
Affordable measures in the control and prevention of
HIV/AIDS have been applied in our country. The high cost
of current treatment available in the developed countries
cannot be afforded by our country and people. We believe
that finding an effective and affordable vaccine offers the
only feasible alternative to the drugs. In the meantime,
however, we are calling upon the international community
to assist us in supporting the orphans and people living with
HIV/AIDS.

On behalf of President Museveni and the Government
of Uganda, I therefore wish to express our gratitude to
Vice-President Al Gore for the support he has announced
towards the fight against HIV/AIDS. I also wish to take this
opportunity to call upon the rest of the international
community, those members of the human race who are
better advantaged, to join this solidarity and help the less-
advantaged members of the world.

