Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): It is a signal honour
and privilege for me to appear before the Council to
present the third report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l2/923) on the situation in Central Africa and the
work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA).

As Council members know, my Office was
established in March 2011. Since then, it has played
an ever more significant role in helping the States
of the subregion in their efforts to confront the
challenges they face. As described in the Secretary-
General's report, my Office has therefore focused on
political governance, institutional capacity-building,
preventive diplomacy - especially mediation and good
offices - and developing a subregional strategy to fight
terrorism and arms proliferation in Central Africa.

In that regard, allow me to thank my colleagues in
the Policy and Mediation Division of the Department
of Political Affairs and on the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force for their invaluable
contribution to the implementation of several initiatives.
Along the same lines, we have continued to build and
maintain fruitful cooperation with a number of United
Nations country teams, as well as with diplomatic
presences in the subregion. We have also strengthened
our cooperation with the United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA) in the framework of our joint
efforts to respond to the common, multidimensional
challenges.

Moreover, my Office has continued to work in
close cooperation with various stakeholders and
partners - including the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa - in addressing the new threats represented by
piracy at sea and armed or terrorist groups such as the
Mouvement du 23 mars, the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and Boko Haram. Indeed, safeguarding peace
and security in our subregion requires us to coordinate
our efforts even better in order to meet these challenges.

(spoke in English)

A critical element for the advent of sustainable
peace and security in Central Africa is subregional
integration. This explains why UNOCA has continued
to work closely with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS)and other subregional
entities, such as the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, as well as the highest political
authorities of the subregion, in the pursuit of that goal.

While the overall peace and security situation
remains stable and significant progress has been
registered in curbing the activities of armed groups and
negative forces, Central Africa continues to experience
some challenges in this domain. Violence perpetrated
by armed groups, including in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and countries affected by the
LRA, as well as a number of other developments
with regional and cross-border consequences, greatly
challenge our efforts to promote sustainable peace and
stability in the sub-region.

However, as the Secretary-General's report shows,
there is also good news coming out of Central Africa,
particularly on the economic front, as countries
continue to register significant growth rates. We have
also noted the increasing confidence being placed in
the conflict-prevention work of the United Nations,
particularly UNOCA, by regional actors in Central
Africa, including Governments, regional organizations,
political leaders and representatives of civil society.
Our growing interactions with those actors, and above
all their multiple requests for support, show that there
is a growing appreciation that establishing a regional
political office in Central Africa was both useful and
timely. They increasingly acknowledge that the creation
of UNOCA has filled a preventive-diplomacy gap.

The requests we received during the reporting
period pertain to but are not limited to the following
areas: mediation and facilitation of dialogue between
opposition political parties and those in Government;
support for capacity-building for regional organizations;
mobilization of support and resources from the
international community for actors in the subregion;
and facilitation of workshops, seminars and training.

I would like to inform members of the Security
Council that, during the period under consideration,
political leaders at the highest level in Central Africa
showed strong determination and commitment to
supporting and facilitating the work that UNOCA is
doing. This is the case with our efforts to address the
impact of the activities of the LRA, which the Security
Council, in its presidential statement S/PRST/2011/21,
requested my Office to coordinate.

As requested by the Security Council, UNOCA
is coordinating the implementation of the regional
strategy to address the threat posed by the LRA.
The challenges of doing so are numerous. However,
perhaps the most urgent step revolves around the
need to promptly finalize the LRA programmatic
document and mobilize sufficient resources for its full
implementation. Once the programmatic document is
finalized, my Office, in partnership with the Office of
the African Union Special Envoy for the LRA, plans to
organize a resource mobilization forum early next year
with the aim of raising funds for the most critical areas
of the strategy.

Another example of political commitment
demonstrated at the highest level by regional leaders is
reflected in the ongoing efforts to organize a regional
summit on piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea. It will be recalled that in its resolution 2039
(2012) of 29 February 2012, the Council requested the
two regional offices, UNOWA and UNOCA, to support
efforts towards the convening of a regional summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Gulf of Guinea.
UNOWA and UNOCA have been working closely
with regional organizations, including ECCAS, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, on the preparation of this
summit.

As part of those efforts, on 7 December the
Secretary-General of ECCAS delivered a special
message from President Idriss Deby Itno of Chad, in
his capacity as Chair of ECCAS, to President Paul
Biya of Cameroon on the convening of that important
summit. Another example of the collaborative spirit in
the subregion is the chairing by President Denis Sassou

Nguesso of Congo of the celebration, on 7 December in
Brazzaville, of the twentieth anniversary of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.

These are just a few examples of the level of political
engagement and commitment among the political
leadership in the subregion on issues of peace and
security. I am glad to note that such mobilization points
to a renewed sense of community and commitment on
the part of the leaders and organizations in Central
Africa. UNOCA will continue to play its role, as
mandated, to mobilize all stakeholders in the subregion
and help shore up these positive trends.

In spite ofthe some ofthe encouraging news coming
out of Central Africa, the report before the Council also
shows that actors in Central Africa, including UNOCA,
continue to face critical challenges that hamper the
effectiveness of our combined efforts. With increasing
and competing priorities in the pursuit of its mandate,
there is a clear disparity between the resources
available to UNOCA and tasks that it is required to
perform. This is all the more so as the expectations of
regional actors regarding the potential role of UNOCA
in addressing some of the peace and security challenges
facing the subregion continue to grow. I have no doubt
that members of the Security Council are aware of this
pressing situation as we endeavour to cope with this
predicament by strenuously trying to do more with less,
as recommended by the Secretary-General.

As we stand on the threshold of a new year, UNOCA
will place a premium on building on and consolidating
the achievements registered during the current year.
This will include redoubling our efforts to accelerate the
operationalization of the regional strategy to address the
threat posed by the LRA through the early finalization
of the relevant programmatic document, the pursuit
of ongoing efforts to organize the regional summit
on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as recommended by
this organ in its resolution 2039 (2012), and enhancing
our capacity-building and institutional strengthening
in support of subregional organizations, particularly
ECCAS. We will also continue to focus our attention on
the development and finalization of a regional strategy
to fight against terrorism and the proliferation of arms
in Central Africa, pursuant to the Bangui Declaration
adopted by Standing Advisory Committee at its 33rd
ministerial meeting.

I thank the members of the Security Council for
their strong and continued support to UNOCA.

