Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I am pleased to address the members of the Security
Council in my capacity as representative of the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to sum up the main aspects of the debate
on the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/720) on the
progress made with regard to the stabilization and
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau,
held during the informal consultations of the Committee
on 19 August.

This year's assessment was less encouraging than
the one set out in the previous report (S/2015/619)
of the Secretary-General, especially with regard
to the political situation that has paralysed State
institutions and led to the frustration felt among a
number of international donors. The crisis impeded the
Government from implementing significant reforms
and weakened its ability to deal with issues such as
crime, illicit trafficking and terrorism. Moreover,
the situation also dissuaded international donors
from fulfilling their pledges. However, the economic
growth forecast for the country for 2016, the renewal
of the mandate of the Economic Community of African
States (ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau and the
uninterrupted efforts by regional and international
actors were all positive factors that could contribute to
putting an end to the crisis.

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
United Nations sanctions continued to have a deterrent
effect on the military, which did not become directly
involved in the political life of the country. Nevertheless,
the risk of intevervention on the part of military forces
could increase if the political crisis were to persist,
reforms of the relevant sectors were not undertaken
and, in particular, if the precarious budgetary situation
were to prevent the payment of the soldiers' salaries.

With regard to the sanctions imposed on
11 individuals, it was reported that at least four of them
had travelled abroad - supposedly to receive medical
treatment. Those trips, which took place in breach of
the prohibition on travel, could have been justified on
humanitarian grounds, which is one of the possible
reasons for exemption that the Committee can grant.
However, no such application was made.

The deep-rooted causes of Guinea-Bissau's
problems continued to exist, and therefore the
possibility of the country slipping back into instability
and unconstitutional crisis could not be excluded.
In that regard, the Secretary-General reiterated his
recommendations of last year to maintain the sanctions
regime and its criteria, send a firm message that
sanctions would be imposed on all elements causing
unrest, and, finally, adopt additional measures with
an increase in designations. He also recommended
considering the establishment of a group of experts
and defining the parameters for the lifting of sanctions.
The report also recommended that the Committee
should consider the possibility of charging its Chair
with visiting Guinea-Bissau and revisiting the issue of
the sanctions list, including updating it. A number of
the members of the Committee felt that the assessment
presented in the report was balanced and sound;
however, some members expressed their deep concern
about the deterioration in the political and econmic
situation in Guinea-Bissau.

With regard to sanctions, some Committee members
made positive comments in that the measures continued
to be useful and effective. They also supported the
continuation of the sanctions regime. Members also
highlighted that sanctions were a means and not an end
onto themselves.Therefore, they had to be adapted to
the situation on the ground. Some members expressed
concern about an expansive interpretation of the criteria
for inclusion on the sanctions list and questioned
its relevance.

With regard to the Secretary-General's recommendation
of considering the possibility of establishing a group of
experts, some members indicated that experts could help
gather timely and useful information for the Committee's
use, especially with regard to process for listing and
delisting from the sanctions list. The Committee
had already taken steps with regard to the potential
revision of the sanctions list, including approving the
sending of a letter to the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau requesting proof concerning the death
of Mr. Sanha Clusse', who apparently died in April.
Some members also urged that Guinea-Bissau be sent
the message that the Council remained vigilant and was
closely following the development of the situation in
the country.

In addressing the questions and observations
of members, Mr. Kelvin Ong, Chief of the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, who presented
the report of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Antero
Lopes, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Political Affairs in the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), who joined the meeting from Bissau via
video tele-conference, stated that the existing sanctions
regime and criteria had already had a positive impact on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and that continuing the
regime was already a strong message to the military to
remain neutral. Moreover, the people of Guinea-Bissau
viewed the continuation ofthe sanctions regime as a sign
of interest and commitment on the part of the Council.
With regard to the possible revision of the sanctions
regime, they clarified that the criteria were sufficiently
broad to include all possible elements of disruption to
the constitutional order, independent of their affiliation.
In that regard, a group of experts could provide timely,
accurate and useful information and could help to
increase awareness about Guinea-Bissau's problems.

With regard to terrorism, the Secretary-General
reported that there were indications of recent terrorist
activities involving recruitment by persons associated
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram
and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa, and that there was a risk for an increase in
terrorist activities in Guinea-Bissau. Nevertheless, for
the time being, there was not sufficient information to
provide a clear picture of the situation.

There was also a recognition of the positive role
played to date by the armed forces and its leaders.
Nevertheless, concern was expressed about the fact that
the military was gaining increasing popularity among
the population owing to a visible lack of ability by the
current Government to provide basic services, pay
salaries and establish conditions for the international
community to meet its pledges offinancial contributions.

Lastly, with regard to mediation efforts by
UNIOGBIS, it was confirmed that the Secretary-
General's Special Representative was fully determined
to meet with all interested national and international
stakeholders to consider the situation, including with
a View to facilitate the high-level presidential visit
proposed by ECOWAS.

