Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom warmly welcomes the Secretary-Generals
first report under Security Council resolution 1289 (2000),
not least for its clear indication of the problem areas in
implementing that resolution and of the priority areas now
for United Nations action.

We are also very grateful for the briefing that Mr.
Annabi has just given us, which brings us up to date on
a number of important aspects. 1 can say straight away
that the United Kingdom has no objection if he extends
the reporting period to 60 days. We understand the
pressures which the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is under at the moment.

My visit to Sierra Leone from 8 to 10 March, which
coincided with that of the United Kingdom Secretary of
State for International Development, Ms. Clare Short,
bears out the main conclusions in the Secretary-General's
analysis.

The first thing to strike a visitor - and I travelled
outside Freetown to the township of Masiaka and to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
camps at Port Loko - is the overwhelming desire of the
great majority of Sierra Leoneans for peace and a normal
life. There is, for instance, no religious animosity among
the communities of Sierra Leone. I think that Muslims
and Christians live together in Sierra Leone in harmony
as great as anywhere in Africa. I would guess that even
a majority of rank-and-file former combatants are eager
to disarm and rebuild their civilian lives. But the DDR
process, having so far attracted over 18,000 participants,
is now slowing to a trickle because combatants are not
getting orders to come in.

Mr. Annabi also referred to the quality of weapons
that are being handed over. I watched a number of
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) members hand over
what looked like relics from the First World War in
applying for their $300 for the DDR process. Clearly, the
good weapons, however obtained, are being hidden in the
bush.

The onus is therefore on the political leaders to
respond to this tangible desire for peace. President
Kabbah has already shown that he is prepared to make
important compromises to ensure an end to conflict. I
made the point to him that he must also know how and
when not to compromise, when to be tough for the
people's sake. I think he took that point. I did not get the
same sense of commitment to peace from the other main
factional leaders, least of all, perhaps, from Foday
Sankoh. The Secretary-General is absolutely right in his
report to be pointing the finger at Sankoh and the RUF as
the main impediments to the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and to
further progress in general in the implementation of the
peace process. Secretary of State Short asked him

 

repeatedly to speed up the RUF's response to DDR and to
stop blocking UNAMSIL's deployment. Sankoh only
bristled in reply, claiming that the RUF were doing no such
thing, that he had never authorized killing as a policy, that
the RUF had not deprived the Guineans of their weapons
and that he had never sold a single diamond to pay for
arms. There is, of course, independent evidence that the
RUF has done all of these things. The Council's authority,
in support of the Lome Peace Agreement, is being thwarted
here in that respect, just as it has been over the travel ban.
Insisting on the proper implementation of Council decisions
is an important source of pressure on the parties. It is also
essential if there is to be a lasting improvement in the
appalling humanitarian and human rights situation in the
country.

I am glad that the Secretary-General has identified as
a priority the rebuilding of new, democratically accountable
Sierra Leone armed forces and police. The United Kingdom
is contributing personnel and resources to these activities,
both of which - army and police - are crucial not only
for filling the security vacuum in the country but also for
allowing UNAMSIL to do its job and then depart. The
United Nations could otherwise be there for a very long
time. I am pleased that President Kabbah made it quite
clear to us during our visit last week that clear and
transparent selection procedures will be established for
entry into the army and the police and that any Sierra
Leonean, from whatever faction, will be eligible if he has
the right qualities.

Elections are going to be a vital part of the
implementation process. In a country where State authority
extends to less than half of its territory, organizing elections
will be a complicated business and, no doubt, a costly one
for the international community. But we have to make the
constitutional timetable stick if we can - presidential
elections by the end of February next year and
parliamentary elections three months after that. Elections
are just as much an opportunity for the RUF as for other
parties, and they must contribute to making Sierra Leone
proceed on the Mozambique, rather than the Angola, model.
The Council can guess whom I place in the role of a
potential Savimbi if it goes wrong in the Sierra Leone
context.

The Security Council should be aware that UNAMSIL
has got off to quite a difficult - perhaps not fully
successful - start. That is no criticism at all of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, Force
Commander Jetley or other senior United Nations figures
there, who are working commendably hard, in the most
difficult circumstances, to produce results, and are taking
tough action where they can. But the people of Sierra
Leone have somehow come to believe that the United
Nations was responsible for removing the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) - which, with some
justification, they trusted to protect them - only to
replace it with what seems to them to be poorly equipped
and not-so-well motivated United Nations contingents
with a different mandate. The loss of the Guinean
contingent's weapons, of course, added to this perception.

I went to some trouble on my visit to explain
publicly that ECOMOG made its own decision to stop
operating, that UNAMSIL is the neutral peacekeeping
force called for by all the signatories to the Lome Peace
Agreement and that it is perfectly capable of doing its job
if the signatories do theirs. But the Council must monitor
this aspect carefully, and insist with the Secretariat that
UNAMSIL is brought up to full strength quickly, in
quality as well as in quantity. I encouraged Special
Representative Adeniji, as part of his important functions,
to conduct and inspire a nationwide public information
campaign, to bring home to Sierra Leoneans what an
important asset UNAMSIL is for them and to seek their
cooperation.

Then there is the question of resources. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently seen as
the litmus test of the work of the United Nations in
Africa, and the United Kingdom agrees with that. But
Sierra Leone, too, is a crucial test. Our Sierra Leone
peacekeeping effort, currently the largest United Nations
peacekeeping effort worldwide, preceded that in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo chronologically and is
likely to set a pattern for those that follow. Donor support
is therefore absolutely vital. The high-level donors'
meeting which the United Kingdom is organizing in
London on 27 March will be convened by the Secretary
of State for International Development and attended by
President Kabbah and, I hope, the Deputy Secretary-
General. Its purpose will be to further energize political
and financial support for the peace process and to identify
the priorities for international funding over the coming
period. Urgent assistance is needed if the ground is to be
laid for free and fair elections next year and for the
eventual departure of UNAMSIL. I hope that Security
Council partners who are able to do so will show the lead
on this.

The holding of this open briefing is itself a signal of
the Council's concern for the fragile situation in Sierra

 

Leone and of our determination to see the Lome Agreement
implemented. But I think that, since the press is not present
at this meeting, a statement directly to the media by you,
Mr. President, after the meeting, would add to the impact.
When I saw him early on 9 March, President Kabbah had
in his hand the text of the statement you made on 8 March
after the debate on the humanitarian situation in that
country, and he was encouraged by it. I think that you
should make it clear, Sir, if Council colleagues agree, that
Council members endorse the conclusions of the Secretary-
General's report; that they place great weight on the early
implementation of all aspects of the Lome Peace
Agreement and commend the efforts of Special
Representative Adeniji and of UNAMSIL to this end; that
they are disappointed by the slow progress being made in
the DDR process in particular; and that they call upon all
signatories to the Lome Agreement, and in particular upon
Chairman Sankoh and the RUF, to reaffirm and
demonstrate a concrete commitment to the Lome peace
process by allowing the extension of State authority
throughout Sierra Leone, in full cooperation with
UNAMSIL and with the United Nations team as whole, and
by instructing the RUF membership to disarm and to
surrender all weapons, including their heavy weapons, their
mines and their anti-aircraft equipment.
I commend your decision, Mr. President, to hold this
open meeting as a sign of the Security Council's concern
for Sierra Leone, and I hope that the conclusions we come
to this morning will support and strengthen the efforts of
those on the ground who are working for a lasting peace.

