Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to pay tribute to the Chairs of the Council's three
counter-terrorism-related Committees for their
informative and comprehensive briefings on
developments during the last six months.

We commend the successful holding of the
Secretary-General's symposium on international
counter-terrorism cooperation, and the special meeting
held in September of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) and to advance international cooperation
in that area. As this year marks a milestone in our
collective efforts to combat terrorism, we feel
confident that those meetings provided a good
opportunity for the international community to reflect
on and review the progress made to date in the fight
against terrorism.

We also welcome the fact that the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) has been officially
launched, at the initiative of the United States of
America, and has already begun its activities. The
GCTF is a new and unprecedented forum intended to
foster discussion on counter-terrorism measures. We
expect that through the sharing of experience and good
practices through candid discussion in the five working
groups under the GCTF, international cooperation in
the area of counter-terrorism will be further
strengthened. We also hope that close cooperation and
constructive dialogue between the GCTF and the three
Committees will contribute to a more coherent and

holistic implementation of counterterrorism measures.

We welcome the recent remarkable progress in
the field of counterterrorism, including the deaths of
Al-Qaida leaders Osama Bin Laden and Anwar
Al-Awlaki. Such successes notwithstanding, we must
bear in mind the fact that the deaths of some of
Al-Qaida's executive members do not mean that
Al-Qaida itself has been annihilated, and we must
remember that Al-Qaida still has the capacity to
conduct serious terrorist attacks.

Terrorism continues to be an imminent and global
threat. The deep-seated problems surrounding
terrorism, such as radicalization and terrorism
financing, must be addressed in an appropriate manner.
To eradicate terrorism, a multifaceted approach by all
stakeholders is also vital. The three Committees have
played a significant role in this context and should
further enhance their efforts in this field.

We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011), by which
sanctions against Al-Qaida and the Taliban are divided
and implemented separately. In particular, the
enhancement of the Ombudsperson's role in the
process of delisting some persons from the
consolidated list is highly appreciated. We believe that
this measure will improve the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations counter-terrorism
measures. In order to improve the effectiveness of
sanctions, it is essential to ensure the credibility of the
consolidated list. In that regard, we wish to underscore
the importance of the continuous review of the
consolidated list. The Government of Japan is ready to
cooperate actively with the work of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the Ombudsperson
and the monitoring team.

We welcome the publication of the report by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). The importance of global
efforts in the area of non-proliferation cannot be
overstated. In order to ensure sufficient support from
Member States, it is essential that they be requested not
only to take measures to implement the resolution but
also to make the activities of the 1540 Committee
known and to enhance transparency. In support of the
work of the 1540 Committee, Japan hosted in May
2011 a seminar on non-proliferation and disarmament,
aimed at increasing awareness and promoting the
sharing of knowledge and experiences among Member
States. As a follow-up to this effort, we will organize
another seminar on 5 December.

It is critical that all Member States make a
concerted effort for the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions through measures
such as introducing legislation on export control and
strengthening their capacity in this area by increasing
the levels of relevant personnel and reinforcing the
relevant organizations. It is equally important to
involve all Member States in discussions on how to
achieve such objectives. Japan will continue to
cooperate closely with the activities of the 1540
Committee.

In conclusion, we strongly hope that the three
Committees will make a determined effort to enhance
their mutual cooperation while avoiding any
duplication of work, as well as to cooperate with
Member States and other relevant organizations for our
common goal of eradicating terrorism. The
Government of Japan will continue to take all possible
measures to counter terrorism and to cooperate
positively in the efforts of the three Committees.
