Mr. O'Brien: Since the conflict began, over a
quarter ofa million people have been killed in Syria and
more than 1 million have been injured. Some 7.6 million
people have been displaced inside the country. Over
1 million people have had to leave their homes this year
alone. Over 4 million people have fled across borders in
a desperate search of survival and a future, placing host
countries and communities under pressure - and now
stretched to the breaking point. We may all be living
on borrowed time. In the name of both security as well
as humanity, we need to find a better, more sustainable
way forward for the wider international community to
share the burden in hosting Syrian refugees.

Over the past month, violence has continued to
escalate across the country. Indiscriminate and targeted
attacks by all parties to the conflict have resulted in loss
of life and the destruction of infrastructure. In addition,
access to basic services, such as water, has been denied
to hundreds of thousands of Syrians.

On 12 and 16 August, Government airstrikes hit
a market place in Duma, killing over 100 people and
injuring many more. The attack took place just a few
days after the indiscriminate shelling of Damascus
by non-State armed groups. Despite the outrage and
condemnations, there has since been at least one further
similar attack. According to reports, since mid-August,
approximately 200 people have been killed and 400
injured in eastern Al-Ghutah. The shelling ofDamascus
has also continued, reportedly killing over 30 people
on 23 and 24 August. That tit-for-tat approach by the
warring parties is causing devastation to the ordinary
women, men and children of Syria, and it must stop.

The parties' callous disregard for human life and
for basic survival seemingly knows no bounds. In early
July, barrel bombs reportedly hit a shelter in the village
ofAl-Hawash, in Hama, killing five civilians. In Aleppo
governorate, an alliance of armed groups, including the
designated terrorist group the Al-Nusra Front, launched
attacks on Government-controlled areas of Aleppo city,
reportedly killing more than 30 civilians. Attacks on
civilians are unlawful and unacceptable, and they must
stop. I appeal to every party engaged in violence and
fighting to protect civilians. All parties involved in
violations of international humanitarian law must be
held to account.

The destruction of civilian infrastructure continued
over the reporting period. Non-State armed groups and
designated terrorist groups deliberately cut access to
essential services such as water and electricity. Such
acts violate international humanitarian law and must be
stopped immediately.

In Aleppo city, the water supply was cut from 2 to
18 July and again in early August - during the hottest
months of the year - affecting an estimated 1.7 million
people. Similarly, in Dar'a city and the surrounding
villages, active fighting disrupted the supply of water
and electricity for more than 10 days, affecting some
300,000 people. The city ofDamascus was also affected
by water disruptions, as non-State armed groups cut
off the supply from the Wadi Barada springs, which
provide water to Damascus. It is unconscionable to
make anyone live under such conditions.

Despite the increasingly challenging environment,
millions of people continue to receive lifesaving
assistance using all available modalities, including
across borders, pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014).
During the first half of 2015, United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations provided food
assistance for 5.9 million people on average per month,
medicine and supplies for 9 million people, water and
sanitation support for over 5 million people, and basic
relief items for more than 4 million people.

While these numbers are significant, I regret to say
that many more could be reached should unimpeded
access be allowed. I am particularly concerned about
the severely limited access to the 4.6 million people
living in hard-to-reach and besieged areas. During
the first half of 2015, each month the United Nations
only reached 12 per cent of people in hard-to-reach
areas with food, and 3.4 per cent with health supplies,
which indicates major access challenges that limit the
humanitarian community's ability to reach the most
vulnerable and affected people in Syria.

Similarly, parties to the conflict continue to
severely restrict access to besieged areas. Each month
of the first half of this year, the United Nations managed
to reach less than 1 per cent with food and non-food
items, and 2 per cent with health supplies. In July, no
food or other type of humanitarian assistance by the
United Nations reached any besieged areas through
official routes where some 422,000 people are located.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East was able to access
Yalda on 18 August, and again on 19 and 24 August,
as well as today, to provide lifesaving health-care
consultations for 1,000 people, and 200,000 water
purification tablets. However, much more is needed,
and I remain extremely concerned about the situation
of Palestine refugees in Syria.

During my visit to Syria, I discussed with senior
Government representatives the need to strengthen the
protection of civilians and the overall humanitarian
response. I urged the Government to grant full and
unhindered access to all people in need wherever they
may be located. It is my sincere hope that the necessary
steps will be taken towards improving access, including
approving requests for inter-agency and agency
convoys.

I welcome the recent granting of the visas
for United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs staff that had been pending for
months. And with respect to visas, I have also just this
minute received news from the Syrian Mission that the
47 pending visas for United Nations staff are going
to be granted, following the specific request I made
during my visit. We will seek official confirmation
later today on this matter. I also welcome initial reports
on the reduction in time to obtain approvals to import
humanitarian supplies.

I also visited the Old City of Homs. I was utterly
shocked to see the destruction that four years of
fighting had brought about. Almost every home had
been completely destroyed. I met with affected families
and was able to hear their stories. I spoke with a man
called Ahmed who told me his harrowing tale. Above
all, he said, he wanted peace in his country. Despite the
destruction and daily challenges, he and his family are
glad to have been able to return to their home at last;
they were among the first to do so. I will be travelling
to Turkey and Jordan in September, where I will be
able to see for myself the ongoing response efforts to
meet the needs of the refugees and of the communities
hosting them.

It is difficult to find words that would justly
describe the depth of suffering that Syrians face on
a daily basis. Having just returned from the country,
I have seen a glimpse of this grim reality myself. I
left the country deeply saddened and outraged by
the needless and immense suffering of ordinary
Syrians and the abhorrent destruction the conflict has
wrought on the country. I am angry because we as the
international community are not allowed, or able, to do
more to protect Syrians who more than ever need our
unfaltering support.

But I come away determined not to give up, not
to be exasperated by the relentless repetitiveness of
the challenges we as humanitarians face and the need
to explore every avenue to do everything possible to
provide lifesaving aid and protection to the people in
need. I urge Council members to do everything in their
power to end this crisis. With all the will in the world,
humanitarian action cannot be a substitute for political
action. The Council must exert leadership to push for a
political solution.

