Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your briefing as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). I also thank the Ambassador of New Zealand
for his briefing as Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.

My statement as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) has been approved by all the members of the
Security Council, and as such members will be quite
familiar with it. I shall therefore not read out the
statement in full, but will limit myself to a much-
condensed version. The Member States with us today
that are not members of the Council will be able to read
the official version approved by the Committee on the
1540 Committee's website, where it will be posted in a
few minutes.

When I last briefed the Security Council, on
22 December 2015 (see S/PV.7597) I spoke of the
extreme violence being perpetrated by terrorists and
their supporters around the world. That violence is much
more intense today, and the terrorists are much closer
to the possibility of acquiring or producing weapons of
mass destruction. We are facing a real threat, as best
illustrated by the fact that an Interpol report states that
Da'esh has a chemical weapons programme under way.
As such, the threat is clearly a global one. The European
Parliament agrees with that as well, stating a week ago
that there was a real risk of a Da'esh attack.

Prevention is without a doubt the best solution to
that threat. And the best preventive tool available to the
international community in the area of non-proliferation
is resolution 1540 (2004). It is therefore essential that
the comprehensive review of the resolution, to which
we are deeply committed, be both ambitious and all-
inclusive. I will now turn to the preliminary steps we
are working on, which we must develop further this
year, in particular at the third session of the review, to
take place next week in Madrid.

First, with regard to implementation, it is important
to highlight that there has been a continued increase in
the number of measures adopted by States to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), however, we still face the
challenge of achieving its universalization. We need to
strengthen direct interaction between the Committee
and States that need our support. For that to become
reality, it is crucial that we make the non-proliferation
regime and its architecture more efficient.

Secondly, the Committee is aware of the fact that
we need to improve the assistance mechanism by way
of a process that more precisely defines requests,
with a view to making it easier to provide assistance
to States and international organizations. That issue
was thoroughly addressed at the recently held African
Union meeting in Addis Ababa

Thirdly, support and greater coordination for
the various programmes of specialized international
organizations will be a key part of the comprehensive
review. We need to focus in particular on areas such
as biological weapons, where there is no mechanism
comparable to the International Atomic Energy Agency,
which is the relevant specialized body for nuclear
weapons, or the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, which is the specialized body for
chemical weapons.

Finally, with regard to outreach and transparency,
we must make a greater effort to interact more with
Member States to make the work of the 1540 Committee
known, while bearing in mind that there is a direct
correlation between the States that are most involved
in resolution 1540 (2004) and their participation in the
events. It is worth mentioning that the involvement of
civil society enriches the Committee with ideas from
different sectors, as was seen in the informal meeting
with experts held in April, where we were able to talk
about new advances in science and technology, and in
the consultations we held with academics in early April.

In my previous briefing, I said that industry was
a key partner in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Thanks to Germany's support, that will
be a cornerstone of the open consultations that will
take place at Headquarters from 20 to 22 June, at
which Member States, international organizations and
selected representatives of civil society will be able to
contribute their ideas to the comprehensive review.

I will end where I began - on the evolving nature
of terrorism affects all States directly and indirectly.
Non-State actors are already fully engaged in acquiring
technologies and materials that will allow them to
obtain weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, we
must also be fully engaged in preventing them from
doing so. What better way is there to do so than the
comprehensive review of our most powerful and
effective weapon in countering their activities, which
is resolution 1540 (2004).

