Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish to
thank the Force Commanders for briefing the Security
Council today and for their service in three of the
world's most demanding United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We would also like to recognize the efforts
of the Force Commanders who are not speaking
today, many of whom are in the Chamber, and the
130,000 troops, police and civilian staff under their
collective command. The Force Commanders and
those individuals are putting their lives on the line to
protect people from countries that are not their own
and to ensure our collective security in an increasingly
interconnected world. They do not get parades when
they return home to their home countries. They are
not celebrated in the way they might be if they were
acting in their own national defence, but I want them to
know that certainly on behalf of the United States, and
I assume everyone in the Chamber, they have our great
gratitude for their service.

The Council values their unique perspectives on
the missions that they command, and we have sought
to ensure not only this right of passage where we hear
from them but also their inclusion in regular Council
consultations. Vice-President Biden joined President
Kagame, Prime Minister Abe, Prime Minister Sharif,
Prime Minister Hasina and the Secretary-General to
co-host on 26 September an unprecedented summit
on peacekeeping, for the simple reason of trying to
secure commitments from Member States so that Force
Commanders can have better trained, better equipped
and more capable forces under their command. That
will take time, but we need to strengthen the pool from
which the Commanders draw and on which they rely.

Today's meeting is well-timed. As others have
noted, on Tuesday a Senegalese peacekeeper was killed
by a rocket attack on a joint French-United Nations
military base in Kidal, Mali. In the past week, nine
Nigerian peacekeepers were killed in a brutal ambush
on their convoy in the Gao region of Mali. Our hearts
go out to the victims' families and to the loved ones
of all the people who have been killed serving in
peacekeeping missions. We condemn those ruthless
acts in the strongest terms. It is essential that, however
long it takes, we bring the perpetrators of those kinds
of attacks to justice. Right now, in many missions,
a sense of impunity reigns. As those attacks in Mali
attest, peacekeepers in twenty-first century missions
face unprecedented risks. That is because we are asking
them and the Force Commanders to take on more
responsibilities in more places and in more complex
conflicts than at any time in history.

In those circumstances we have seen great
professionalism and effectiveness, and we see systemic
failures to fulfil core responsibilities. Today's meeting
aims to draw upon the knowledge and experience of the
Force Commanders in the Chamber today to identify
and learn both from best practices and from common
problems. We have heard in their presentations about
some of those shared challenges.

Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz's commitment
to protecting civilians is a model for twenty-first
century peacekeeping missions. He has led his troops
by example, personally participating in patrols and
operations and even travelling to the headquarters of the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (F DLR)
armed group to pressure its leaders to lay down their
arms. He is the embodiment of the kind of leadership
that Special Representative Kobler described in the
Council in August (see S/PV.7237) when he called for
a shift in mindset, from of protection by presence to
one of protection by action. That is something that my
Rwandan colleague has also spoken to in the Council
today. We wholeheartedly support his assertion that
peacekeeping missions must be more responsive, not
only when attacks to happen but also more proactive
in efforts to protect civilians even before those attacks
take place.

That is why incidents like the one in Haut Uele
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo earlier this
year, during which civilians were attacked just a few
kilometres down the road from peacekeepers, cannot
be repeated. That is also why the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must proactively pursue action
against the FDLR and other armed groups that continue
to wreak havoc on civilians, without waiting for those
groups to strike first.

There remain large gaps between principle and
practice, between mandates and implementation. The
protection of civilians is, as the Force Commanders
have stated, at the heart of a number of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. Yet, as the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) report (A/68/787) in March
2014 found, missions routinely fail to use force to protect
civilians under attack. We are deeply concerned by
that finding and believe that when civilians are facing
imminent risk, peacekeepers have a responsibility to
intervene. Civilians are counting on peacekeepers.

The OIOS report highlights that troop contingents
sometimes refuse to follow orders from their
commanders, and the report recommends that those
incidents of indiscipline be reported to Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. But there is a structural
issue that we should acknowledge in the Council
today. Every military person knows that command and
control is essential for the performance of one's mission
effectively. Yet often in peacekeeping missions there
are two chains of command, one back to the capital and
one within the mission to the Force Commanders. That
creates tensions that often go unacknowledged, and
certainly under-addressed. It is something that we need
to think about as we consider peacekeeping reform,
because unity of command is so essential.

Major General Kazura's Mission - the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali - shows, as much as any mission,

the complex and multifaceted risks that peacekeepers
in the field face today. With his troops being attacked,
using improvised explosive devices, rockets, mines,
ambushes and suicide bombers, 31 peacekeepers have
been killed and at least 91 injured since the Mission
deployed on 1 July 2013. The Major General is, I believe
it is official, leading the most dangerous mission in the
world for United Nations peacekeepers. He therefore has
a unique challenge, on the one hand, in maintaining the
morale of his troops as they come under growing attack
and, at the same time, trying to perform his mission,
supporting the political process and trying to help the
Malians reclaim control and to consolidate control of
their territory. As the Major General said - he put it
very eloquently - he is in a terrorist-fighting situation
without an anti-terror mandate. He also noted the lack
of equipment and training needed for the environment
in which they are now operating. He has often in the
past expressed, including when the Council visited Mali
and we had the chance to engage with him, a desire to
do more and to be more aggressive in dealing and more
proactive, more along the lines of what we have heard
from Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz. But he has
waited more than a year to even get the troops promised
to him, again without the equipment and trained troops
tailored for the environment he now finds himself in.

Lieutenant General Singha, for nearly four decades,
in what was a relatively quiet observer mission in the
Golan Heights, monitoring a disengagement of forces
between two countries, suddenly found himself caught
in the middle ofa brutal civil war, and his peacekeepers
have come under direct attack by non-State armed
groups. We were, like others, deeply relieved that
the 45 abducted Fijian peacekeepers were released
and that the surrounded Filipino peacekeepers were
able to reach safety unharmed. But we know that the
situation remains extremely volatile, and the threat
to United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
peacekeepers remains high. The abrupt change in the
Chapter VI mission has required flexibility on the part
of Lieutenant General Singha and the observers on
the ground, as well as extensive work on behalf of the
whole international community with troop contributors
or observer contributors to maintain contributions and
to make sure that the mission remains whole. That has
been extremely challenging.

For Generals Dos Santos Cruz, Kazura and Singha
and all the Force Commanders in the Council today,
the United States is fully committed to their missions'
success, to the protection of civilians that they serve
and to the capacity and safety of the troops that they
command. In conclusion, would like to ask three
questions.

First, the circumstances they find themselves in
are circumstances that even the most advanced, well-
resourced militaries would find challenging. Yet they
are pooling troops, observers and police from different
countries with different military cultures, with
different training, with equipment of different quality
and different ways of approaching their mandates. That
presents enormous challeges. Again, over time, we need
close the gaps in those differences in interpretation and
capabilities.

My first question is, what can be done by the
Security Council, by troop-contributing countries or
by the Secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to increase cohesion towards the one
mission-one mandate concept, as well as towards
greater shared capabilities and more even capabilities
and will across missions?

With regard to my second question, in the Golan
and in Mali the ground has shifted under commanders'
feet - I think my Rwandan colleague put it well. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, after many years of
a similar approach being taken, over the past couple of
years we have seen the Council and troop-contributing
countries adapt to circumstances where the Mission was
not performing its mandate adequately, to try to make
the Mission more effective in the light of the success
that armed groups had had in terrorizing civilians.
We need to look at missions afresh. Sometimes we get
on auto-pilot here as the Security Council and as the
international community. But the Force Commanders
have presented to us, and we ourselves are witness to,
the fact that some of the fundamental assumptions at the
heart of their missions need to be revisited, challenged
and refreshed. Terrorist groups have gained strength
and have made targets of the men and women serving
under the Force Commanders - and, in a way, under
us. We therefore need to look anew at the fundamentals.
Of course, commanders should bear in mind that their
missions are more, not less, important in the light of
the changed circumstances. We therefore do not have
the option as the international community of walking
away from these vital missions they are dealing with,
in which there are critical threats to international peace
and security. But we have to make sure that our means
are tailored to the circumstances at hand. I would be
grateful if the briefers could speak to what they think
these new circumstances demand, not simply in terms
of anti-improvised explosive device support of the kind
we have a responsibility to provide commanders, but
the fundamentals.
Thirdly and finally, I have spoken about the
importance of protecting civilians. I cannot put it any
better than General Dos Santos Cruz or Rwandan
Ambassador Gasana have. Before concluding, however,
I would like to go back to where I started, and where my
British colleague ended as well, which is with regard to
the lives and the safety ofpeacekeepers themselves. Not
only are civilians often targeted, with United Nations
peacekeepers nearby, but peacekeepers themselves
are increasingly targeted for attack. Yet, whether
in Darfur, South Sudan or Mali, the perpetrators are
rarely, if ever, held accountable. What more should the
Security Council or the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations or the broader international community do
to secure accountability? That is of course particularly
challenging with regard to non- State actors and terrorist
groups. Often, though, even Government forces
involved in attacks against peacekeepers get away with
their crimes. That is something that the Council and
the entire international community have an interest in

stopping.

I thank briefers for their candid presentations thus
far and for their responses to the questions raised. I think
this dialogue is essential to improving peacekeeping and
enhancing the protection of the people who rely on all
of us for capabilities that sometimes their Governments
are not able to provide.

