Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). I wish to convey the Movement's
appreciation to the Spanish presidency and to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, Mr. Jose Manuel
Garcia Margallo, for convening today's open debate.
I also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his briefing.

In these days of tragedy that starkly remind us of
the continuing plight of the Palestinian people resulting
from the denial of their rights and the grave injustices
inflicted upon them for decades, the Non-Aligned
Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people
and reiterates its support for the realization of their
legitimate national aspirations and inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and freedom
in their independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, together with ajust solution for
the plight of the Palestine refugees pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948.

Today, the situation in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate
at an alarming rate, as a result of Israel's crimes and
violations against the Palestinian people. More than
49 Palestinians, including children, have been killed
by the Israeli occupying forces, and more than 1,800
Palestinians have been injured, many severely, by the
live ammunition and other weaponry used excessively
and indiscriminately by the occupying Power against
the defenceless civilian population under its occupation.
That situation requires immediate attention by the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, which must act to bring a halt to all such
violations of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, committed by the occupying
Power, which is further destabilizing the situation and
threatening international peace and security.

The Movement strongly condemns all acts
of violence and the provocations and incitement
committed by the Israeli occupying forces and
extremists at the sensitive holy site, which threaten to
further destabilize the already fragile situation with
far-reaching consequences for the region and beyond.
NAM. believes that the continuation of Israel's illegal
settlement campaign, which is at the core of the 48-year
foreign occupation, remains the major obstacle to
peace, undermining all efforts to resume a credible
peace process and casting serious doubts on Israel's
alleged commitment to ending its foreign occupation of
Palestinian land and achieving the two-State solution
on the basis of the pre-l967 borders and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace.

NAM. calls once again upon the international
community to act collectively and forthwith to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its destructive
and illegal practices and abide by all its obligations
under international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Security Council, in
particular, must uphold the duties assigned to it by the
Charter to address the situation and act with urgency to
implement its own resolutions, respond to those critical
developments and advance a peaceful solution based
on United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The current dangerous situation, including in
occupied East Jerusalem, cannot abide further delay or
aggravation. The time to act is now to save innocent
civilian lives, including by providing protection to the
Palestinian people, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law, and to
revive the gravely diminished prospects for peace.

The Security Council cannot remain on the
sidelines in the quest for ajust and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine. NAM. again urges the Security
Council to act resolutely and forthwith to end the plight
of the Palestinian people and the Israeli occupation,
support the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, and establish peace and security by
resolving this prolonged conflict, which has so severely
destabilized the region and undermined international
law and the international system as a whole.

Lebanon continues to suffer from continuing Israeli
violations of its borders and incursions against its
territory, along with years of occupation and aggression.
Unfortunately, Israel continues to violate Lebanese
airspace and has been intensifying its incursions over
Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that ensures the strengthening of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June

1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

