Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): As I understand it, the
primary objective of this meeting is to introduce the
report of the Security Council mission to Haiti, which
took place from 13 to 16 April, which has been
circulated as an official document of the Security
Council. The visit to Haiti was made in conjunction
with a visit by the Economic and Social Council's Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. This meeting will also
provide an opportunity to start the process of gathering
Member States' opinions on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

I am informed that Ambassador Allan Rock of
Canada, who led the visit by the Economic and Social
Council Group, will also present a report on that
mission's activities in due course. He will, of course,
be presenting his report to the Economic and Social
Council.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank, once again, the Haitian authorities for their
hospitality and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Juan Gabriel Valdes, and his team
for their support and for the excellent and professional
work that they are performing.

The visit to Haiti by the Security Council
mission, which I had the privilege to lead, was the first
of its type to a Latin American or Caribbean country.
The decision to carry it out it was adopted in the course
of the open debate on Haiti promoted by the delegation

of Argentina during its presidency of the Council in
January.

The actions of the mission benefited from high-
degree participation. All 15 Council members were
represented, 14 by Ambassadors, of which 10 were
Permanent Representatives, including the President of
the Security Council in April, Ambassador Wang
Guangya. In view of its unprecedented nature, the
holding of the mission was in itself significant and
constitutes a clear indication of the Council's concern
and interest with regard to the current crisis in Haiti.

The mission met with members of the
Transitional Government, including Interim President
Boniface Alexandre and Interim Prime Minister Gerard
Latortue, as well as representatives of the main
political parties and of civil society. In addition to
staying in Port au Prince, the mission visited the cities
of Gonaives and Cap-Haitien. In-depth discussions
with MINUSTAH personnel helped the mission to
enhance its understanding of MINUSTAH's activities
and diversified actions in the implementation its
mandate.

The main conclusion that can be drawn from the
visit is that the international community is committed
to supporting Haiti today at this decisive turning point
in its history with a view to achieving peace and
stability, mitigating its immediate social and economic
tribulations and assisting it in making progress towards
sustainable development, while respecting its
sovereignty. In line with that, it cannot and should not
act in Haiti's stead. The mission called on Haitians
themselves, particularly the Transitional Government,
to carry out their State responsibilities and take
advantage of this historic opportunity for gaining full
ownership of their future.

The mission report now before the Council
contains a detailed description of its activities and
findings with regard to security, political transition,
elections, human rights, development, the humanitarian
situation, institution-building, regional relations and
the organization of MINUSTAH.

I would like briefly to stress the main messages
and recommendations which were highlighted in the
report. There can be no genuine stability without
comparable advances in the creation of a safe and
secure environment, in the political dialogue with a
view to national reconciliation, in the observance of
human rights, and in the promotion of social and
economic development.

Notwithstanding the fact that the deep-seated root
causes of unrest in Haiti, including poverty, require a
long-term approach, a number of very serious issues
must be dealt with in the short and medium term.

The holding of elections later this year
constitutes, indeed, the most pressing and visible
challenge for Haitians and the international community
in the short term. Free, fair and inclusive elections
must take place in accordance with the established
timetable. Even though they should not be seen as a
universal remedy, elections are essential for the
formation of a legitimate Government, thus concluding
the political transition period that started more than a
year ago.

In Haiti, the mission stressed that there is no
alternative to elections and that all political parties that
publicly reject violence should be entitled to
participate in the electoral process. The result of the
vote should be respected by all actors. In that regard,
the mission recalled in its report that, in accordance
with the Haitian Constitution, "democratically elected
authorities must take office on 7 February 2006"
(S/2005/302, para. 67).

The technical and political preparations for the
elections should continue to be closely monitored by
the Council on a regular basis, to ensure that they
remain on track. Additional resources will be required
to cover an estimated gap of about $22 million. The
mission has strongly encouraged the timely
disbursement of funds committed for that purpose.

MINUSTAH and the Transitional Government
should launch a broad-based civic education
programme to ensure the broadest possible
participation of the Haitian population in the upcoming
elections. The mission is of the opinion that there is an
urgent need to establish appropriate arrangements for
international electoral observation. The mission also
supports a long-term dialogue involving all sectors of
Haitian society and aimed at developing a common
vision of Haiti's future.

Security must continue to be reinforced to allow
free and fair elections that have a large degree of
participation by the Haitian population. Special
security arrangements may be needed for a limited
period in the months preceding and immediately
following the elections. Such measures include
establishing better coordination procedures between
the Haitian National Police and MINUSTAH. The
report also stresses the need to ensure more
coordination between MINUSTAH's civil police and
military components by, inter alia, making the Joint
Mission Analysis Cell operational as soon as possible.

The Transitional Government should accelerate
its disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme, with the assistance of
MINUSTAH. Members expressed their concern over
the reported DDR funding gap, which should be
addressed without delay.

The Haitian National Police must urgently be
reformed so that it can gain the trust of citizens and be
counted upon to provide public security. Such reform
should be planned and implemented by the Transitional
Government with the support of MINUSTAH and
bilateral partners.

All political actors must abide by human rights
standards without exception. Combating impunity and
promoting respect for human rights are urgently being
demanded by both the Haitian people and the
international community at large.

The mission stresses the importance of rebuilding
Haitian institutions, such as the judicial and penal
systems - many of which are barely functioning - so
that the population can trust State structures. The
mission calls upon the international community to
provide assistance to that end, including in terms of
capacity building. Strong additional measures to assist
the judicial system must be considered with the Haitian
authorities. MINUSTAH's mandate should be amended
to allow international experts to assist and participate
in that effort as may be required.

Rapid implementation of quick-impact projects,
specially those that create large numbers of jobs, would
also help to increase participation in the elections by
raising the self-confidence of the Haitian population.

The mission renews its appeal for the accelerated
disbursement of the funds pledged by international
financial institutions since the International Donors
Conference on Haiti of July 2004, and strongly
supports the holding of the follow-up to the Cayenne
donor conference, preferably no later than July 2005. It
calls on all donors to resume full cooperation with
Haiti by, among other things, supporting the priority
areas identified by the Transitional Government,
namely, infrastructure, road repair and construction,
energy generation and transmission, reforestation and
the management of water resources.

The Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the Economic
and Social Council could play an important role in
establishing, along with Haitian authorities, a long-
term institution-building and development strategy.

In order to improve the Haitian population's
understanding of MINUSTAH's mandate and its role in
Haiti, the mission recommends that MINUSTAH
urgently develop and implement a proactive
communications and public relations strategy.

Allow me now to make a few comments in my
national capacity. I notice that the list of speakers
already contains the names of other delegations
wishing to speak.

I would like to point out that the most urgent task
we face today is to ensure the minimum conditions
necessary to guarantee the success of the transition
period in Haiti, thereby taking the first step towards
long-term recovery. In line with that, and taking into
account a common understanding regarding the need
for a long-term United Nations presence in Haiti,
Brazil believes that a 12-month extension in
MINUSTAH's next mandate is now required.

Despite the substantive improvement in the
security situation, the environment in Haiti still
remains volatile. Given the history of violence during
previous elections, Brazil believes that security
arrangements may be needed for a limited period in
connection with the elections. Given the nature of
potential threats in Haiti, we believe that United
Nations civilian police should enhance its participation
in the provision of security.

It is imperative to ensure adequate funds to carry
out the DDR programme. It is also urgent to expedite
the reform of the Haitian National Police, with
emphasis on providing adequate training and
equipment in accordance with internationally accepted
standards. Nevertheless, there can be no sustainable
progress in that area if there is no coordinated reform
of the judicial system. International experts and
capacity-building programmes could play a role in that
regard.

As to the political sphere, the Security Council
should continue to insist on, and support, the holding
of free and fair elections in accordance with the agreed
timetable, and the subsequent taking of office by the
newly elected authorities. Potential interested
international observers should be deployed, with a
View to ensuring respect for democratic standards.

In the economic sphere, it is essential to speed up
the implementation of quick-impact projects and to
establish a long-term strategy towards sustainable
development in the country. Priority areas identified by
Haitians themselves should fully be taken into account.

Finally, I wish once again to thank my colleagues
in the Council for giving me the opportunity to lead the
Security Council's mission to Haiti.
