The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses its deep and
growing alarm at the escalating conflict between
the Sudan and South Sudan, as manifested most
recently by the seizure and occupation of the town
of Heglig and its oil fields in the Sudan by the
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). The
recent violence threatens to return both countries
to full-scale war and the period of tragic loss of
life and suffering, destroyed infrastructure and
economic devastation, which they have worked so
hard and so long to overcome. The Security
Council demands a complete, immediate and
unconditional end to all fighting; the withdrawal of
the SPLA from Heglig; an end to Sudanese Armed
Forces aerial bombardments; an end to repeated
incidents of cross-border violence between the
Sudan and South Sudan; and an end to support by
both sides to proxies in the other country.

"The Security Council affirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both the Sudan and South Sudan. It
recalls the importance of the principles of good
neighbourliness, non-interference and regional
cooperation.

"The Security Council demands that both
sides redeploy their forces 10 kilometres outside
the North/South 1 January 1956 borderline in
accordance with their Agreements of 29 June and
30 July 2011. It urges the Sudan and South Sudan
to take immediate steps to establish a safe
demilitarized border zone and activate the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism,
and reiterates its readiness to continue to support
the parties in implementing this agreement with
the support of the United Nations Interim
the

Security Force for Abyei, in accordance with
resolution 2024 (2011).

"The Security Council calls on the Sudan
and South Sudan to respect the letter and spirit of
the Memorandum of Understanding on Non-
Aggression and Cooperation of 10 February
2012.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand
that the Sudan and South Sudan urgently redeploy
their security forces immediately from the Abyei
Area in accordance with their Agreement of
20 June 2011 and resolution 1990 (2011).

"The Security Council calls upon the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan
urgently and peacefully to resolve the
fundamental issues of security and border
management, the situations in Southern
Kordofan, Blue Nile and Abyei, and all
outstanding Comprehensive Peace Agreement
issues that are fueling the mistrust between the
two countries. It further calls on the leaders of the
Sudan and South Sudan to meet immediately in a
summit as previously planned in order to advance
the issues that stand in the way of achieving
lasting peace.

"The Security Council underscores its
support for the continuing efforts of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP)
to assist the Sudan and South Sudan to reach
agreement on all outstanding issues, and
encourages continuing partnership with the
United Nations in this regard.

"The Security Council views the current
situation as a serious threat to international peace
and security. It will continue to follow the
situation closely, and will take further steps as
necessary. The Security Council looks forward to
receiving a briefing from the AUHIP and Special
Envoy Menkerios in the coming days."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2012/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.10p.m.
12-2919]
