Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would also like to join
previous speakers and express our condolences to the
people of China with respect to the tragic incident in the
kindergarten in Jiangsu, in the eastern part of China.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) on peace and security, which
is particularly timely after the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2320 (2016), last November. I also thank
Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Chergui, AU Commissioner for Peace and Security,
and Mr. Kaberuka, AU High Representative for the
Peace Fund, for their effective briefings.

Japan takes note of the reports from both the
Secretary-General (S/2017/454) and the AU. They
provide a useful basis for exploring our expanded
partnership, as well as the particular tools that AU
peace support operations offer for the maintenance of
peace and security.

A major point that emerges from both reports is
the AU's comparative advantage in deploying as a first
responder and in challenging environments. Further
discussion is needed both at the Council and within
the AU on the most effective role for peace support
operations, particularly on the division of labour. Green
and Blue Helmets have different roles, and it may not be
efficient to focus on enabling peace support operations
to replicate multidimensional United Nations tasks.

The Secretary-General's report outlines a new
model ofjoint financing of a jointly developed budget,
as well as a joint assessment and planning process. We
also see similar proposals in the AU report. We believe
that greater clarity is needed on those models from the
AU, with support from the United Nations Secretariat
as necessary, particularly with regard to joint budgeting
and accountability. We underline the Chef de Cabinet's
point on the crucial role of the General Assembly on
financial matters.

We should avoid peace support operations
discussions becoming overly centred on their financial
aspects. Financing alone cannot solve challenges facing
peace support operations, given the limited personnel
to carry out tasks, including at the AU Peace and
Security Department.

In order to deepen our understanding of the current
situation, we would like to hear more about ongoing
efforts and political commitment on the implementation
of the Kigali decision regarding the AU Peace Fund
during the informal interactive dialogue following
this meeting.

Japan believes that the United Nations-AU
partnership is about empowering African States
and their peoples to play an active role in their own
security. Japan, both as a Council member and as a
major contributor to the United Nations peacekeeping
budget, is very pleased to join discussions on continued
collaboration that employs the comparative advantages
of both organizations.

