The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Canada and Finland, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria), Mr. Laurin (Canada) and Ms. Lintonen
(Finland) took seats at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply shocked
and distressed by the firing by the Israel Defense
Forces on a United Nations Observer post in
southern Lebanon on 25 July 2006, which caused
the death of four United Nations military
observers.
the

"The Security Council extends its deepest
condolences to the families of those victims and
expresses its sympathies to the Governments of
Austria, Canada, China and Finland.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Israel to conduct a comprehensive
inquiry into this incident, taking into account any
relevant material from United Nations authorities,
and to make the results public as soon as
possible.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and in this regard stresses that Israel
and all concerned parties must comply fully with
their obligations under international humanitarian
law related to the protection of United Nations
and associated personnel and underlines the
importance of ensuring that United Nations
personnel are not the object of attack.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern for Lebanese and Israeli civilian
casualties and suffering, the destruction of civil
infrastructures and the rising number of internally
displaced people.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.
06-44740

