Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): Ijoin all those
who thanked the United States for its able leadership of
the Security Council during September, which is always
an exceptional month, and I congratulate Bolivia for its
accession to the presidency of the Council for October
and its very compact and relevant programme of work.

I would like to begin by thanking Ambassadors
Meza-Cuadra, Umarov and Llorentty Soliz for
their detailed briefings and committed leadership,
respectively, of the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540.
Terrorism and nuclear proliferation are today among
the greatest threats to international peace and security.
Let me touch briefly the activities of each Committee.

First, with regard to the 1267 Committee, which is
responsible for sanctions against Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
as its Chair pointed out, although Da'esh has suffered
major military defeats, the group continues to pose a
complex threat and inspire radicalized individuals to
act. The end of its territorial control does not signify
the end of the terrorist threat posed by Da'esh, but has
only made it more diffuse, as has been pointed out
more than once today. Its own autonomous capacities
for producing and using chemical weapons have not
vanished. Al-Qaida also remains very active in certain
areas, such as the Sahel and the Arabian peninsula. In
that regard, the 1267 Committee is carrying out two
critical missions. First of all, it is analysing the terrorist
threat through the reports of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, which serve as valuable
tools for Member States. France encourages all States to
cooperate with the Team in strengthening its analyses.
Secondly, concerning the implementation and rigorous
monitoring of the sanctions list, which is the largest of
all United Nations sanctions regimes, we encourage
every State to continue to submit listing requests. For
that regime to remain credible and effective, it is also
essential that its procedures respect the basic freedoms
of those on the list. France welcomes Mr. Daniel Kipfer
Fasciati, who assumed his functions as Ombudsperson
to the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
this summer, and encourages all States to continue to
cooperate with the Office of the Ombudsperson, whose
work is critical for the sanctions regime.

My second point concerns the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which also carries out two major functions in
complementarity. The first is to raise States' awareness
of new trends characterizing the constantly evolving
terrorist threat. The Committee's special meetings - for
example, our meeting next week on the links between
terrorism and organized crime - provide an excellent
means for sharing information and reflecting on specific
issues. The second function of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is to consider how States are implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions in the many
areas that fall under its purview, namely, monitoring
foreign terrorist fighters, countering the financing of
terrorism and combating propaganda and incitement to
commit terrorist acts. It is essential that States allow
visits by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate so that it can audit their counter-terrorism
systems and provide appropriate recommendations,
particularly with regard to technical assistance. France
also encourages pursuing joint meetings between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee
so as to address analysis on the terrorist threat and assess
the implementation of Security Council resolutions.

Lastly, I would like to say a few words about the
important work being done by the 1540 Committee
under the chairmanship of Bolivia.

The risk that radiological, biological, chemical
and nuclear materials and vectors fall into the hands
of terrorists is, as I have said, a proven danger. We
have seen it in Syria and Iraq, and it has been clearly
established by the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons that Da'esh has used yperite on
at least two occasions in Syria. Added to that are the
uncertainties that weigh on the comprehensiveness
of the Syrian declaration on its chemical programme
made to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, while the potential existence of
residual capabilities on Syrian territory only increases
those risks.

It is therefore more important than ever to adapt our
efforts to the evolution of the threat. We are particularly
concerned about transfers to the Middle East of goods
and technologies related to vectors designed to be
able to carry weapons of mass destruction. Progress
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions is tangible at the national
and regional levels. The vast majority of United
Nation States Members have now adopted measures
incorporating the provisions of the resolution into
their national legislation. Whether it concerns securing
sensitive materials and goods, strengthening border
controls or even, where necessary, establishing export-
control mechanisms, the international community
aims to ensure that such sensitive materials and assets
cannot possibly fall into the hands of terrorists. The
adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) at the end of 2016
has made it possible to adapt and bolster our framework
for action in countering the threat. By strengthening
the approach to cooperation, assistance and interaction
we will be able to better prevent the risk of weapons of
mass destruction being acquired by non-State actors.
France will remain fully involved in that effort, starting
this month by submitting to the First Committee
a draft resolution on preventing the acquisition of
radioactive sources by terrorists and by supporting the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction at the
European Union and in the course of its forthcoming
chairmanship of the Group of Seven.

