The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Spain, Switzerland and the
United Republic of Tanzania, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provision of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Renan Fuentealba,
Special Envoy of the President of Chile.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation, under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
Mr. Sergio Duarte, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Duarte to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, to Archbishop Celestino Migliore, Apostolic
Nuncio, Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the
United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of the Holy See
to take the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the Council's attention to
document 8/2008/697, containing a letter dated 10
November 2008 from the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

Costa Rica has convened this thematic debate on
strengthening collective security and arms regulation
with the objective of considering what is contained in
Article 26 of the Charter. That Article gives to the
Security Council the express mandate of promoting the
establishment and maintenance of international peace
and security with the least diversion for armaments of
the world's economic and human resources. We must
take action to achieve this noble objective.

I believe that we have the obligation to reflect
upon the role entrusted to this Council to promote
international peace and security. And I believe that this
is an opportune moment to consider the instruments
that can be used to achieve those objectives. Among
them is the strengthening of both regional and global
multilateral mechanisms and, without a doubt, arms
control and regulation. The dialogue that we are
proposing today should not be an isolated event in the
struggle to build better well-being. We must begin on a
path of reflection and action which will bring us to a
more rational use of available resources and, without
undermining security, will ensure greater development.

This is a particularly opportune moment. On one
hand, arms races are developing in many situations
around the world. On the other hand, there are the
crises that afflict us. The food crisis, the environmental
crisis, the energy crisis and the economic crisis are
impeding efforts to improve the lives of those who are
condemned to poverty, ignorance and ill-health. It
08-60919
would appear that the time has come for us to
recognize the link that exists between the squandering
of resources on arms and the need for those resources
to advance us to greater levels of human development.
This is what we must do after having recognized that
peace and security, development and human rights are
the pillars of this Organization and the basis of our
collective security and wellbeing. Today we need to go
beyond words. The dialogue that we are starting now
must lead us to action.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General by
Mr. Sergio Duarte, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs. I invite Mr. Duarte to take the
floor.


