Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Liechtenstein, I would like
to express our solidarity with and sincere condolences to
all those victimized by the recent terrorist attacks in India.
We unequivocally condemn such heinous acts of
terrorism - irrespective of their motivation and wherever
and by whomever committed - and reiterate our full
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.

We are grateful for the concept paper
(S/2008/738) submitted by the President for today's
debate, and our statement will be focused on a few
specific points.

We strongly agree with the notion reflected in the
paper that the use of armed force cannot be the only
answer to the scourge of terrorism and that terms such
as "war on terrorism" have brought about more
problems than solutions, in particular with respect to
the uniform application of international humanitarian
law.

We believe that today's debate provides us with a
good opportunity to promote international solidarity in
countering terrorism on the basis of a comprehensive
approach, as reflected in the United Nations Global
Counter-terrorism Strategy of September 2006. Merely
reaffirming those commitments, however, will not by
itself improve our response to terrorism. During the seven
years following the attacks of ll September 2001, the
United Nations has massively scaled up its global
counter-terrorism toolbox, and Member States as well as
international and regional organizations have taken
numerous steps to that effect; but still the threat of
terrorism seems more pervasive than ever. That simple
08-63845
fact underlines the limitations of traditional counter-
terrorism measures and the need to systematically address
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorist
activities.

This Council has a particular role to play in that
regard with respect to the need to address a number of
long-term conflict situations whose repercussions are
being felt all over the world and that are directly
related to violent extremism. Other parts of the United
Nations system, including the General Assembly, are
called upon to redouble their efforts, within their
respective mandates, that contribute to the prevention
of terrorism. In that regard, we recall that the General
Assembly has a particular responsibility that it needs to
address urgently: the finalization of the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
We hope that renewed vigour in global counter-
terrorism cooperation will bring about a political
climate in which the outstanding issues with respect to
what has been termed the definition of terrorism can be
solved.

The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy identifies
the absence of the rule of law, human rights violations
and a lack of good governance among the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. It is equally true
that the fight against terrorism can have a negative
impact on the rule of law, human rights and good
governance, as States and international organizations
take sometimes urgent and forceful counter-terrorism
measures without allowing for appropriate checks and
balances on executive action.

The United Nations Special Rapporteur to
conduct a comprehensive study on terrorism and
human rights has given numerous relevant examples of
such measures where public and individual security
interests are not always properly balanced against the
human rights of affected individuals. Given the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including with respect to the fight against international
terrorism, we are convinced that the Council should
lead by example when dealing with the difficult
question of balancing security interests and human
rights. We are therefore pleased that further
improvements have been made to the Council's
counter-terrorism sanctions regime, and we urge the
Council to take further necessary steps in that regard.
3
