Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): In too many places,
civilians are deliberately targeted and continue to
suffer from unspeakable violations. Canada welcomes
this open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in order to highlight situations where
civilians are in danger and. more important, to identify
opportunities where more can be done to ensure their
protection in line with legal obligations.

As the 2013 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/689) points out, parties to conflict, States,
the United Nations and other partners all have a
responsibility to do more to ensure that civilians enjoy
the protection they so rightly deserve under appropriate
laws.

Over the years, Canada has sought to encourage and
facilitate serious work on improving how the United
Nations prevents and responds to situations of armed
conflict. We are principally concerned with addressing
the protection needs of the most vulnerable in these
contexts - including women, religious communities
and children.

(spoke in French)

In conflict situations, women and girls, men and
boys, can become victims of abuse. Women and girls
in particular continue to face increased risks of sexual
violence, including rape and early and forced marriage.
Canada remains at the forefront of efforts to prevent
and address violence against those most vulnerable,
and in promoting their empowerment.

We must continue to work closely to strengthen
efforts and coordination to prevent and respond to
sexual violence, such as rape as a weapon of war, sexual
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion and enforced sterilizations. Even in times of
conflict, the promotion of accountability, including by
increasing the capacity to prosecute perpetrators of
such acts, is important.

Canada remains committed to advocating for the
rights of religious communities in situations of armed
conflict, who are often persecuted for their beliefs. We
are deeply concerned about situations where individuals
from religious communities experience difficulty in
their ability to practice their faith in peace. In the face
of such injustice, including when pilgrims have been
killed, churches or mosques attacked and religious
leaders taken hostage, Canada has not been silent.
And we have not sat idly by. We are speaking out on
behalf of religious communities that are under threat.
In that regard, we call on United Nations agencies to do
more to ensure that the protection needs of vulnerable
religious communities are addressed.

(spoke in English)

We wish to draw special attention today to the
urgent need to address the impact of the indiscriminate
use of explosive weapons, and in particular their impact

on children. As the report of the Secretary-General
highlights, in Syria and in far too many other conflicts,
tens of thousands of civilians have been targeted or
subjected to indiscriminate attacks, including the
widespread use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. Opportunities to strengthen civilian
protection in that regard should include creating
stronger political barriers to the use of indiscriminate
explosive weapons and building recognition among
parties to conflict that the use of such weapons should
be avoided, particularly in densely populated areas.

We furthermore condemn the intentional targeting
of schools, teachers and students as a tactic of war and
the practice of using schools for military purposes
during armed conflict. That practice has a clear negative
impact on children's safety and access to education,
and we call on parties to armed conflict to refrain from
such military use of schools. We also encourage States
that have not yet done so to take appropriate measures
to restrict the use of schools for any military operations.

(spoke in French)

The conflict in Syria continues to have a devastating
impact on the civilian population. Canada continues
to call on all parties to conflict to adhere to their
international obligations, as well as to provide full, safe
and unhindered access to humanitarian actors seeking
to provide emergency relief to affected populations.

We also demand, in the strongest terms possible,
that parties refrain from attacking hospitals, medical
facilities and health-care workers, which are protected
under international law.

(spoke in English)

The crisis in Syria is but one of many examples
where civilians are not only suffering from the
devastating impacts of conflict, but are also being
denied access to lifesaving humanitarian assistance
and protection. In South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali
and Afghanistan unacceptable constraints on access
are undermining the ability of humanitarian workers
to be able to reach those in need. We urgently call
on all parties to conflict to ensure that humanitarian
workers, relief goods and equipment are able to
reach those in need of assistance. That includes the
freedom of movement of humanitarian workers and the
establishment of simple and effective procedures for
administrative and logistical arrangements pertaining
to customs, visas and travel authorizations.

You may rest assured, Madam President, that
Canada will remain committed to working with the
international community to protect the world's most
vulnerable and to ensure that those responsible for
violations are held accountable for their actions and
brought to justice.
