Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, like other
delegations, I would like to thank the Chairman of the
Committee, Ambassador Mufioz, for his
comprehensive briefing. His account of the last four
months of the Committee's work is quite impressive.
His tireless interaction with Member States,
international organizations, other United Nations
bodies and civil society has greatly enhanced the
Committee's outreach. Under his able guidance, the
Committee has become a dynamic partner in the global
fight against terrorism.

As the threat posed by the expanding Al Qaeda
network is still on the rise, the 1267 sanctions regime
needs to adapt itself to new challenges. The following
two points seem to us essential to enhance the
Committee's efficiency and credibility. First, the
Consolidated List, the operational centrepiece of the
sanctions regime, needs constant improvement. It must
become a meaningful tool for those who enforce the
measures on the ground. For instance, both the bank
clerk who is supposed to freeze an account and the
border guard who is tasked to prevent the border
crossing of a listed individual deserve to work on the
basis of a list that contains sufficient identification data
and that is regularly updated.

The List is not a political document. It is
designed to serve as an operational tool for the
enforcement of the assets freeze, the travel ban and the
arms embargo. Therefore, it should not be burdened
with non-operational data, such as incomplete entries
of names or outdated information, which will only
complicate the task of proper enforcement and
demotivate the implementing agent.

These issues are not new. In fact, the Monitoring
Team has highlighted them in many instances and has
put forward useful suggestions, such as subjecting the
List to a constant review in a clearing-house process,
using feedback from Member States and specialized
agencies, such as INTERPOL. In this context, I would
like to underline that the Monitoring Team, under the
guidance of its Coordinator, Mr. Richard Barrett, has
been performing excellent work, both as advisers to the
Committee and as reliable partners to many Member
States.

The second point I would like to raise is related
to the issue of due process. As the European Court of
Justice is expected to pass judgement on several cases
related to United Nations sanctions early next year, this
issue is of great importance to my Government.
International law clearly stipulates that counter-
terrorism actions must at all times respect due process
and the rule of law. There can be no trade-off between
human rights and effective security measures. Indeed,
respect for human rights must remain an integral part
of any comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy.

The recent report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565) examines
the impact of those legal principles on the counter-
terrorism sanctions regime. In paragraph 152 of its
report, the Panel states that,

"The way entities or individuals are added
to the terrorist list maintained by the Council and
the absence of review or appeal for those listed
raise serious accountability issues and possibly
violate fundamental human rights norms and
conventions."

In paragraph 182, the Panel recommends that,

"Where sanctions involve lists of
individuals or entities, sanctions committees
should establish procedures to review the cases of
those claiming to have been incorrectly placed or
retained on such lists."

Germany fully supports the Panel's view that
current rules on listing and delisting fall far short of
international legal standards and need to be revised
with a view to enhancing their transparency and their
even-handed applicability. The ongoing review of the
Committee's guidelines should present a good
opportunity to advance that key issue, which, as the
Chairman stated in his briefing, will continue to be
high on the Committee's agenda. That will enhance the
credibility of the sanctions regime and improve
proactive cooperation of States with the Committee.

We are convinced that the Panel's
recommendations, if implemented in good faith, are a
valuable basis for strengthening worldwide consensus
to counter terrorism.

To conclude, let me again express my
delegation's sincere appreciation to Ambassador
Heraldo Munoz, as well as to his predecessor,
Ambassador Gabriel Valdes, and to the very able team
in the Permanent Mission of Chile, in particular
Mrs. Carla Serazzi, for the outstanding work they have
performed in chairing the Committee over the last two
years.

I equally extend our gratitude to the Monitoring
Team, as well as to the Secretariat, in particular
Ms. Tatiana Cosio, who have all worked tirelessly to
master the Committee's constantly heavy workload.

Finally, Mr. President, let me assure you that
Germany will continue to work closely with the
Committee and to support its endeavours to make the
world a safer place.

