The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Angola and Portugal, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion Without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chikoti
(Angola), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Georges Chikoti, Vice-Minister for
External relations of Angola.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Seixas da
Costa (Portugal) took a seat at the side of the
Council Chamber


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Oshima to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. After the briefing, I shall give the
floor to the Vice-Minister for External Relations of
Angola, Mr. Georges Chikoti, who will make a
presentation. Thereafter, I will open the floor to
Council members who wish to comment or ask
questions.

I now give the floor to Mr. Oshima.


