Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this open meeting on East
Timor. I wish also to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his
timely and useful briefing.

Last year's popular consultation on East Timor
marked an important stage in the struggle of the people
of East Timor for self-determination and independence.
On this, the eve of the anniversary of the popular
consultation, Jamaica salutes the indomitable spirit and
courage of the people of East Timor, and we pledge
continued solidarity and support.

We cannot but recall the tragic loss of life and the
destruction of property which occurred following the
popular consultation. It is therefore heartening that, one
year later, substantial gains have been made, with
democratic structures and institutions of governance
firmly in place. The National Council has begun to
play a crucial role in the political process, along with
departments of government responsible for formulating
policies. An environment has been created for the
growth of multi-party democracy in preparation for
democratic elections. Progress has also been made
towards the establishment of a credible system of
justice, with the recent opening of another district
court, outside Dili in Baucau, and with the proposed
development of a national action plan on human rights.
Important to this process must be continued efforts to
bring to justice those responsible for crimes committed
following last year's referendum.

Other positive developments include
improvements in public health services, the
revitalization of the education system and human-
resource capacity-building, including the training of
civil servants and police.

All of this could not have been possible without
the direct involvement of the international community,
first through the International Force in East Timor
(INTERFET) and then by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
This involvement must continue.

We recognize the enormous contribution made by
the dedicated men and women, some of whom have
given their lives in the cause of peace, and we join in
the expression of condolences to the Governments and
people of Bangladesh and Nepal for the most recent
casualties.

As Mr. Annabi indicated, UNTAET has continued
its important work in governance, in providing security
and in rebuilding the economy. We are pleased to learn
of the improvements in the employment situation. We
View these developments as significant for nation
building.

It is against this background that my delegation is
deeply concerned that the deteriorating security
situation in East Timor and the events taking place in
West Timor threaten to disrupt the progress already
achieved.

We condemn the assault by militias on the staff of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) in West Timor and deeply
regret that the UNHCR has had to suspend its work in
West Timor due to the harm inflicted by the militias.
We deplore any act that seeks to disrupt the important
work of relief agencies and that negatively impacts on
the safety and well-being of aid workers as well as on
refugees.

We look forward to receiving the results of the
investigations being conducted in conjunction with the
Indonesian authorities.

My delegation hopes that the repatriation of the
more than 100,000 refugees remaining in West Timor
can be completed in a timely and safe manner with the
combined efforts of UNTAET, UNHCR and the
Indonesian authorities, especially in light of the
imminent closure of the refugee camps.

Reports also indicate that confrontations near the
border with West Timor continue and we urge the
Indonesian Government to do its utmost to end the
cross-border incursions from West Timor, as well as to
provide guarantees for the security of aid workers and
refugees.

We are aware that the Indonesian Government has
sent a brigade of troops to provide protection to aid
workers and refugees but it is clear that the militias
continue to act with impunity. This cannot be allowed
to continue. We therefore reiterate our appeal for the
disbandment and disarming of the militias and for the
bringing to justice those persons responsible for the
crimes committed.

In conclusion, we would wish to reiterate our
support for the work of UNTAET and for the people of
East Timor on their journey towards independence. We
look forward to welcoming East Timor into the family
of nations.

