Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): I have the honour
and privilege to introduce today the sixth report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord's Resistance Army-affected areas (S/2014/319).

The report before the Council stresses that the
political and security situation in Central Africa
remains fragile. Since the previous report published
in November 2013 (S/2013/671), armed violence has
undermined efforts to promote and ensure stability
in the subregion. Moreover, new cross-border
challenges have emerged. In particular, the outbreak
of communal Violence in the Central African Republic
since December 2013 has had considerable regional
impact, given the serious consequences of the crisis
on the security, economic and humanitarian fields for
neighbouring countries.

At the same time, the violence that has broken out
in South Sudan since December 2013 has jeopardized
the implementation of the African Union's Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army. The crisis in South Sudan has led the
Governments of Uganda and South Sudan to withdraw
some of their troops from the African Union's regional
intervention force responsible for the struggle against
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

The Boko Haram group, based in Nigeria, is another
cause of serious concern for Central Africa. That
Islamist group continues to exploit the porous borders
between north-eastern Nigeria and neighbouring States,
and the recent intensification of its violent activities
have grave security and humanitarian consequences
for Cameroon and Chad. Last month, the kidnapping
by Boko Haram of more than 200 school girls near the
border of Cameroon and Chad and the statements by its
leaders that the girls would be sold resulted, rightly, in
a strong condemnation by the international community.

(spoke in English)

The report before the Council also details the
initiatives of UNOCA to promote stability in the
subregion during the reporting period. Of note, my
missions to Chad, Cameroon, the Congo and the
Democratic Republic of Congo highlighted the regional
consequences of the crisis in the Central African
Republic, including humanitarian challenges faced
by Governments and United Nations agencies. Those
States also expressed concern that flows of weapons,
activities by armed groups and sectarian violence may
spread across the Central African Republic's borders
and threaten their own stability.

UNOCA continued its collaboration with the
African Union to coordinate international efforts
within the framework of the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threat and impact of the Lord's
Resistance Army. I am pleased to inform the Council
that the number of LRA-related deaths, abductions and
displaced persons have continued to decline, while
military operations and the defection campaign have
further weakened the LRA. During the fourth ministerial
meeting of the Joint Coordinating Mechanism of the
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the Lord's Resistance Army, participating countries
renewed their political commitment to the initiative by
endorsing my proposal to convene a high-level summit
on the Lord's Resistance Army, as mandated by this
body, and agreeing to review progress on a quarterly
basis.

UNOCA also supported initiatives to promote
cooperation among Central African States on critical
security challenges, notably piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. The recent convening of the first
Interregional Working Group on the establishment
of the Interregional Coordination Centre reaffirmed
the commitment of Gulf of Guinea States to combat
maritime insecurity coherently. The elaboration of the
2014-2016 road map and action plan for operationalizing
the Interregional Coordination Centre, starting in June
2014, is a welcome development.

While those are some of UNOCA's efforts for
the latest reporting period, I would like to take the
opportunity to highlight some of the overarching
achievements during my three-year tenure as the

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa and Head of UNOCA.

First, UNOCA organized five ministerial meetings
ofthe United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), upon
assuming secretariat functions in 2011. UNOCA has
ensured that this forum has a real impact on addressing
security threats in Central Africa. Poaching and
transnational crime are now standing agenda items at
UNSAC meetings, and UNSAC decisions have resulted
in a series of initiatives to support States in developing
an integrated counter-terrorism strategy for Central
Africa.

Secondly, UNOCA signed and elaborated
a framework of cooperation with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) in
2012 in the area of peace and security. UNOCA has
supported the enhancement of ECCAS capacity in the
area of mediation, and has systematically encouraged
and facilitated the inclusion of ECCAS in joint
missions within the subregion. UNOCA has forged a
solid partnership with ECCAS, which has proven to be
mutually beneficial. Close cooperation takes place at
the strategic and operational levels.

Thirdly, UNOCA, together with the United Nations
Office for West Africa, supported three subregional

organizations - ECCAS, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission - in organizing a successful regional

Heads of State Summit in June 2013 in Yaounde
on piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.
Mandated by the Council through resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012), the initiative established the
framework to combat maritime insecurity in the Gulf
of Guinea through a comprehensive global approach.
UNOCA continues to work with those subregional
organizations to operationalize the decisions adopted
at the Summit.

Fourthly, UNOCA, together with the Department
of Political Affairs, spearheaded the development
of the United Nations regional strategy to address
the threat and impact of the LRA, which the Council
endorsed in June 2012. That was followed, in 2013,
by the development of an implementation plan of
activities. Routine joint diplomatic missions with the
African Union Special Envoy for the Lord's Resistance
Army Issue and the convening of the biannual meeting
of LRA focal points have ensured the integration of
political, military and civilian efforts. Significant gains
have been made over the past three years. Overall, we
have overseen a period of forward momentum, which
must be maintained well into the post-Kony phase.

Central Africa lies at the heart of the continent.
It is rich in resources, yet remains one of the most
underdeveloped and volatile subregions in Africa. Its
potential, however, is unlimited. I have observed first-
hand the political commitment of ECCAS member
States to address critical challenges such as the crisis
in the Central African Republic and piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. However, despite the efforts made by
leaders of Central African countries and their peoples,
the subregion remains fragile and continues to require
ongoing support from the international community,
particularly the United Nations. I am confident that,
with the Council's continuing support and guidance,
UNOCA will continue to play an instrumental role in
supporting the States of the subregion in confronting
the pressing challenges that threaten peace, stability
and development in Central Africa.

As I depart, I am honoured to have been given the
opportunity to shepherd UNOCA since its establishment
in 2011. I would like to take this opportunity to
wish Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, the incoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and Head of UNOCA, success in carrying out
his mandate.

I would like to recognize the Heads of State and
Government of Central Africa for their cooperation.
I wish to express my gratitude to the subregional and
regional organizations, notably the African Union,
ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. On the
LRA, I have particularly enjoyed the constructive
partnerships with the Special Envoy of the African
Union on the LRA issue, Francisco Madeira, and
numerous non-governmental organizations. My thanks
go to the United Nations Resident Coordinators in
Central Africa and the Heads of United Nations
missions and entities in and around the subregion for
their collaboration. I want to acknowledge the guidance
and support provided by the Department of Political
Affairs and to thank all the colleagues in my office.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to
the Secretary-General for the opportunity to serve as
his Special Representative for Central Africa and to the
members of the Council for their steadfast support to
UNOCA during my tenure.

