Mr. Simancas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), Ambassador
Noel Sinclair, for the information that he has just
provided. Before the Peace Monitoring Group leaves
Bougainville, I would also like to express our gratitude
for the work and support that Australia, New Zealand,
Fiji and Vanuatu have provided to Bougainville.

In that regard, Mexico welcomes the decision by
those countries to send representatives to the
Bougainville Transition Team to follow up on the
peace process. That kind of initiative sends the clear
message that the international community attaches
importance to the advancement of the peace process
and the establishment of an autonomous and
representative Government in Bougainville.

Finally, stage II of the weapons collection plan
has been successfully concluded under the watchful
supervision of Ambassador Sinclair. Bearing in mind
the experience gained in other conflicts where a delay
in the final disposal of collected weapons has been
used by some disruptive elements to resume hostilities
or return to criminal activities, it is essential for the
Security Council to urge the Peace Process
Consultative Committee to begin disposal of weapons
as soon as possible. In a society that has opted for
dialogue, tolerance and understanding, there is simply
no place for weapons.

Throughout the peace process, the cooperation of
the Government of Papua New Guinea has been
essential. It is now important for the State bodies to
reach prompt agreement on a draft constitution for the
island so that elections may be held as soon as possible
to establish an autonomous and democratic
Government in Bougainville. However, political
progress is not sufficient if it does not go hand in hand
with essential economic and social development.
Therefore, it is essential for the donor community to
support the establishment of sustainable economic and
social conditions by channelling resources towards
infrastructure, education, health and development
projects. In these efforts, reintegration and
rehabilitation of ex-combatants should be promoted.
That in turn will contribute to a peaceful transition to a
political future for Bougainville.

Finally, I wish to express once again Mexico's
gratitude for the work carried out by Ambassador
Sinclair and his staff, whose commitment has been
reflected in positive progress towards achieving a
lasting solution to the conflict in Bougainville.

