The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Portugal.

As the representative of the Netherlands has already
done on behalf of the European Union, Portugal welcomes
the recent developments in the political situation in Angola.
The Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, and
the swearing-in ceremony of the UNITA members of
Parliament, are paving the way for a successful conclusion
of the Angolan peace process.

As the Secretary-General stated in his progress report
on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), last week's events could well become a
milestone in the history of Angola. The Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation is a fundamentally
important political confidence-building measure. We look
forward to all members of that Government working
together towards the unity of Angola and the reconciliation
of the Angolan people. In fact, the Government will be an
essential tool in facilitating the implementation of the
remaining tasks of the peace process.

Being close to peace does not necessarily translate into
a consolidated peace. We must not deceive ourselves: peace
and prosperity are now within reach of all Angolans, but
they cannot yet be taken for granted. The remains of the
past still persist in Angola, and it is crucial to learn from
mistakes. Therefore, the message we must now send to all
Angolans, and in particular to those who have subscribed
to the peace agreements, is a very simple one: they must
believe in the peace process and act accordingly, with an
open heart, an open mind, and without any misgivings.

In this context, a meeting within the territory of
Angola between President J ose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr.
Jonas Savimbi would show the international community that
the political situation in that country is really changing for
the better. We hope that the recent approval by the National
Assembly of the special status of Mr. Savimbi will
facilitate that long-awaited meeting.

Other vitally important steps include the completion
of the remaining military aspects of the peace process,
including the selection and incorporation of UNITA
soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and
demobilization, and the extension of State administration
throughout the national territory. Portugal urges the
Government and UNITA to complete those tasks
expeditiously. They must go that extra mile for peace. We
want to believe that such steps will be taken, but the
Security Council will have to remain actively seized of
the matter to ensure that they are.

Portugal considers national reconciliation to mean
not only national unity, but national unity in a democracy.
These targets must not be separated. A vibrant democracy
is a precondition for peace and stability, and these
elements will enable the international community to assist
the economic rehabilitation of Angola.

Peace, prosperity and democracy are the separate
threads that will unite Angola in a joint destiny. My
country is ready to maintain its assistance programmes in
the political, social, economic and humanitarian fields, so
long as they result from the will of the Angolan
Government. For the same reasons, we also welcome the
United Nations consolidated inter-agency appeal for
Angola, covering the period from January to December
1997. My delegation also associates itself with the
statement made earlier by the European Union, stressing
its willingness to cooperate actively in the reconstruction
of a reconciled Angola.

Looking ahead, the Portuguese Government fully
agrees with the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Council approve the extension of UNAVEM's
mandate until 30 June 1997, on the understanding that the
operation would proceed gradually towards an observer
mission which would focus basically on political,
humanitarian and human rights aspects. We also share his
view that the international community should remain
engaged in Angola until the goal of the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is achieved.

Allow me also to underline the importance of the
recent visit of the Secretary-General to Angola, which
injected new vigour into the process, strengthening the
remarkable efforts made by his Special Representative,
Maitre Beye, supported by the observer countries. The
results of his visit are evident.

 

Portugal has consistently argued, in international
forums and in its bilateral contacts, against direct and
indirect military intervention in Angola. Respect for the
sovereignty of States is a cardinal principle of Portuguese
foreign policy. The Angolan people paid a very heavy toll
for these interventions. Therefore, we call upon the
Angolans to proceed in such a way as to contribute always
to regional peace and stability.

Before concluding, I must state the obvious: the
present situation in Angola offers the Angolan people the
prospect of a fresh start; but it also constitutes a new
challenge to its collective will and determination. Recent
events have shown that the seeds of peace which were
sown with the agreements signed in Lisbon and by the
Lusaka Protocol will finally bear fruit.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Angola has asked to speak. I
now call on him.

