Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on taking over the Presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for the outstanding presentation
he has given us on the topic we are discussing at
today's Council meeting.

A year ago, in her statement to the Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia highlighted
the worsening situation of armed conflicts, in which 90
per cent of the Victims are civilians, along with
terrorism and the ensuing humanitarian tragedies such
as those we witnessed in Rwanda and Srebrenica,
demonstrate that contemporary conflicts deliberately
target unarmed civilians. She also decried, in parallel
with the Secretary-General's report at that time, the
illegal financing of conflicts and terrorism by means of
trade in illicit drugs, kidnapping and extortion -
criminal activities that target helpless civilians. That is
why, in supporting the inclusion in the aide-memoire
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict of a
chapter on the illicit exploitation and trade in natural
resources, we wish to state our conviction that any
consideration of that topic must include due
consideration of criminal activities such as trade in
illicit drugs, kidnapping and extortion.

Colombia supports those ideas because they
reflect elements that underpin the democratic security
policy promoted by President Alvaro Uribe Velez since
August 2002. That policy is not designed to give more
power to the State for its own sake, but to prepare the
State to better protect the civilian population in all
areas and, most especially, from the dangers inherent in
armed conflict, and in order to secure the rights and
freedoms of all its citizens throughout the national
territory. That policy seeks to restore the rule of law
and the capacity to deter violent agents by
strengthening the legitimate armed forces of the State.
That policy maintains an open door to political
negotiation with illegal armed groups, as long as they
suspend hostilities and respect the ceasefire.

During President Uribe's first year in office, the
democratic security policy that has been applied to
uproot terrorism is now producing its first results, and I
should like to cite just a few figures. There is now a
police presence in every municipality of the country,
including 170 where there were no police before. The
homicide rate has dropped 22 per cent; massacres by
35 per cent; kidnapping 34.7 per cent; illegal
roadblocks by 49 per cent; and the number of internally
displaced persons has diminished by 66 per cent. All of
that has been achieved while respecting the law, which
is evidenced by the fact that the only complaints of
human rights violations are as a result of individual
initiatives on the part of some agents of the State -
whose cases are being investigated and prosecuted, as
necessary - have dropped by 95 per cent. Those
meaningful advances in the protection of our citizens
have elicited the support of the Colombian people,
which is supporting the Government and actively
cooperating with the authorities in restoring the rule of
law and in isolating violent agents.

If we are to continue our efforts to overcome
terrorism in strict respect for the law, however, we need
greater powers in keeping with the law. Currently, the
Government is seeking a constitutional amendment to
enable the public forces, in cases of terrorism, to bring
specialized staff to bear in order to arrest, search and
intercept suspects. Those measures are to contain
democratic safeguards, such as the necessary
intervention of an independent prosecutor in the hours
following such action, and with the proviso that the
Attorney-General's office be informed, as well as the
Congress - which is important for political control of
operations. The powers proposed are much less
extensive than those currently found in the democracies
of developed countries that are not confronting a
domestic conflict or terrorist threat of the magnitude
Colombia faces.

Finally, the democratic security policy has filled
in certain administrative gaps, making it possible to
disarm and demobilize 1,000 members of illegal armed
groups. Presently there is a law before the Congress to
make that process viable on the basis of justice,
reparation and reconciliation. The reintegration of
those former combatants in civilian life will require
additional efforts and the support of the national and
international community.

A chapter of the aide-memoire that requires
special attention and care concerns humanitarian
assistance and the access of humanitarian organizations
to the victims of conflict and the vulnerable population.

We believe that it is fundamental for the dialogue
between the receptor State and the international
community to be based on General Assembly
resolution 46/182, which recognizes the basic
principles of neutrality and impartiality in the provision
of humanitarian assistance, as well as the requirement
of consent from the receiving State for the provision of
such assistance. As it is incumbent upon the receiving
State to guarantee the security of humanitarian staff,
humanitarian organizations must be subject to
restricted access in zones of conflict where the security
ofthe humanitarian staff cannot be reasonably assured.

To initiate unauthorized dialogues with illegal
armed groups in order to obtain access implies a
twofold risk. On the one hand, it endangers the security
of humanitarian personnel since many of these armed
groups do not respect international humanitarian law,
and there is also the risk of engaging in political
negotiations, which is the prerogative of the
Government and which is not consonant with the basic
principles of neutrality, impartiality and transparency
for humanitarian work. In addition, this places on an
equal footing authorities arising from a democratic
decision with illegal armed organizations that flaunt
their rifles as a token of their claimed rights. These are
organizations that can violate their undertakings with
impunity and which, at least in my country, have
demonstrated that they do not respect the immunities
that treaties and civilized actors grant to the personnel
and property ofthe United Nations.

We welcome any path that leads to lessening the
suffering of the civilian population within armed
conflict. But the optimum, the irreplaceable, the
definitive way of protecting the entire population is
just to put an end to these conflicts. I know this is a
truism, but it is sometimes forgotten, and it is our duty
to promote, demand and support any procedure that
will lead to the end ofthese conflicts.

In the case of democracy in Colombia, it is also
necessary to support policies that seek to strengthen
institutional mechanisms, and to start by giving the
armed forces that serve and uphold law and justice
sufficient capacity, acting as they do within the
universal principles of respect of human rights and rule
of national law. If they are not so trained and
empowered, conflicts provoked by illegal armed actors
will drag on and on, will worsen, will deteriorate, will
mutate, will turn against civilians, will resort to savage
terrorism, and will fund it by exploiting illicit
resources, and, losing sight of their political dimension,
become a criminal lifestyle based on illegal and
abundant resources. These are precisely the elements,
in illegal armed groups, that make them degenerate into
tools of death against women, children and helpless,
peaceful civilians.

Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that, when
confronted with violence and terrorism, as the Charter
says, we must "reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person ...". The United Nations must preserve the
dignity of each and everyone, the right to life and the
right to live without fear. These are universal public
goods, which, as our Minister for Foreign Affairs said a
year ago in this room, can only be preserved by the
community and with the collaboration of all its
members. This is the domain of our shared
responsibility.

