The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2381 (2017) and the endorsement of the
Secretary-General's recommendations on United
Nations support for the Mission tasked with verifying
the temporary ceasefire between the Ejercito de
Liberacion Nacional and the Colombian Government.
In that regard, we thank the British penholder for its
efforts.

We welcome, in particular the responsiveness
of the United Nations and its readiness to assist the
parties in the negotiations process. In one month,
the Secretary-General and his team, in particular
his Special Representative, Mr. Jean Arnault, have
managed to submit proposals that would provide a
swift and effective response to the request for support
to uphold the temporary ceasefire. After the successful
disarmament and political transition of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias dc Colombia (FARC), we
hope that the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional will take
part in the peace process to end the conflict with the
Colombian Government.

The ceasefire and all commitments arising from
it spark considerable hope for the current talks under
way in Quito. The peace process conducted with the
FARC demonstrates that the decades-long violence is
not inevitable. We call upon all parties involved in the
negotiations to respect their commitments, including
those not covered by the United Nations Mission.The
United Nations, along with the Catholic Church, will
attempt to strengthen the climate of trust. Nonetheless,
success depends, above all, on the political will
demonstrated by the parties. France will continue to
support United Nations action in Colombia - a great
and friendly nation on a historic path of courage and
determination.

In recent years, the country has shown that conflict
is not inevitable. The will of the parties could reverse
the course of history. By supporting the peace process,
the United Nations was able to fulfil its mission of
maintaining international peace and security. The will
of the parties and the support of the United Nations
have made the peace process in Colombia a source of
inspiration for us all.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.

