Mr. Nardi (Liechtenstein): The annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360) illustrates that
the suffering of children in times of armed conflict
continues, including forced abduction and sexual
abuse, with very few truly positive developments
to report. Accountability for perpetrators and the
listing mechanism established under the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's mandate have
continued relevance and importance. The monitoring
and reporting mechanism established in resolution 1612
(2005) to document grave violations against children is
a key element of the United Nations effort to protect the
rights of children. The documentation used is based on
information vetted for accuracy, leading to credible and
evidence-based listing for perpetrators.

Like many others, we are deeply concerned about
the pressure put upon the Secretary-General to redact
the report produced by the Special Representative. Such
pressure seriously jeopardizes the integrity not only
of the mechanism, but also of others that the United
Nations has put in place. It also offers a welcome
pretext for other offenders to dismiss the credibility
of monitoring and reporting. Such interference can
undermine progress made by the mandate, in particular
with regard to all the perpetrators. It also creates the
impression that accountability is only asked of those
who are not in a position of power vis-a-vis the United
Nations system. We wish to express our strong support
for the mandate of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and its independence.

The report of the Secretary-General illustrates the
complex relationship between violent extremism and
children in armed conflict. On the one hand, children
fall victim to acts of terror intended to inflict maximum
civilian casualties. On the other hand, extremist groups
have exploited the vulnerability of children and used
them by enlisting them to carry out acts of violence.
In many of those cases, the decision to join violent
extremist groups is made out of a sense of exclusion
and hopelessness. The key challenge therefore lies in
reducing the incentive to join terrorist organizations in
the first place.

A preventive approach that fosters more inclusive
societies for children through measures such as youth
outreach programs and community-based projects can
go a long way in that respect. A solely military and
security approach will fail to address the underlying
factors driving violent extremism. Instead, we must
focus on tackling the root causes of conflicts and
crises: lack of good governance, poverty and the
absence of socioeconomic prospects. Doing so will
help address the pull factors for the radicalization
of children. Following the cessation of conflict, the
reintegration and rehabilitation of these children should
be prioritized. Psychological support and educational
programmes are helpful tools in that respect. It is of the
utmost importance to always respect the human rights
of children, in particular when States treat children
associated with violent extremism as security threats.

The Secretary-General's report reflects the
troublesome number of sexual violence and abuse
cases perpetrated against children this past year. We
are concerned by the deteriorating situation in South
Sudan, in particular the recent reports that United
Nations peacekeepers took no action to prevent sexual
violence perpetrated against women and girls directly
outside of a United Nations camp. We welcome steps
taken by the Council in resolution 2272 (2016) to
repatriate units whose members have perpetrated such
crimes. That was a much-needed step, but still fell short
of the need for full accountability and an effective end
to impunity.

Much ofthe suffering of children in times of armed
conflict is due to the alarming erosion of respect for
international humanitarian law. A consistent political
commitment on the part of the Council to ensure
such respect, as well as our joint efforts to enhance
compliance, can go a long way towards addressing
this crisis of international humanitarian law. Along the
same lines, it is vital that we make firm commitments
to guaranteeing the human rights and safety of refugee
and migrant children, while also providing them with
livelihoods and income opportunities. As such, we are
strongly committed to the preparations for the high-
level plenary meeting on addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants on 19 September.

