Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this timely meeting on an important
issue which is the focus of attention of the entire
international community. I would also like to thank Mr.
Kofi Annan for the sincere efforts that he has made
over the past few months to address the situation.

This morning, the Israeli occupying army started
another round of large-scale military operations
involving ground troops, apache helicopters, tanks,
armoured vehicles and so forth against Palestinian
civilian areas and Mr. Arafat's headquarters, and
caused both many human casualties and large-scale
material damage. Earlier this month, the Israeli army
staged another round of large-scale operations, which
lasted several days and resulted in the death of more
than 200 innocent civilians.

Such military operations are a form of collective
punishment inflicted on civilians. They increase
civilian casualties and make life even more difficult
and precarious for the Palestinians, who were already
subjected to bombing of civilian areas, assassinations,
demolitions and daily humiliation, as well as severe
physical and economic hardships.

Against this backdrop, and as the international
community is condemning the latest massive invasion
of Palestinian areas, it is disturbing that today some
still align themselves with the aggressive, oppressing
and occupying side.

The Israeli spokespersons' rejection of the latest
peace initiative put forward by the Arab States once
again clearly proves that peace is not on Israel's
agenda. There should be no doubt that, by embarking
on a large-scale invasion of civilian areas just a day
after the Arab Summit, the Israelis clearly meant to
signal their opposition to any serious effort towards
peace. Yet we did not need to listen to their
spokespersons to know about their inherent opposition
to any peaceful solution. Their continued settlement
activity since 1993 - including the building of 34 new
settlements in the West Bank and Gaza over the last
year alone, among other things - has spoken for itself.
The ongoing uprising is clearly the result of Palestinian
disappointment in the peace talks, which bore no fruit
simply because, from the beginning, the Israelis never
meant to cede anything to the Palestinians.

There is no escaping the fact that occupation lies
at the origin of all the trouble and instability in the
region, and the Israeli regime simply cannot continue
to occupy Arab lands, be they Palestinian, Syrian or
Lebanese, on the one hand, and hope to ensure security
by resorting to repression and aggression on the other.
So long as the illness that causes pain is not effectively
and duly addressed, the pain persists.

After so much destruction and the loss of so many
precious lives, the urgent question that the international
community should tackle now is whether or not the
Palestinians are entitled to the right of self-defence.
Moreover, while the Security Council has thus far
failed, for obvious reasons, to take any action to protect
the defenceless Palestinians against Israeli State
terrorism and the armed-to-the-teeth Israeli army, the
question is also how and by what means they should
defend themselves.

International public opinion is outraged at the
atrocious ongoing military operations by Israeli troops
against the Palestinians. Moreover, Israel's acts have
already taken the Middle East region to the brink of all-
out war and disaster, and there is a real fear that the
flames of war will spread to the whole region.
Therefore, there should be no doubt that the
international community earnestly expects the Security
Council seriously to live up to its Charter
responsibility, effectively address the root causes of the
conflict and deal appropriately with the crimes
perpetrated by the Israeli regime.

