Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express my gratitude to the members of
the Security Council for having adopted resolution 2214
(2015) on combatting terrorism in Libya. Specifically,
I wish to thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
the Arab member of the Security Council, for having
submitted the resolution and exerted great efforts in
recent days to garner the support of all members of the
COuncil. We hope that the adoption of this resolution
will provide a qualitative leap in the efforts of the
international community in combating the scourge of
terrorism that has spread throughout the Middle East
and in Libya in particular.
The events of recent months have proven that
terrorism is now a transnational phenomenon. The
cancer of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has spread across borders and its criminal actions have
touched many throughout the world. That organization
now controls vast areas in more than one country in
the Middle East. The international community must
therefore deal with that threat decisively and firmly. It
is impossible to coexist with terrorism or to negotiate
with it.

During the deliberations of the Council this
morning, we heard testimony from victims of terrorism
that established very clearly the extent to which these
violent creature will go now that they have given up
all human values, killing people and stealing property
without hesitation. This requires us us to combat
terrorism without distinguishing among its different
manifestations, be it in Iraq or in Libya, now that its
effects are spreading to other countries.

While the Arab Republic of Egypt welcomes this
resolution, it realizes that its adoption does not mean
that terrorism has been defeated in Libya. It is merely
the first step in a lengthy and arduous journey that
will require great effort and sacrifice. Egypt believes
that, now that the resolution has been adopted, the
international community must take the following clear
and practical steps in order to eliminate this danger.

First, the international community must implement
paragraph 3 of the resolution, which urges Member
States to combat by all means threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts in Libya in
coordination with the Libyan Government and the most
affected countries in the region.

Secondly, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) should implement paragraph 7,
which urges it to consider expeditiously requests by
the Government of Libya, taking into consideration
that this Government is the only member of the
international community that is combating terrorism
on the ground in Libya, in light of its responsibilty to
protect its population, and that the threat of terrorism
in Libya has greatly increased over the recent period,
which therefore requires substantial equipment and
effort in order to eliminate it.

Thirdly, in order to implement paragraph 8 of the
resolution, States with significant counter-terrorism
expertise should directly contact the representatives
of the legitimate Libyan Government in order to
identify its genuine needs, in particular with regard to
capacity-building in the areas of security and gathering
intelligence about the weapons and abilities of terrorist
organizations and should provide that support as soon
as possible.

Fourthly, the international community must deal
firmly with all external parties that are proven to be
providing any form of support, including moral support,
to terrorist parties in Libya because this danger can only
be eliminated by drying up its sources of financing and
weapons.

In conclusion, the path of combatting terrorism
in Libya is distinct, but runs parallel to the country's
political process, which is being guided by the able
efforts of Mr. Bernardino Leon. In that regard, I wish
to express Egypt's strong support for this important
process, which is crucial to resolving the conflict in
Libya. We have been in contact with Mr. Leon in order
to identify ways in which we can support the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya. We wish the Mission
every success in serving the Libyan people.

The meeting rose at 6.45 pm.
