Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
also like to thank the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as
well as the two Prosecutors, for their exhaustive
briefings.

I would like to begin by expressing our
satisfaction with the progress that the two Tribunals
have made in the past six months towards completing
all their trials diligently and without neglecting the
demands of justice. We welcome the parallel measures
that have been taken in order to guarantee the
transition to the Residual Mechanism as called for in
resolution 1966 (2010). We fully understand the
difficulties discussed in the reports (see S/2011/7l6 and S/2011/731) that both Tribunals face in completing
their work in a timely fashion. That is the reason that
we call for the adoption as soon as possible of a
practical solution to the issue of retaining the
Tribunals' specialists and ensuring the replacement of
those who leave for more permanent posts, as that will
avert any delays in the Tribunals' work. In that regard,
we would like to recall resolutions 1993 (2011) and
1995 (2011).

We would also like to express our satisfaction at
the arrests of the two remaining fugitives from the
ICTY, namely, Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzie. We
call on Rwanda's neighbouring countries to strengthen
their cooperation with the ICTR in order to ensure the
arrest of the nine remaining fugitives. We also believe
that it is important to give adequate attention to those
who have been freed but who have not been able to
return to their homes or be reintegrated into society,
which undermines their fundamental right to a decent
and safe life with their families.

As we come to the end of the year, we would like
to commend the Informal Working Group on
International Criminal Tribunals, chaired by Portugal,
for its efforts and constructive role in contributing to
the success of the Tribunals and assisting in the
transfer to the Residual Mechanism. Lebanon's view is
that the juridical work and opinions of the Tribunals
have contributed to combating impunity and to
rendering justice for Victims, as well as greatly
enriching and advancing international criminal law and
strengthening the rule of law, nationally and
internationally. Finally, I should like to reaffirm that
there can be no stability or peace without genuine
justice.
