Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
At the outset, Mr. President, allow me to express our
gratitude to you for guiding the work of the Security
Council during the month of May and to wish you
success in carrying out this extremely important and
significant task.

Today's meeting of the Security Council, which is
devoted to the consideration of the question of the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for an additional
six-month period in accordance with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General, is extremely important for the
intensification of the peace process in the Republic of
Tajikistan.

It is a great honour for me to express, on behalf of
the President of the Republic of Tajikistan, Emomali
Rakhmonov, our profound gratitude to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General for their unflagging
attention to the problems related to an inter-Tajik
settlement and for their solidarity with the Tajik people in
such a difficult period of post-conflict reconstruction.

The conclusions of the Secretary-General regarding
the need for comprehensive international support for the
peace process and for the provision of financial assistance
to Tajikistan to achieve the goals of reform and
development inspire the hope that the United Nations and
its specialized agencies will continue to make their
important contribution to the stabilization of the situation
in the country and will energetically and consistently
promote the rehabilitation of the economy and the social
sphere in Tajikistan. We are counting on positive results
from the meeting of the Consultative Group of donor
States, to be convened next week in Paris by the World
Bank, which will play a significant role in strengthening
the peace process and the stable economic development
of Tajikistan.

The assistance of the international community to the
efforts of the Government of Tajikistan aimed at a further
stabilization of the situation and the continued progress of
the country towards peace and national accord is
particularly important at this time, when embers of
mistrust still glow in the ashes of the civil conflict -
embers that ignited flames of tension in March and April
of this year, resulting once again in the loss of human
life.

The Government of Tajikistan has expressed its
profound concern at these local conflicts, which were
initiated by individual field commanders of the United
Tajik Opposition. We fully agree with the assessment of

 

these events given earlier by the Security Council and by
the Secretary-General.
It is no secret that the recent incidents and armed
clashes were initiated by people whose natural environment
is lawlessness and chaos. They clearly represent the death
throes of those few forces that have not yet freed
themselves from the illusion that they can undermine the
implementation of the Moscow agreements and drag the
long-suffering people of Tajikistan into a new spiral of a
fratricidal war. The President of Tajikistan, Emomali
Rakhmonov, is firm in his position that there is no
reasonable alternative to the peace agreement, that progress
towards national accord is irreversible, and that the
Government of the country is unswerving in its dedication
to the cause of moving the peace process forward.

We value highly the contribution that is being made to
the implementation of the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
by the States and international organizations that form the
Contact Group of guarantors. We note the stabilizing role
of the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States in Tajikistan.

The Government of Tajikistan expresses its sincere
gratitude to the donor States and to all the agencies and
non-govemmental organizations that supplement the
humanitarian efforts of the United Nations as well as its
rehabilitation and development activities. This assistance is
extremely important and urgent now, as unprecedented
heavy rains and destructive landslides have killed dozens of
people, left hundreds homeless and done enormous material
damage to the national economy and to the social
infrastructure. The immediate losses from the natural
disaster are assessed at $24 million.

It has been nearly a year since the General Agreement
on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan was signed in Moscow, putting an end to the
bloody civil conflict and opening the way to building a new
and peaceful life. Much has changed over that period of
time.

Despite the fact that the implementation of key
agreements on military issues has been unjustifiably
delayed, thus holding back the progress of the entire peace
process, that process is moving forward, albeit slowly, at a
steady pace. In this respect a significant role is being
played by the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan, with which my Government is maintaining the
closest contacts.

We value highly the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Tajikistan,
Mr. Gerd Dietrich Merrem, who is soon to retire. His
personal efforts made a significant contribution to the
breakthrough in the inter-Tajik settlement and to the
signing on 27 June 1997 in Moscow of the General
Agreement.

The Government of Tajikistan is ready to continue
constructively to cooperate with the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, whose personnel is
rendering effective assistance and support in the
implementation of the peace agreements.

Tajikistan is firmly convinced that there is no
reasonable alternative to national accord. Based on the
positive forces in its society and with the assistance of the
international community, the Guarantor States and all of
the friends of Tajikistan, the Government will do all that
is necessary to ensure that an atmosphere of confidence,
peace and stability reigns throughout the country.

