The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
participation and statement in today's open debate. I
also want to join the Secretary-General and other
colleagues members of the Security Council in
condemning in the strongest terms the bombing of the

11-4815]
United Nations building in Abuja, Nigeria, this
morning. It caused numerous deaths and injuries, and I
join others in expressing our deep sympathy and
condolences to the victims of this heinous crime and to
their families and to the people and Government of
Nigeria. I also join the Secretary-General in conveying
to the larger United Nations family our deepest
sympathies on this tragic terrorist action.

Peacekeeping is a term that does not find mention
in the United Nations Charter. Yet it has become the
face of the United Nations. It consumes more
resources, employs more people and occupies a greater
share of the Security Council's time than any other
single issue, and no other Council instrument has had a
greater impact on the provenance and application of
international law and international humanitarian law
than its peacekeeping mandates. Peacekeeping has also
generated a reputation of impartiality and fairness for
the United Nations.

India is proud to have been associated with
United Nations peacekeeping from its very inception.
As a country that has contributed more than 100,000
peacekeepers to virtually every United Nations
peacekeeping operation over the past six decades, we
are also conscious that much has changed since the
first peacekeeping missions were launched more than
five decades ago.

The geopolitical environment in which
peacekeeping is conducted today is vastly different
from that of those days. Global capabilities -
economic, political and military - have also shifted
significantly. Moreover, today peacekeeping missions
deal predominantly with intra-State issues rather than
play the classic role of interposing troops between
warring States. The peacekeeping agenda has also
added new dimensions to various civilian and policing
domains, and United Nations initiatives on
peacebuilding demand close examination of the entire
enterprise of peacekeeping.

The challenge before the international community
is to build on the legacy of peacekeeping and ensure
that it remains relevant to current realities. Today,
United Nations peacekeeping faces a number of
challenges, including the central resource gap
challenge and peacekeepers being asked to do more
with less. Ambitious agendas are not being backed by
the necessary financial, operational and logistical
resources. That lack of resources affects the

11-4815]
operational effectiveness of peacekeeping and casts a
shadow on the credibility of the Council's mandates.
Mandates also need to be relevant to realities in the
ground.

Suggestions that the Council adopt a two-stage
mandate-creation process that takes into account the
complexities on the ground and matches those with
resource requirements need to be seriously and
urgently considered by the Council. In-depth
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries should be an integral part of the mandate-
generation process.

India also notes the slow and cumbersome
process of recruitment for key positions. This process
will not only be speeded up by greater reliance on
seconded capacities from Governments of Member
States, but will also benefit from their real experiences
in nation-building. This holds true not only for field
positions but also in the management structures of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support.

Given the importance of Africa on the United
Nations peacekeeping agenda, India supports the
capacity-building of the African Union (AU) peace and
security architecture so that the AU may become a
more effective and capable partner of the United
Nations system.

Peacekeeping is a partnership involving members
of this Council, the General Assembly, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the host country. It is
critical that the guiding principles of consent, the
non-use of force except in self-defence or the defence
of the mandate, and impartiality be strenuously
guarded. This is important to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping retains its credibility and
universal acceptability.

Of late, several United Nations peacekeeping
mandates have included tasks that raise questions on
the fundamental tenet of consent, placing peacekeepers
in difficult legal circumstances and thereby hampering
their effectiveness. The principle of national ownership
needs to occupy centre stage in all peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations.

I would like to conclude by paying homage to
those peacekeepers, including from my country, who
have laid down their lives while serving in United
Nations missions.
I now resume my functions as President of the

Council.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council affirms that respect
for the basic principles of peacekeeping,
including consent of the parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and
the defence of a mandate authorized by the
Security Council, is essential to the success of
peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council stresses the role of
the United Nations peacekeepers in supporting
efforts to promote political processes and
peaceful settlements of disputes. The Security
Council underlines the need for precise, full and
effective implementation of mandates and its
intention to continue to review and monitor such
implementation on a regular basis. The Security
Council recognizes the role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charier.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of providing peacekeeping operations
with clear, credible and achievable mandates. It
also recognizes the need for an adequate
provision, management and efficient and
effective use of operational and logistical
resources for peacekeeping operations, in
congruence with approved mandates and based on
a realistic assessment of the situation. The
Security Council also requests that the Secretary-
General include a realistic assessment of how
available capabilities and logistic planning affect
implementation of the various mandate elements
in briefings regarding specific peacekeeping
operations.

"The Security Council welcomes efforts by
Member States to respond more quickly to
requests for the provision of personnel to take
part in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and underlines the importance of swift force
generation in the early stages of mandate
formulation.

"The Security Council believes that United
Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership that draws together the contribution
and commitment of the entire United Nations
system. The Security Council stresses the need to
improve the communication between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
and other stakeholders in accordance with
resolution 1353 (2001) to foster a spirit of
partnership, cooperation, confidence and mutual
trust and to ensure that the Security Council has
the benefit of the views of those serving in the
field when making its decisions about
peacekeeping mandates. The Security Council
also underlines the importance of an improved
system of consultations amongst these actors, in
order to promote a common understanding of the
situation on the ground, of the mission's mandate
and of its implementation. The Council welcomes
practical suggestions to improve this relationship
and underscores the useful role of its Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
recommendations made in its resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001) and in the statements of its
President dated 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22),
4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62), 28 March
1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), 31 January 2001
(S/PRST/2001/3), 17 May 2004 (S/PRST/2004/16)
and 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24) and the note
by its President of 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56)
and confirms its intentions to strengthen further
efforts to implement fully these recommendations.

"The Security Council recalls, in particular,
the statement of its President dated 4 November
1994 (S/PRST/l994/62) and its resolution 1353
(2001) and the decision contained therein to
circulate an informal paper setting out the
agenda, including issues to be covered and
drawing attention to the relevant background
documentation to troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs)
when they are invited to attend meetings with the
Council or the Secretary-General. The Council
requests that the Secretariat circulate to troop-
contributing countries and police-contributing

11-4815]
countries by the 15th of each month notice of and
invitation to the Council's upcoming TCC/PCC
meetings that are anticipated to take place during
the following month on individual peacekeeping
mission mandates. This routine notification
mechanism shall not constrain the Council from
convening additional special, emergency or short-
notice TCC/PCC meetings as circumstances may
make appropriate.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
to improve its access to military advice, including
from troop-contributing countries, and intends to
pursue its work on mechanisms to that effect. The
Council will continue to review the role of the
Military Staff Committee. The Security Council
recognizes the benefit of maintaining regular
contact with mission senior leadership, including
through an annual briefing by heads of military
components. The Council would welcome similar
briefings by heads of police components in order
to improve understanding of operational
challenges.

"The Council expresses its commitment to
continuing to improve its consideration of and
reflection on early peacebuilding tasks in the
mandates and composition of peacekeeping
operations. In this context, the Council notes with
appreciation the contribution that peacekeepers
and peacekeeping missions make to early
peacebuilding and recognizes the need to
integrate mission expertise and experience into
the development of peacebuilding strategies.

"The Council also recognizes the important
work conducted by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly.

"The Council commits to making progress
on the issue of more meaningful engagement with
troop-contributing countries and police-
contributing countries and to reviewing progress
in 2012."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l l/ 17.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes

11-4815]
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Guatemala.

