Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is nice to see you
presiding over the Council, Madam President.

The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and thanks the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fall, for his briefing and
his work and that of his team. We welcome the efforts
of UNOCA in monitoring political peace and security
developments and trends in Central Africa this year.
We also welcome the good offices deployed, the work
on conflict prevention and mediation, support to
peace and security initiatives and efforts to enhance
coherence and coordination in the subregion. I would
like to say how important we also think it is that the
Special Representative continue his efforts to support
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and its members in their work to strengthen
and reform the organization. UNOCA should look
to enhance its work on early warning and analysis,
alongside greater coordination with United Nations
country teams in the subregion, going forward. With
that focus on conflict prevention in mind, let me turn to
some specific country areas within UNOCA's mandate.

The United Kingdom continues to share the
concerns set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/913) about the deteriorating humanitarian
and security situation in the North-West and South-
West regions of Cameroon. We welcome reports and
information that humanitarian access in areas of
Cameroon controlled by the Government of Cameroon
have improved significantly over the past few months.
However, all parties need to do more to ensure that
humanitarian access is protected. I must particularly
condemn attacks on health infrastructure, personnel,
schools, teachers, parents and children, as set out in the
UNOCA report. Human rights violations and abuses
committed by all sides must stop, and all allegations
must be investigated.

Let me say how much the United Kingdom
welcomes the steps of the Government of Cameroon to
convene a national dialogue and, alongside that, secure
the release of detainees. The Government of Cameroon
now needs to ensure that the key recommendations
from the national dialogue are implemented, including
strengthening bilingualism in the educational and
legal systems, decentralization by granting special
status to the North-West and South-West regions
and taking steps to engage diaspora groups. I again
stress that those are the own intentions and policies
of the Government of Cameroon. But we believe that
urgent follow-up on those recommendations is vital to
maintaining momentum. Put simply, words need to be
matched by actions. Failure to do so will only cause
the already concerning situation to deteriorate further.
The United Kingdom remains willing, as it has been
throughout, to continue to support the Government of
Cameroon in carrying out those recommendations and
urges all United Nations bodies to do likewise.

A united approach on Cameroon is important. The
recent Commonwealth-International Organization of
La Francophonie-African Unionjoint visit to Cameroon
helped promote the restoration of peace in the North-
West and South-West regions. We look forward to
hearing about the follow-up recommendations based
on that joint visit. It is imperative that the regional and
wider international community continue to support
credible peacebuilding efforts, including through the
mechanism of the Peacebuilding Fund, and urgently
respond to the growing humanitarian need. We believe
that regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union and ECCAS, play an integral
role. We hope for further joint visits by the United
Nations and the African Union to Cameroon and
neighbouring countries.

Let me welcome the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights technical mission
to Cameroon, which was conducted at the invitation of
its Government, and urge prompt, continued and full
cooperation among all sides to ensure the protection of
civilians and accountability. It is important that there be
follow-up to the visit, including on impunity. Freedom
of political expression must be respected at all times,
including in the run-up to the forthcoming legislative
and municipal elections.

Let me turn briefly to the situation in the Lake Chad
basin. Special Representative Fall reminded us, in his
briefing and report, of the impact of climate change in
that area. The UNOCA report highlighted deplorable
high levels of violence and human displacement,
resulting from Boko Haram and Islamic State in West
Africa attacks on civilian and military targets. The
United Kingdom recognizes the important role of the
countries of the region in supporting stability in the
Lake Chad basin, including through the Multinational
Joint Task Force, and the hosting of refugees. A
number of us were able to hear from the Executive
Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin Commission during
the Peacebuilding Commission's annual session this
week on the progress made with respect to the regional
stabilization, recovery and resilience strategy for areas
affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin region.

All I would say is that I believe that we need to
do more to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2349 (2017) to tackle security, humanitarian and
development crises in the region. We fully support the
cooperation between UNOCA and the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel. We are very
pleased to hear about the joint visits between Special
Representatives Fall and Chambas. We look forward
to an update when reports on those visits are ready, as
well as any conclusions that they draw together on the
way forward.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress made
to date by President Touadera and the authorities of
the Central African Republic since the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic in February. We also welcome
the reactivation of the Central African Republic-
Cameroon and Central African Republic-Democratic
Republic of the Congo bilateral commissions and the
advocacy role played by UNOCA in helping to bring
them about. We remain extremely concerned about the
ongoing political challenges and human rights situation
in Burundi and its humanitarian consequences. The
election scheduled for next year is a critical moment
for Burundi. We urge the Government to work with all
parties to ensure a fair and peaceful election.

Let me conclude by again noting that the report
and the briefing set out a number of areas where the
United Nations, in the form of its Secretariat, agencies,
funds and programmes, and Member States can
support countries and the region in the areas of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. We all need to rise
to that challenge, and UNOCA is key to doing so.

