Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
the candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway; members of
the European Economic Area align themselves with
this statement.

Let me begin with thanking the Special
Representative, Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his briefing,
and commend him with his swift start in this
challenging situation.

Two weeks ago, the Security Council discussed
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, stated that Bosnia is
moving from a "Dayton era" to a "Brussels era". The
European perspective of peace and progress provides
countries in the region a real and important incentive to
replace conflict and confrontation with reconciliation
and reforms. It is in the interest of the European Union
to assist the region to further integrate in Euro-Atlantic
structures. Against that background, the European
Union is engaged with the region through the
comprehensive Stabilisation and Association Process.
Against that same background, the European Union
will in three days' time take over the main peace
stabilization role from the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization in Bosnia.
And finally, against that background, the
European Union is deeply committed to be part of the
discussion on the future of Kosovo. Let me today
briefly touch upon two issues: the current situation in
Kosovo and reform steps as presented in the Eide
report.

On the situation in Kosovo: the positive trend to
address the consequences of the March violence
continues. As the report of the Secretary-General
states, "tangible and encouraging progress" has been
made. Houses and schools are being rebuilt. Those
directly responsible are being brought to justice. The
European Union commends the Kosovan leadership for
their efforts. It will, however, take longer to also
rebuild the confidence and trust of the victims.
Structural outreach to the victimized communities is
now the important next step. This should include a
thorough investigation of those who created an
environment that enabled the violence, like some
media outlets. They may not be criminally liable, but
they are morally responsible, and should therefore be
held no less accountable. As the report describes, after
the derailment of March, Kosovo is getting back on
track to fulfil the implementation of the standards. The
immediate priority for the Kosovars is now to put the
new Government to work. Despite the disappointing
non-participation by the Kosovo Serbs in the elections,
the Government should be representative for the whole
population. And it will have to work effectively on the
priority standards.

The European Union reiterates that a multi-
ethnic, democratic Kosovo is only achievable if the
implementation of the standards is guaranteed. This
requires constructive actions from the new Government
and the minorities themselves, and renewed energy by
both Pristina and Belgrade to engage in a dialogue,
supported by the international community. Belgrade
must also play a constructive and committed role in
enabling Kosovo to implement the standards. In this
regard, the next report of the Secretary-General will be
of great importance. It will reflect the first results of
the new Government. And, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General will more than before focus
on those standards that are essential to a multi-ethnic
Kosovo. Progress is still lacking in the areas of
minority return, security for minorities and freedom of
movement, and reform of local government. Especially
with the winter months coming up, reconstruction
efforts should be doubled.

Turning to the reforms after the Eide report, we
see that in recent weeks and months the Secretary-
General has held a series of consultations on the Eide
report with key Member States, the Contact Group, and
regional organizations such as the European Union. We
commend the Secretary-General for this inclusive
approach and share his conclusion that there is a broad
consensus on a number of important measures. The
measures consist notably of defining priority actions
within the Kosovo standards, the transfer of additional
competencies to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, a greater accountability by the
Provisional Institutions, and a more robust oversight by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

With regard to the transfer of competencies to the
Provisional Institutions, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
identified a number of responsibilities that do not
impinge on sovereignty. The European Union
welcomes the swift transfer of those responsibilities.
This will provide the leadership in Kosovo with a
further opportunity to show the political will to govern
effectively and in accordance with basic principles of
democracy, rule of law and respect for minorities.
Reforming local government will be crucial in this
regard, and the European Union looks forward to early
implementation of pilot decentralization projects. As is
pointed out in the report, additional capacities within
the Provisional Institutions are necessary. In order to
improve coherence of international assistance, we
welcome the fact that a clear needs assessment from
the side of the Provisional Institutions and UNMIK is
under preparation. This will also enable more targeted
support by the European Union, its member States and
its institutions.

A crucial element for the future of Kosovo is
economic development. The Eide report clearly
analysed the detrimental effect of the bleak economic
situation in Kosovo. The European Union looks
forward to responding positively to calls upon the
European Union to develop and implement an
economic plan in accordance with its mandate under
Pillar IV of UNMIK and the Constitutional
Framework. Recognizing the value of a regional,
European-oriented economic strategy, the European
Union notes the importance of the Kosovo Government
taking on greater responsibility for the economy, and
stands ready to help build the capacity of the Kosovo
Government to design and drive forward such a
process. The European Union welcomes the work of
the joint UNMIK and Provisional Institutions
Economic Strategy and Project Identification Group
(ESPIG) and looks forward to close cooperation with
the Provisional Institutions and UNMIK in planning
for development and identifying precise needs.

Last but not least, the European Union fully
supports the further development and evolvement of a
comprehensive and integrated strategy for Kosovo. The
strategy should offer the leadership and population of
Kosovo a chance to show its intentions to establish a
democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo. Consequently, that
will ultimately provide the basis to embark on the
process determining the future status of Kosovo.

