Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to thank the delegation of Ghana for
organizing this open debate on peace consolidation in
West Africa. We welcome the presence of Minister
Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo in conducting our
deliberations. We also acknowledge and welcome the
participation, among others, of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou
Ould-Abdallah. We also thank the Executive Secretary
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Ibn Chambas. We thank them for their
statements and for their work for the United Nations.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
issues that we are discussing today. Unfortunately,
today they do not have the visibility nor the
transparency that they deserve because the press is
focusing on other events that unhappily are taking
place in other geographic areas, as is the case today
with the conflict in the Middle East.

Nevertheless, we wish to point out that the region
of West Africa, which comprises 15 countries and has
more than 260 million people living in a territory of
five million square kilometres, has great political and
economic relevance not only for the continent, but for
the entire world. Some of these countries have
managed to achieve a satisfactory transition from
conflict to the establishment of constitutional and
democratic regimes, as is the case of Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau. Others, like Cote d'Ivoire,
have embarked on the path towards the establishment
of a similar political regime. All of these situations,
with their own characteristics, have required great
efforts and sacrifices as well as the commitment of
both regional actors and the international community
as a whole in order to achieve peace, security and
sustainable development.

While each situation is different, there are
common elements. In the first place, we must not
forget that they share a colonial past that has obviously
had influence in the institutional weaknesses from
which all these new States are suffering. Other
elements common to these crises and to the challenges
facing these countries are the limited possibilities for
economic growth, the need to strengthen and affirm the
State authorities, and a limited experience in the
management of public affairs and also, unfortunately,
corruption.

Also, in some cases there is the question of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons;
needed reforms in the security sectors; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants;
illicit cross-border activities; the worrisome
humanitarian situation that still persists in large areas
of the region; the crucial role of justice and the
struggle against impunity for serious crimes committed
in the past; and the need for education and respect for
human rights.

For all these reasons, we consider it necessary to
adopt a coordinated approach in the search for lasting
solutions to the conflicts in the region, one promoting
the capacity of national institutions to address their
root causes in the framework of a peace consolidation
process. In this regard, it is important to underline the
valuable contribution of regional actors such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the advantages of cooperative work
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
as experience with ECOWAS has demonstrated.

It is worth mentioning the contribution that the
Peacebuilding Commission can make in the future in
helping to build sustainable peace, preventing nations
from sliding back into conflict, and assessing the
existence of the elements essential for stability, from
immediate humanitarian assistance to security
conditions and efforts by authorities to strengthen their
national capacities - to mention but a few of the
necessary elements.

It will be necessary for all the actors involved to
do our utmost for the cause of peace and national
reconciliation in West Africa. Only through
coordinated efforts recognizing the primary role of
each Government and each people in developing its
own conditions that favour growth will we succeed in
reversing the negative consequences of conflicts that
the region has suffered in the past decade. Only in this
way will we leave behind the fragility that persists in
some countries of the region and bring forth the fruits
of a lasting peace.
Once again Argentina thanks you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. We reaffirm our readiness to
cooperate in this endeavour.

06-4607]
Finally, we wish to thank the delegation of Ghana
for the draft presidential statement that it has prepared,
and we reaffirm our readiness to support it.

