Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Along with France, Spain has supported this
draft resolution (S/20l6/846) on Aleppo in order to try
to respond to a desperate situation. During more than
five years ofa heart-breaking conflict in Syria, we have
seen indiscriminate attacks against civilians. We have
seen both parties destroy hospitals, schools and even
humanitarian convoys. We have seen with alarm the
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian army. In spite
of that, we are here today because the worst phase of
the war in Syria could still lie ahead. The offensive by
President Al-Assad against eastern Aleppo is a tragedy
against which the international community cannot turn
its back.

As the French Minister for Foreign Affairs has
correctly said, this draft resolution seeks to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe. We therefore demand an
immediate halt to aerial attacks, which are terrorizing
the 275,000 civilians trapped in the eastern part of the
city. The main goal of the draft resolution is to save
from disaster an ancient city at risk of being levelled
to the ground by the brutality of a fratricidal war.
Spain's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jose Manuel
Garcia Margallo, clearly expressed our view here in the
Security Council when the increase in clashes began
in late September (see S/PV.7774). He identified three
essential steps on which we must focus our efforts.
The first was to ensure that a ceasefire takes
effect; the second was to ensure humanitarian access;
and the third was to create the necessary conditions
to relaunch United Nations mediation. The draft
resolution in effect calls for the immediate observance
of a ceasefire throughout the entire country. We also
aim to improve the monitoring mechanism, which has
not worked as desired in recent months. We call on the
Security Council - for the first time since the war in
Syria began - to send a clear message to the parties to
isolate the terrorist groups in Syria, who are posing a
threat to the entire international community.

Secondly, we aim to ensure once and for all that
humanitarian access is in the hands of the professionals
of the United Nations and of the Red Crescent. It is
intolerable that the Syrian Government continues to
block assistance to its own population, using fictitious
bureaucratic hurdles and deliberate tactics, such as
removing medical materials, which amount to war
crimes. The draft resolution therefore establishes that
it ought to be the United Nations that determines the
number ofbeneficiaries and the needs ofalmost 900,000
civilians in Syria. We also call for an investigation into
the attack on the United Nations-Red Crescent convoy
at Urum Al-Kubra on 19 September. We will not rest
until we have done everything possible to ensure that
those responsible are held accountable before justice.
We hope that, wherever they may, they will listen
clearly to this message today on the part of all members
of the Security Council.

Lastly, the draft resolution calls for a return to
the path of dialogue as soon as possible, while also
expressing our full support for the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General.

France and Spain have done everything within
their power to garner the support of the 15 members
of the Security Council. This has been a sincere
effort to incorporate the various points of view, while
always respecting the main purpose of the draft
resolution - nothing less than avoiding catastrophe in
Aleppo and slowing the escalation of violence. We note
that we are near to achieving consensus. We still hope
that the countries seated around this table will allow the
adoption of this draft resolution. We still have time to
make the right decision.

Lastly, Spain would like to express its gratitude to
the many States Members of the United Nations that
are sponsoring this draft resolution. We interpret that
support as a message that the Security Council should
fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter.
From the seat we occupy here as a non-permanent
member of this organ, we will work tirelessly to ensure
that is the case.

