Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): At the outset, I should
like to express to you, Mr. President, the appreciation
of Algeria for convening this important open debate
on the concept of security sector reform (SSR). I wish
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Aminu Bashir Wali,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, to our meeting
today and thank him for his stewardship of this debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Today's debate is an opportunity for Member States
to identify and clarify the main characteristics and
priorities of the United Nations on SSR, in particular
its normative and operational dimensions. We recall
that SSR was initially introduced in the United
Nations in the context of identifying peacekeeping
exit strategies. This concept has evolved significantly,
to the point where it is becoming a core component of
the Organization's engagement across peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development contexts. We believe
that successful SSR is vital to establishing enduring
peace and stability in countries that are in a post-
conflict peacebuilding phase.

In post-conflict contexts, security institutions
are often weak and dysfunctional, ineffective in
their impact and lacking accepted legitimacy in their
foundation. The failure to address such operational
and accountability deficits has often undermined
the reconstruction efforts of the United Nations and
increased the risk ofa relapse into conflict. The purpose
is to enhance the quality of security sector governance
through a focus on accountability, inclusivity and
effective management and oversight. The United
Nations should be able to provide assistance in this
area, and is particularly well positioned to support such
reforms and may have a comparative advantage relative
to other partners in providing sector-wide support.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General recognizes in
his latest report (S/2013/480) that SSR is pertinent
across the United Nations peacekeeping, human rights,
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and development
agendas.

At the same time, while much progress has been
made, the protracted conflicts, emerging threats and
complex crises witnessed in the world today certainly
require innovative and flexible responses from the
United Nations. To face those challenges, there is a need
to strengthen the role of the United Nations system in
supporting security sector reform as a key tool in the
prevention and management of conflict.

That being said, Algeria believes that there is still
a lot of work to be done in those areas by enhancing
system-wide coherence and coordination, including
through the collaborative efforts of the Task Force, and
by forging partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. The African Union endeavour in its
African Peace and Security Architecture and capacity-
building efforts is, in this regard, the perfect example
that deserves to be taken into account in this area.

The role of the Security Council is crucial in
providing strategic guidance and in defining the
institutional priorities of the United Nations, in
particular due to the fact that security sector reform has
become a key component of Security Council mission
mandates. Furthermore, Security Council mandates are
increasing not only in number but also in complexity in
relation to the demands placed on support for security
sector reform. There is a need, therefore, to reflect on
how these increasing demands are to be met by current
United Nations capacities.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of SSR among other important components
in the context of United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping operations and post-conflict situations
that should be integrated into the broad framework of
United Nations rule-of-law activities, thereby ensuring
that SSR activities and structures are not duplicating the
work carried out in the rule oflaw area. Algeria believes
that the successful implementation of the many tasks
that peacekeeping operations could be mandated to
undertake in the area of SSR requires an understanding
of and action based on a perspective that takes fully
into account the fact that security and development are
intertwined. Equally, we stress the importance of the
mutually reinforcing nature of SSR and all the other
components of the peacekeeping operations when it is
mandated.

Lastly, we think that any development of a United
Nations approach to SSR must take place within the
General Assembly and in accordance with the principle
of national ownership, and that the formulation of SSR
strategies, including its scope and mandate, should be
carried out through the intergovernmental process and
must be context-specific. It is obvious that SSR should
be undertaken at the request of the country concerned,
and we underline the primary responsibility and the
sovereign right ofthe country concerned in determining
its national priorities in this regard.

