Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on organizing today's meeting and on giving us the
opportunity to comment on the report of the Security
Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Before going into the substantive issues, I would
also like to congratulate Ambassador Peter Kolby for
his excellent leadership of the mission and for
introducing the report today. Norway attaches great
importance to the Ethiopia-Eritrea peace process, as
has been demonstrated by the significant contribution it
made in financing the work of the Boundary
Commission. I would also like to thank the
Government of Norway for providing us with the
aircraft which facilitated our mission. Our thanks also
go to the Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea for their
very warm hospitality and, of course, to Ambassador
Legwaila, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) and the members of the Security
Council Secretariat for preparing the mission and for
the facilities provided to the members of the mission.

The mission to the two countries has been
extremely useful, as it has allowed members of the
Council to have first-hand information on the activities
of UNMEE on the ground. The meetings with the
United Nations country teams and the diplomatic corps
in both countries, as well as with the religious leaders,
provided us with insight into the underlying
complexities of the Ethiopian-Eritrean conflict.

We commend the report of the mission, which
faithfully reflects the substance of the meetings and
contains a set of observations and recommendations to
which we fully subscribe.

We believe that the mission to the two countries
was indeed very timely and opportune, especially in the
light of the much-awaited decision of the Boundary
Commission later this month.

As we are entering a crucial stage in the peace
process, we welcome the commitments with regard to
the upcoming decisions of the Boundary Commission
that the leadership of both Ethiopia and Eritrea
reiterated during our mission to the two countries. The
commitment of the two sides to abide by the decisions
of the Boundary Commission as per their undertakings
under the Algiers Agreement constitutes a very
important step in forging a sustained peace between the
countries.

As highlighted in the mission report, we
discussed with the two parties the various steps relating
to the implementation of the decisions of the Boundary
Commission. Once the decisions are known later this
month, it will be extremely important for the two sides
to sit together with UNMEE to discuss ways and means
of implementing them. We would like to mention that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Legwaila, and his team, who have our full
trust and support, will have a very important role to
play in the months ahead. To ensure smooth
implementation of the decisions of the Boundary
Commission, the guarantors, facilitators and witnesses
of the Ethiopian-Eritrean peace process should
continue to use their good offices to urge the two sides
to live up to their obligations under the Algiers
Agreement.

Norway, as we can see, attaches great importance
to this file of the Council, and we would like to suggest
that Norway also use its good offices to complement
Ambassador Legwaila's work of ensuring that the two
parties implement the decisions of the Boundary
Commission.

Once the decisions ofthe Commission are known,
it will be of utmost importance for the two sides to
refrain from any unilateral action that could have
negative repercussions on the peace process. We
highlighted this aspect during our mission to the two
countries and we do likewise today. Hence, all issues
pertaining to the movement of population or troops
should be addressed only through dialogue within the
framework to be established by the United Nations
through the good offices of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Legwaila.

During our mission, we had the opportunity to
visit a school where children's awareness of landmines
is being raised. Indeed, anti-personnel landmines
continue to hinder the proper return of internally
displaced persons. When we met with the leadership of
the two countries, we urged them to live up to their
commitments under the Algiers Agreement to
cooperate fully in ensuring an expeditious demining
process, which will take us to the demarcation stage.

There is no doubt that the continued presence of
UNMEE in Ethiopia and Eritrea will be of extreme
importance until the demarcation and delimitation
process is successfully completed. My delegation is
ready to explore all possibilities that might ensure that
the demining required for paving the way for a
successful demarcation process is efficiently carried
out in a timely manner. It is in this spirit that we would
like to approach the draft resolution that would extend
the mandate of UNMEE. We are also ready to consider
a change in the mandate of UNMEE to include
demining activities.

