The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Timor-Leste in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item Without the right to vote, in
accordance With the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gaterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2006/414, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. Members also have before them
document 5/2006/383, which contains a letter date
13 June 2006 from the Secretary-General transmitting
a letter from the President, the President of the
National Parliament and the Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, and document 5/2006/391, which contains a
letter dated 13 June 2006 from the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste transmitting a letter
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
and Minister for Defence of Timor-Leste.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1690 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10. 25 am.
06-39542

