Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to express our
appreciation to Cote d'Ivoire's presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's very important debate.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
President of the Economic Community of West African
States for their valuable insights.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Vietnam shares the view of other Member States
on the primary importance of conflict prevention
in all peace processes and the need to strengthen the
cooperation between and among the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations and States. We
are pleased to see that the United Nations, including
the Security Council, has attached greater importance
to its ties with regional actors at all stages of conflict
prevention and resolution. With a view to making that
collaboration more effective, we would like to highlight
the following points.

First, the State has a crucial role in the maintenance
of law and order, in addressing the root causes of
conflict and in fully adhering to international law
while conducting its relations with other countries.
At the same time, the United Nations and regional
organizations play a vital role in upholding and
promoting the principles of international law that
govern friendly relations among States.

Secondly, the United Nations, with its vast
experience and expertise in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping should provide support and assistance to
Member States and regional organizations. Meanwhile,
regional organizations have comparative advantages
with their in-depth understanding of all aspects of
conflict dynamics. Therefore, synergy among the
United Nations and regional organizations should be
strengthened, including through information-sharing,
the exchange of experiences and dialogue facilitation
and mediation, where appropriate.

Thirdly, a comprehensive approach should be
developed in the prevention and settlement of conflicts,
given the interlinkage of all of the issues that we are
dealing with in today's world. Economic development
and social progress cannot be achieved without a
peaceful, stable and secure environment, and vice
versa. We therefore strongly believe that it is necessary
to enhance the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in all political, security,
economic and sociocultural areas so as to strengthen
their collaboration, including by jointly addressing
emerging regional and global challenges.

Finally, as a member State of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Viet Nam would
like to share our experience deriving from what we
have done in ASEAN and within the cooperation
framework of ASEAN and the United Nations. Since its
creation, ASEAN has made continuous efforts to turn
Southeast Asia from a region of mistrust, turbulence
and instability into a region of mutual confidence
and cooperation. That achievement may be attributed
to ASEAN's efforts at norm-building and sharing.
Dialogue and consultation have long been the so-called
ASEAN Way, which seeks to narrow differences,
promote mutual trust and understanding and build
consensus. ASEAN has been taking a leading role
in the creation of various ASEAN-led frameworks to
engage external partners.

The cooperation between ASEAN and the United
Nations is of great importance to ASEAN. We are
pleased with the progress in the implementation of the
Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on
Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the
United Nations (2016-2020) through various practical
activities, including the holding of regular meetings,
dialogues on global issues ofcommon concern, capacity-
building, information-sharing, training and technical
assistance in humanitarian affairs, peacekeeping,
efforts to counter terrorism, cybersecurity and so forth.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our strong commitment
to working closely with other Member States at the
bilateral, regional and international levels towards our
common goal ofglobal peace, security and development.

