Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic of Serbia. I
thank him and Mr. Skender Hyseni for their statements.
I should likewise like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his comprehensive briefing. I shall now
proceed to make the following four comments.

First, my delegation welcomes the relative
improvement in the security situation in Kosovo. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2010/5),
there has been a decrease over the past year in the
number of incidents involving minorities. Another
positive development has been the return to duty by
Kosovo Serb police officers. However, the fragile
security situation in northern Kosovo remains a cause
for concern. We therefore urge all parties to protect
ethnic minorities, exercise restraint and avoid any
measures that might threaten stability and peaceful
coexistence there.

Secondly, with respect to the missions stationed
in Kosovo, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in maintaining security and stability,
facilitating dialogue and reconciliation and promoting
regional cooperation. We are also reassured by the
improved relations between UNMIK and the Kosovo
authorities. We therefore urge the Kosovo authorities to
continue coordinating and cooperating with the United
Nations Mission in a constructive and realistic way.

On the other hand, we commend the close
cooperation between the United Nations with both the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force within the status-neutral framework,
as stipulated in resolution 1244 (1999). We urge all
international partners to pursue coordination and
information exchange with UNMIK in areas of
common interest.

Thirdly, with respect to the elections, we praise
the quiet and organized atmosphere in which the
municipal elections took place. We are also pleased
that the current Government will not prosecute those
Kosovo Serbs who chose to participate in these
elections.

Fourthly, with respect to cooperation on
humanitarian, cultural and development issues, and
although we understand the differing viewpoints
between the parties regarding the status of Kosovo,
while awaiting the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice in this context we call on
all parties to set aside their differences and to
cooperate with each other on humanitarian and
development issues in order to improve the lives of all
Kosovars, regardless of their affiliations.

On the one hand, there is the urgent humanitarian
issue of refugees and displaced persons. The Kosovo
authorities should create conditions conducive to their
safe and voluntary return, since the number of
returnees has been minimal. From this perspective, it is
essential not to politicize the return of refugees, but to
address their security and development concerns. We
also call on local authorities to take measures to
improve the situation in internally displaced persons
camps, especially those located in areas contaminated
with lead, and to address health risks in cooperation
with the United Nations and the relevant humanitarian
organizations.

On the other hand, regarding the cultural heritage
issue, there is a genuine opportunity for both Belgrade
and Pristina to cooperate in developing a special
mechanism on cultural heritage that brings mutual
benefits to and builds trust between both parties. We
share the Secretary-General's disappointment with the
failure thus far to establish such a mechanism, and we
urge both concerned parties to show openness and
constructive practicality in seeking a solution to this
issue.

Finally, we encourage Belgrade and Pristina to
resume direct and constructive dialogue in order to
avoid creating a climate of tension and confrontation.
We believe it crucial for all parties to reach a peaceful
solution to this issue, in view of its potential positive
impact on security and stability in the West Balkans.

