Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Before making my statement, I would like to extend
my congratulations to the new Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Sir Emyr Jones Parry, on his assumption of his post.
We will be cooperating closely with him. I trust that
the cooperative and friendly relations that we have had
with the United Kingdom Mission in the past will be
continued and indeed strengthened during his term.

I would first like to thank you, Madame
President, for convening this public meeting on the
work of the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999). I would also like to
thank Ambassador Munoz of Chile for his briefing and
to congratulate him on his assumption of the
Chairmanship of the Committee. I would also like to
welcome the presence of the Chairman of the
Monitoring Group of the Committee, Mr. Chandler, and
other Committee members.

Terrorism is the common enemy of the
international community. The terrorist bombings that
have taken place recently in Saudi Arabia, Chechnya,
Morocco and Afghanistan indicate that the Taliban and
Al Qaeda still constitute a serious threat to
international peace and security and to regional peace
and stability.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) as a sanctions
mechanism, targeting the Taliban, Al Qaeda and
relevant entities and individuals, has shown us the
importance of studying and analysing changes in the
level of threat posed by Al Qaeda; continuously
updating the list of entities and individuals subject to
sanctions; and assisting States in the implementation of
their sanctions measures and in monitoring and
enhancing these measures.
The Committee addresses the sources of funding
and weapons used in the planning and carrying out of
terrorist attacks by Al Qaeda in order to determine if
these links can effectively be severed and whether
illegal cross-border activities by terrorist elements can
be forcefully combated. This is an important and
indispensable part of the counter-terrorism struggle
waged by the Security Council and the world as a
whole.

Recently the Committee took a series of active
measures to implement the resolutions of the Security
Council and to enhance the work of the Committee.
These include improvement of the consolidated list, the
revision and expansion of the guidelines for the work
of the Committee, and the drawing up of guidelines for
Member States in the formulation of their
implementation reports.

The Committee still faces an arduous task,
however. I should like to make three proposals
concerning the work of the Committee and of its
Monitoring Group.

The first area of importance is for the Committee
to strengthen its capacity for analysis and research, and
to implement and improve sanctions against Al Qaeda
and the Taliban. The views and proposals of the
Committee and of the Monitoring Group provide
important guidance. We encourage the Committee and
the Monitoring Group to acquire firsthand information
and to use precise evidence as a basis for strengthening
its analytical work, and we appeal to States to
cooperate with, and support, the work of the
Committee and the Monitoring Group.

Secondly, coordination and cooperation with the
Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
must be strengthened. Both committees are important
mechanisms in the Security Council's counter-
terrorism efforts. The strengthening of exchanges will
be helpful in order to avoid duplication, improve
efficiency and move forward in the struggle against
terrorism. We welcome and support the momentum
achieved recently by the two Committees in
strengthening cooperation.

Thirdly, the practicality of the consolidated list
must be improved and enhanced. This list is an
important tool for Member States in implementing
sanctions. Through the efforts of the Committee, the
consolidated list has been rendered even more useful.
We hope that additional efforts can be made to improve
it in order to ensure that the information provided is as
detailed, accurate and specific as possible.
China has always attached great importance to,
and actively participated in, the work of the Committee
and has strictly applied the sanctions adopted by the
Security Council through its resolutions. China, too,
faces the scourge of terrorism. East Turkestan terrorist
organizations have been receiving long-term training,
arms and funding from the Taliban and Al Qaeda. They
have been carrying out terrorist acts in China and in the
Central Asian countries and are an important part of
the international terrorist forces. Opposing East
Turkestan terrorist organizations is an important aspect
of the international counter-terrorist struggle.

Last year, at the request of China and of other
concerned countries, the Committee put the major East
Turkestan organization, the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement, on the consolidated list. We hope that other
East Turkestan terrorist organizations also will be
included on that list. We will continue to work closely
with the members of the Committee and to contribute
to the strict implementation of Security Council
resolution 1455 (2003) and of other resolutions and to
the global struggle against terrorism.

