I am very happy to hear Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi speak today and to join today's important debate. I sincerely thank the President of the Council for convening this open debate and thank the briefers for their informative briefings. The long-known nexus between terrorism and organized crime is turning into a greater and more real threat, presenting each and every society - all of us - with deadly consequences. I believe that we are all in a very dangerous situation at present. As we speak, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has somewhat diverted our attention and resources away from our common fight against terrorism and organized crime and their nexuses. As we speak, COVID-19 and its dire consequences are hampering our efforts to realize the Sustainable Development Goals. The pandemic is not only deepening development gaps and exacerbating poverty, but it is also creating fertile breeding grounds for organized crime and terrorism, permitting them to flourish in many parts of the world. As we speak, terrorists and organized-crime actors are wasting no time to hone their deadly skills and schemes to attack innocent people and the general public. Indeed, these actors have become more organized, digitalized and globalized. I truly appreciate the leadership of Foreign Minister Marsudi and particularly her convening today's important debate. Unless and until concerted efforts and effective measures are taken against the threats of terrorism and organized crimes, the efforts and accomplishments that we have made towards maintaining peace and security and towards spreading prosperity may be lost. Against this backdrop, we believe that the Security Council should and could play a more active role in these endeavours. Of course, the United Nations addressed this issue early on and, over the years, has adopted several resolutions and set aside resources for tackling it. However, it is time we address this issue not only from the technical perspective but also from the strategic perspective, both in the short term and for the long term. In this regard, I wish to share four points from Viet Nam's perspective. First, it is important to stress that the States Members of the United Nations, with their exclusive legal right to the use of force within their jurisdictions, have the primary responsibility for countering terrorism and organized crime. The measures adopted against terrorism and organized crime, as well as their linkages, should be taken in conformity with the United Nations Charter, international law and respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries concerned. In addition, they should abide by and help to further the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. Secondly, it is time we develop, mainstream and substantially invest in a comprehensive approach to address the root causes of terrorism and organized crimes in Member States, including, but not limited to, extreme poverty, inequality, unemployment and social marginalization. We are also facing the risk of human crisis as a consequence of COVID-19. Thirdly, we need to enhance regional and international cooperation in combating terrorism and organized crimes, particularly in preventing financing for terrorism and the recruitment flows. To that end, we support closer coordination among United Nations relevant agencies, namely, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). And I am very happy that UNODC Executive Director Ghada Fathi Waly and Under- Secretary-General Voronkov are here with us today. Fourthly, the international community can further support countries, especially developing ones, in exchanging information and sharing experience and best practices in building up capacity. Areas needing special attention include border control and management, legislation and judiciary assistance. Viet Nam has in recent years done its utmost to improve the legal, economic and financial framework to better reduce the risk of terrorist financing, combat organized crime and fulfil our obligations under Security Council resolutions and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. At the regional level, Viet Nam and the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) view the fight against terrorism and organized crime as an issue of utmost importance. As ASEAN continue its community building process with greater levels of exchanges of people, goods and services, consequently the risks of organized crime and terrorism also increase. The Organization has repeatedly reaffirmed its political commitment and coordinated actions to adopt various frameworks to better share information and best practices, with a view to enhancing regional and international cooperation in the fight against terrorism and organized crime and their potential linkage. Among those, the 2019-2021 Work Plan of the Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime detailed 10 crimes that ASEAN should focus on, namely, terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, illicit trafficking of wildlife and timber, trafficking in persons, piracy, arms smuggling, international economic crime, cybercrime, people smuggling and money laundering. In conclusion, let me quote Secretary-General Guterres, in his remarks just last month at the launch of the Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week: "Like the virus, terrorism does not respect national borders. It affects all nations and can only be defeated collectively. So we must harness the power of multilateralism to find practical solutions." In response to this call, Viet Nam reiterates its commitment to working closely with Member States and all relevant stakeholders in combating the threats of terrorism and transnational organized crime to regional and international peace, security and prosperity.
