Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to express my deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to your team for your hard work this
month and for the professional way in which you led the
Security Council deliberations.

Together, we were able to adopt a number
of resolutions, presidential statements and press
statements, which reflected the unity of the
Security Council towards the various issues under
its consideration. You, Sir, were also keen to provide
the press with information after informal consultations
held in January.

In our view, the holding of today's meeting
represents an occasion to review the Council's work
during an unusually eventful month. In that regard,
I would like to highlight some of the important
achievements of your presidency and address additional
points, as follows.

First, the important field visit of Council members
to Afghanistan was the first since 2010. It demonstrated
the Council's commitment to closely monitoring
the latest developments in one of the most important
conflicts on its agenda. We reaffirm the importance
of such field visits, which provide an opportunity to
follow developments on the ground in conflict zones,
understand the real challenges faced by countries in
question and realize the responsibilities of the Council
to meet all needs and requirements so as to achieve
international peace and security.

Secondly, the open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
(S/PV.8167), proved that it is now high time to end the
Israeli occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories
so that the Palestinian people can exercise all their
rights, including their right to establish a Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and along the
4 June 1967 borders, as provided for in the resolutions
of international legitimacy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Thirdly, Kuwait is co-penholder with Sweden
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. As such, we
are prepared to take the lead in reaching a unified
position in the Council to improve the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria; to expand the range of
humanitarian assistance so that it can reach different
parts of Syria, such as Eastern Ghouta, Idlib, and north
of Aleppo; and to provide protection to civilians in the
light of the increasing violence there.

Fourthly, with regard to presidential note S/2017/507,
we have come together today to implement its most
salient elements. As Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, I take this opportunity to announce, in
my capacity as President of the Council next month,
that we will hold an open debate in the first week of
February to hear statements and recommendations by
United Nations States Members - not only Security
Council members - on how to increase transparency
and improve the performance of the Security Council.
That will allow us to identify ways to improve our
working methods during our presidency.

In conclusion, I thank all Council members that
have offered their good wishes and support to Kuwait's
presidency of the Council as of tomorrow. We look
forward to cooperating with all Council members
so that the Council can carry out its tasks, shoulder
its responsibilities and implement its mandate for
maintaining international peace and security. We will
ensure that the presidency is transparent and cooperative
in a constructive manner with all Member States.

