Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Malaysian presidency for
organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict, and to further thank Dato Sri Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, for presiding
over today's meeting.

Let me also thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Eunice Apio,
Director of the Facilitation for Peace and Development
organization, for their comprehensive briefings and
thoughtful analyses.

We applaud the efforts of the Malaysian presidency
on behalf of resolution 2225 (2015) adopted today, of
which Georgia was a sponsor.

My country fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.

The Secretary-General states in his latest annual
report on the item before us: "There were unprecedented
challenges in 2014 with regard to the protection of tens
of millions of children growing up in situations affected
by conflict". (S/2015/409, para.5) To our dismay, that
is today's reality. UNICEF called 2014 "a devastating
year for children, with as many as 15 million caught
in conflicts in Palestine, Syria, Iraq, South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, and Ukraine".

We believe that the Council should address this
important issue more actively and resolutely, because
we face an ever-increasing trend of violence against
children in both conflict and non-conflict situations,
including violence committed by non-State actors.

Despite broad understanding of the nature of the
problem and despite the numerous efforts at the regional
and international levels to address them, we have yet to
see tangible progress on the ground. Children continue
to be abducted in armed-conflict situations, recruited as
combatants, and boys and girls continue to fall victim
to acts of violence, murder, maiming and arbitrary
detention committed by parties to conflict across the
globe. Boko Haram's abduction of hundreds of women
and girls in Chibok and the kidnappings in Syria and
Iraq committed by Daesh are glaring examples of the
types of gross Violations to which children are subjected
in armed conflicts. The areas controlled by non-State
actors and terrorist groups, as well as territories under
foreign occupation, are zones of grave risk for children,
with imminent threats to their lives by actors who
operate in total disregard for internationally recognized
legal norms.

Let me use this opportunity to reiterate that the
issue of child protection is of great importance for
Georgia. Our Government spares no effort to ensure
adequate living conditions for children affected
by internal displacement. Such measures include
expanding social and education assistance programmes
and implementing a comprehensive national strategy.
Unfortunately, my Government has been deprived of
the opportunity to address the humanitarian needs of
children affected by conflict who live in regions that
remain under illegal Russian military occupation. We
are extremely concerned that fundamental human
rights continue to be violated on a daily basis. That
becomes especially disturbing considering the absence
of international monitoring mechanisms inside the
occupied regions of Georgia. Children residing in
the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions are deprived of
minimal safeguards for the protection of their rights,
as envisioned by the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child.

The Georgian children living under foreign
occupation are being prevented from exercising their
fundamental right to education in their mother tongue,
which is guaranteed by the Constitution of Georgia and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Freedom
of movement is also severely restricted for Georgian
children living under occupation. The intensive
process of the installation of barbed-wire fences
and embankments along the occupation line in the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions significantly affects
the livelihoods of the local population, including
those of children. Russian military forces do not allow
schoolchildren to cross the occupation line to attend
classes on the territory controlled by the Georgian
Government. On a number of tragic occasions, even
people seeking medical care have died en route to the
hospital after being denied passage across the dividing
line. We fear that the so-called integration treaties
recently signed by the Russian Federation with the
aforementioned Georgian regions will cause further
deterioration in the living conditions of the families
residing inside the occupied territories.

We once again call on the Russian Federation to
respect the fundamental principles of international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the
Helsinki Final Act and other legal instruments within
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as the provisions of the August 2008
ceasefire agreement between Georgia and Russia.

We have a common responsibility to strengthen
our efforts to protect children in armed conflict. We
need to take concrete and tangible steps to alleviate the
consequences of armed hostilities for new generations
and safeguard their rights and freedoms. For its part,
Georgia stands ready to contribute to concerted
international efforts and to help ensure more effective
protection of the population caught up in armed conflict
or in post-conflict situations.

