Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and giving us
the opportunity to speak. We commend the Secretary-
General for his unremitting attention to the issue.
According to the United Nations, since 25 August
nearly half a million people have entered Bangladesh,
fleeing violence in northern Rakhine state. Despite
serious constrains, Bangladesh has given shelter to
these distressed Rohingyas, a majority of whom are
women and children. Our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, has personally stood by the side of this most
persecuted minority in the world.

We are providing these forcibly displaced Myanmar
nationals with basic and emergency humanitarian
assistance. The international community has come
forward in the spirit of responsibility sharing, although
the United Nations and other relevant partners are
stretched beyond their capacity. Our authorities are
also conducting biometric registrations of all those
who arrived in the past month. With this fresh influx,
Bangladesh is currently hosting over 900,000 forcibly
displaced Rohingyas from Myanmar. This is an
untenable situation, to say the least.

Despite claims to the contrary, violence has not
ceased in northern Rakhine state, nor has the exodus
of Rohingyas to Bangladesh. Last night alone, an
additional 20,000 entered Bangladesh. Any individual
among the new arrivals would make it known why this
exodus is continuing. They all speak of the use of rape
as a weapon to scare families to leave. Available reports
suggest that village upon village have been burnt,
homes have been looted and people have been abused
in Rakhine state. Those atrocities attest to the fact that
the Myanmar Government is using arson to depopulate
northern Rakhine and take ownership of the land.

The indiscriminate killing and torture by the
Myanmar security forces, aided by vigilante groups
acting on the basis of religious and ethnic affiliation,
have already been cited as a textbook example of ethnic
cleansing by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. That was also emphasized by our Prime
Minister in her statement before the General Assembly
(see A/72/PV.l4). The Security Council perhaps has a
responsibility to examine whether military operations
and consequent developments in northern Rakhine
state point to any threat to peace or breach of the peace,
and what can be done to restore peace.

In the present circumstances, it is of utmost
importance that the remaining Rohingya civilians in

northern Rakhine State be guaranteed unconditional
protection by creating United Nations-administered
safe zones inside Myanmar. We must ensure that the
humanitarian assistance provided reaches all affected
communities, in particular the Rohingyas. Myanmar
must ensure full and unfettered humanitarian access to
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies.

In line with our zero-tolerance policy towards
terrorism and violent extremism, we have unequivocally
condemned the alleged attacks on the Myanmar
security forces by extremist elements and offered to
help Myanmar to combat terrorism through coordinated
patrols, joint inspections and even joint operations.
Regrettably, against the backdrop of our overtures, we
have heard senior Myanmar leaders and officials of state
entities referring to the alleged extremists as "Bengali
terrorists". There is perhaps no taker for the baseless
and malicious propaganda that projects the Rohingyas
as illegal immigrants from Bangladesh. This is not only
a blatant denial of the ethnic identity of the Rohingyas,
but also an affront to Bengalis all over the world. It has
to stop.

Myanmar claims that half of the Muslim villages
are vacant, despite the presence of about 30,000
military and other forces. Myanmar's official narrative
also claims that a particular terrorist group has gathered
such strength and capacity that it has been able it to
enlist most male members of the Rohingya community
in northern Rakhine state and use civilians and
children as combatants and human shields. This state
of volatility constitutes a larger threat to regional peace
and security and, as such, should be a major security
concern for the international community, including
the Council.

Likewise, the new narratives of Muslims killing
Muslims or Muslims killing Hindus should be perceived
as the State's failure or abnegation of its primary
responsibility to protect its civilians. Allegations and
counter-allegations of various forms of atrocities,
which amount to crimes against humanity, must be
fully investigated by a Security Council-mandated fact-
finding mission.

The Council should also take into account that
Myanmar has reportedly deployed more than two
divisions of armed forces in areas near our border since
the first week of August. Troops have been spotted
within 200 metres ofthe zero line, and heavy armaments
and artillery are reportedly placed in close proximity
to our border. There have been 19 reported incidents
of Bangladesh's air space being violated by Myanmar
helicopters and drones, including the latest one the day
before yesterday. Anti-personnel mines have reportedly
been laid along one stretch of the border to prevent the
return of Rohingyas to Myanmar. Incidents of firing on
Bangladeshi fishermen have resulted in the death one
earlier this week.

Bangladesh continues to exercise utmost restraint
in the face of such repeated, unwarranted and wilful
provocations. As a responsible and responsive State,
we shall forge ahead in seeking a peaceful and lasting
solution to this protracted situation through diplomacy,
dialogue and cooperation. Accordingly, our Prime
Minister made a five-point proposal last week before
the General Assembly that has been largely echoed
by the Secretary-General and Council members this
afternoon. Pursuant to those points, the immediate
priorities should be to cease all forms of violence and
ensure protection and humanitarian assistance for those
affected or vulnerable in Rakhine state.

At the same time, Bangladesh looks forward
to immediately start working with Myanmar and
the international community to help implement the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State and ensure the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of all those displaced from Myanmar
into our territory over the years, including the
recent arrivals.

In this regard, previous precedents, including
the 1992 arrangement, can be used by adapting them
to current realities, challenges and priorities. In that
regard, Bangladesh prefers joint verification in the
presence of international observers. The forcibly
displaced Myanmar nationals should return to their
places of original abode in safety, security and
dignity. As our Prime Minister stated in the General
Assembly, "The crisis has its root in Myanmar and its
solution has to be found in Myanmar" (A/72/PV14).
Bangladesh, however, remains committed to engaging
with Myanmar and the international community for a
resolution of this outstanding critical issue.

Our experience from the past three decades makes
it obvious that the bilateral track loses its momentum
as soon as the international community shifts its
attention elsewhere. We therefore urge the Council
to keep this issue at the forefront of its agenda and
make sure that we manage to arrive to the point of its
logical conclusion. We also invite Council members to
conduct a field mission to Bangladesh, and possibly to
Myanmar, to gather first-hand accounts of the unfolding
humanitarian crisis.

Before concluding, I must, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Bangladesh, express our
deepest appreciation for the show of support extended
to us by each member of the Council this afternoon.

