Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I wish
to also take this opportunity to thank the Permanent
Mission of Venezuela for its presidency of the Council
last month.

At the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
to the United States for its efforts in preparing resolution
2270 (2016), which has been adopted today, and to China
for its diplomatic and political efforts aimed at restoring
stability to and ensuring security on the Korean
peninsula, as well as for its support of the preparation
of the resolution. Today's unanimous adoption of

resolution 2270 (2016) sends the strong message that
the members of the Security Council do not accept the
recent actions undertaken by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, be it the conduct of nuclear testing
or the launching of ballistic missiles, which represent
breaches of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and international legitimacy and undermine the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
its entirety.

I also wish to register our satisfaction with the
balanced language of the resolution, which takes a
political direction with regard to the resumption of the
six-party talks and the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, while also taking care to avoid aggravating
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. My delegation is of the view that the
resolution constitutes a step on the long road to prevent
circumvention of the NPT.

Egypt has repeatedly warned against the use of
double standards with regard to challenges to the
Treaty and denuclearization. One State in the Middle
East remains outside of the Treaty. The members of the
Security Council are well aware of the abysmal failure
of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
to produce an outcome document, due to the double
standards applied by certain influential international
parties. Neither Egypt nor the States ofthe Middle East
will ever accept this state of affairs. The adoption of
resolution 2270 (2016) is an optimal opportunity to
remind the international community and the members
of the Council of that fact, and calls upon them to fulfil
their responsibilities on that score.

