Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. My delegation, aware of your vast diplomatic
experience and of your intellectual acumen, is convinced
that under your presidency the work of the Council this
month will be successful. We offer our complete
cooperation to you and to the delegation of China.

I also wish to express to Ambassador Juan Somavia
and the Chilean delegation our sincerest congratulations on
the excellent work done during the month of April,
testifying to the talent and professional skills characteristic
of Chilean diplomacy.
In his report of 30 April 1996 on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), the Secretary-
General notes that the progress achieved by the Government
of Angola and UNITA towards the implementation of the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol is disappointing, and that
the parties had not yet fulfilled many of the tasks that they
had agreed to carry out in April to consolidate the peace
process.

In fact, although it is positive that the dialogue
between the parties has been maintained, that the military
situation remains stable, and that the Government of Angola
is moving forward with the quartering of the rapid reaction
police and the withdrawal of its forces from points near
the UNITA quartering areas, in general the political
situation in Angola is characterized by slowness in the
implementation of a number of elements fundamental to
the success of the peace process in that country.

While in the past two months there has been some
progress in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
that progress does not live up to the hopes raised by the
commitments undertaken by the parties at the meeting in
Libreville, Gabon, on 1 March 1996. There are clear
delays in meeting the successive timetables agreed by the
parties, particularly as regards the full quartering of all
the UNITA troops, their disarmament, negotiations for
their integration into the Angolan Armed Forces and the
establishment of a joint military command.

My delegation considers that UNITA must accelerate
the quartering of its troops, in accordance with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1045 (1996),
and turn over to UNAVEM. III all its weapons and
military equipment, since further delays in the
accomplishment of these important tasks greatly affect the
peace process and, as is rightly indicated by the
Secretary-General in his report, lead to a decline in
discipline among the UNITA soldiers and a rapid
depletion of United Nations resources if the stay of the
troops already quartered there is further prolonged. It is
also necessary that the parties conclude military talks on
outstanding issues during this month of May, in
accordance with the timetable of tasks of the Joint
Commission.

The present situation of Angola requires that the
parties take concrete measures to speed the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, the fulfilment of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
commitments undertaken in Libreville, reiterating their
decision to form a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation by the month of July in order to avoid
affecting the peace process.
My delegation also considers it necessary that the
parties show their firm will for peace by cooperating in
demining activities, in order to allow the free circulation
of persons and goods, destroying existing mines and their
stockpiles, disarming the civilian population and adopting
measures that ensure the safety and security of UNAVEM
personnel and the personnel of the humanitarian
organizations working in Angola.

 

Furthermore, it is necessary that an end be put to
hostile propaganda. In this respect, we consider it of vital
importance that the Government of Angola facilitate the
establishment of a United Nations radio to help in
confidence-building and in national reconciliation.

With regard to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission, my delegation considers that it not only helps in
observing the cease-fire and is an important factor in
bringing stability to Angola, but it also plays an important
role in the rehabilitation of roads and in mine clearance. In
addition, it conducts activities related to promoting respect
for human rights and related to the voluntary
implementation of humanitarian projects. Its presence is
therefore a necessity, and no matter how unsatisfactory the
level of implementation of the Lusaka Protocol may be
now, my delegation agrees to an extension of its mandate
for two months. We will vote in favour of the draft
resolution, although, taking into account the fact that many
tasks remain pending in the peace process in Angola, we
would have preferred a longer period of time to make it
possible for UNAVEM. to fully accomplish its mission.

