Mr. Zenawi (Ethiopia): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to join previous speakers in commending you for
your initiative, in South Africa's capacity as President
of the Security Council for this month, to organize this
timely meeting. The meeting could pave the way to
more effective collaboration between our institutions.

We all know that primary responsibility for
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council. In that regard, the Council has been dealing
with security challenges in Africa on a continuous
basis. Indeed, as our continent has over the years had
more than its fair share of conflicts, African issues
have constituted a very significant part of the Security
Council's deliberations on peace and security. We in
Africa too have been exerting efforts to prevent,
resolve and manage conflicts on our continent,
including through the establishment of a
comprehensive peace and security architecture within
the African Union. We bring a number of strengths to
the table in resolving African conflicts.

I am confident that we would all agree that there
is a great deal of room for fruitful collaboration
between the two institutions, consistent with the
Security Council's primacy in terms of its
responsibility for international peace and security. In
that regard, I welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on this matter (S/2008/ 186) and, in particular,
his proposal to establish a panel to look at the issue of
ensuring predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
for peace operations of the African Union. I would like
to urge the Security Council to speedily consider the
recommendations of such a panel, and to act on them,
as such a funding arrangement could be crucial in
saving many African lives. As this process is bound to
take some time, I would urge the Security Council, in
the meantime, to support the African Union in its
peacekeeping operations on the continent, particularly
in Somalia. The African Union was unable to deploy
the full contingent of peacekeepers in Somalia solely
because of a lack of funding, and with the support of
the Security Council Africa will be better able to
support the people and the Government of Somalia in
achieving peace.

