My statement is aligned with that of the delegation of the European Union (annex 21). I would like to congratulate the Nigerien presidency of the Security Council for organizing this open debate, which continues to assess threats to peace and security from a global and three-way point of view. I also thank the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, Ibrahim Thiaw, as well as Land Ambassador Inna Modja, for their statements. I would like to start by recalling the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire and supporting resolution 2532 (2020), as they are relevant to the issue at hand. We cannot continue to talk about the so-called triple nexus - humanitarian affairs, development, peace and security - without clearly including climate and environmental issues. The coronavirus disease requires a global response that takes environmental issues into account at all stages for two reasons: first, because for any solution to be effective it must take into account the effects of climate change and the environmental situation; secondly, because the effects of climate change can worsen the situation of vulnerability of people and pose an added element of inequality in accessing a dignified life and breaking the cycle of vulnerability and poverty. The maintenance of international peace and security requires us to strengthen humanitarian action, the protection of civilians and development instruments so that they contribute to building resilient and inclusive societies that respect human rights. Our goal of leaving no one behind will be possible only if we include environmental issues and their impact on the agenda of the Council on a more regular basis. To that end, relevant data and serious analysis of climate factors and conditions will be essential for both prevention and early action, as well as mitigation. In the twenty-first century, climate is a critical determinant of peacebuilding policies. Spain fully shares the Niger's position on this issue. Preserving the environment means preserving livelihoods, such as agriculture and livestock, which are essential in countries facing situations of vulnerability. And preserving the environment means protecting civilians. Climate change is a threat to the lives of millions of people, to food security and clean water supplies, to health and diversity and to stability, peace and security. Therefore, Spain has developed a guide to mainstreaming the environment into all humanitarian actions of our country, which will be officially presented in the coming weeks. We believe that this is the only way that we will contribute to the goal of saving lives and responding effectively to the needs of the most vulnerable people. Another of Spain's priorities is defending and respecting international humanitarian law, which protects the environment in situations of armed conflict. I therefore recall the obligation of parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian law at all times. I conclude by recalling that, in order to respond in the best possible way to the crisis that we are facing, it is imperative that the Security Council take into account the environment and climate change in the reports that are ordered, the decisions that are adopted, the mandates that are approved, the measures that are designed and the effective response that is planned.
