Mr. Mogae: Mr. President, I thank you for the
opportunity to address the Security Council by video-
teleconference today.

In October 2015, I was appointed to chair the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), the
body charged with overseeing the implementation
of the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The
Agreement provides that the JMEC Chairperson may
report to the Security Council at any time should there
be need for remedial action in the implementation ofthe
Agreement. It is my duty to report that in the months
intervening since the Agreement was signed and JMEC
began its work, as I reported to the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union about three weeks ago,
the progress made to date in implementation has been
limited and lags far behind the timetables specified
in the Agreement and in subsequent arrangements
between the parties themselves.

Despite its imperfections, the Agreement provides
the best opportunity for South Sudan to restore peace
and stability. But the Agreement is only as strong as
the political will that accompanies it, and, on this front,
the resilience of the South Sudanese people continues
to be severely tested by their leaders. Despite the
repeated commitments leaders have made to uphold the
Agreement, the test of timely implementation has not
been met. The parties have consistently demonstrated
that there is still much distrust and reluctance
to overcome.

Before suggesting what could usefully be done
to accelerate implementation, I should acknowledge
the progress that has been made to date. First, after
several months of discussion, the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army In Opposition (SPLM/A In Opposition) advance team returned to the capital,
Juba, in late December 2015, after JMEC intervened
to determine the parameters for return. Secondly,
JMEC and a number of other institutions provided for
in the Agreement, such as the Joint Military Ceasefire
Commission, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee, have begun to
meet. Thirdly, some steps towards the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity have been
taken, including the amicable distribution of ministerial
portfolios in the new Government, the appointment by
President Salva Kiir of Mr. Riek Machar, in absentia, as
First Vice-President, as provided for in the Agreement,
and the start of redeployment of Government forces to
locations at least 25 kilometres from the capital. And
finally, and perhaps most crucially, the permanent
ceasefire is largely holding in the former theatre
of conflict of Greater Upper Nile, although as the
latest events in Malakal amply demonstrate, violence
continues to occur.

These achievements, though notable, should be seen
in the context of a worrying escalation of instability
and violence in other areas of the country, particularly
in Western Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal,
which were regions largely unaffected by the conflict
that began in late 2013. Freedom of access of ceasefire
monitors is a recurrent challenge, most recently in the
vicinity of the town of Mundri, Western Equatoria.
While the significant reduction in violence in the most
conflict-affected states of Unity, Jonglei and Upper
Nile is most welcome, even here the security situation
remains fragile, and the tentative progress made is
vulnerable to reversal if political dynamics shift.

Even if mass violence has largely subsided in the
areas that experienced the most intense conflict, serious
incidents are still occurring. Most recently, violence in
Malakal over the past two days left at least 18 people
dead, many hundreds more reportedly displaced, and
significant damage to the United Nations protection-of-
civilians camp, which is meant to be a place of refuge.
I deplore this violence and call for a swift investigation
to determine responsibility for these incidents. I urge
all armed factions to show restraint.

More broadly, across the country, access restrictions
and localized insecurity have made the humanitarian
response extraordinarily complicated, and large parts
of the country, both directly and indirectly affected by
the conflict, continue to face humanitarian catastrophe,
for reasons that are largely within the control of
political actors. Humanitarian agencies remain unable
to preposition adequate supplies before the rainy season
arrives, given general insecurity and access restrictions
by the authorities on both sides. So there should be no
doubt that South Sudan's leaders can, if they wish, act
to ameliorate the conditions in which their people live.

I witnessed the depths of the crisis when I travelled
to Bor, Malakal and Bentiu - three of the conflict's
worst-affected towns. Let me thank the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for its facilitation
of my travel to those areas. In those three towns, I met
internally displaced persons who remain in United
Nations protection of civilian sites in vast numbers,
but who are, I understand, only a fraction of the
population affected by the conflict and its resultant
crisis. Two years after the conflict began, few yet have
any confidence that they will be able to return to their
homes and resume normal lives. This is because political
progress has been so slow and because the provisions of
the Agreement, while filled with potential, have yet to
demonstrate real achievement on the ground for most.

The current preoccupation of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission remains the formation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity, which
should have been formed in November 2015 following
the expiry of the Agreement's pretransitional period
of 90 days. The subsequent reset date, which should
have led to the establishment of the Transitional
Government of National Unity between 15 December
2015 and 15 January 2016, was also missed, as was a
further date for the new Government's formation, in
part because ofa number of new political obstacles, not
least the creation by the present Government of new
administrative boundaries within South Sudan.

The calendar issued in my capacity as Chairperson
of JMEC accelerated the implementation of the
Agreement's provisions in the latter half of December
2015, and the obstacle of new administrative divisions,
I hope, has been overcome by the latest communique
offered by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in Addis Ababa on 31 January.
Despite the IGAD communique, which was subsequently
unconditionally endorsed by the parties and the entire
JMEC membership in Juba on 2 February, as of today
we still do not have a Transitional Government of
National Unity in place.

We are, I believe, today closer to the formation of
that new Government, but the mere act of formation will
not deliver relief overnight, and does not necessarily
mean that the path of implementation ahead will become
any easier. The new Government must quickly confront
the humanitarian, development, political and military
crisis that the country continues to face. In addition
to these facets of the crisis, the rapid deterioration of
South Sudan's economic situation in recent months is
an additional challenge.

Therefore, the significance of the new Transitional
Government will be determined by its performance.
Does the new Government demonstrate a commitment
to the ambitious but necessary reform agenda provided
for in the Agreement? Can the new Government
consolidate peace and effectively manage the country,
which is suffering from drastically reduced revenues
but facing enormous needs? Will the new Government
honour its commitments to accountability and
reconciliation - processes that are desperately needed
in the world's newest country? We in the international
community must remain vigilant if we are to ensure that
the Transitional Government is not only formed, but
delivers on the promises and commitments contained
in the Agreement.

In order to accelerate implementation of the
Agreement, a high-level, coordinated international
effort, comparable to that which led to the signature of
the Agreement in August 2015, must be maintained. The
South Sudanese parties should not believe that they can
bypass the Agreement's commitments, difficult though
they may be, or that any divergence in the views of the
international community can be exploited for partisan
interests. Continued pressure on the parties will remain
necessary because the limits of time and political will
remain significant constraints. Peace is the popular
demand of the people of South Sudan. Unfortunately,
among South Sudan's political leadership, the threat to
resort to war in the event of political dispute arises all
too frequently.

The United Nations, both through the Security
Council and through UNMISS, has a critical role to play.
I am grateful for the willingness ofUNMISS to support
the return of SPLM/A in Opposition personnel - both
military and civilian - as the transitional security
arrangements for Juba start to be implemented. I am
grateful for the support of the United Nations to the
work of the ceasefire monitors now deployed in 8 out of
10 locations, most recently Yambio and Aweil, as well
as the soon to be formed area joint military ceasefire
committees and joint military ceasefire teams,
due to play a crucial role in the consolidation of the
ceasefire. I urge the United Nations to continue to play
a leading role in support of JMEC and in support of
the Agreement.

In support of the Agreement, I would request that
the Security Council consider the following actions.

First, the Council should unequivocally state
that while the Agreement does not offer solutions to
all problems or fulfil all of the objectives each party
pursued militarily, its genuine provisions of compromise
are worth implementing in the interests of peace and
reform, and that continued renegotiation of the terms of
the Agreement is not an option that will be entertained.

Secondly, the Council should underscore
the absolute urgency of completing the security
arrangements necessary to establish the Transitional
Government of National Unity, as already urged by
IGAD and the African Union. In this regard, last night
I received from Mr. Riek Machar, leader of the SPLM/A
In Opposition, a letter in which he stated that he would
travel to Juba to form the Transitional Government
only once 2,910 of his police and troops were in place
in the capital, with a further 1,200 police sent to Bor,
Malakal and Bentiu. This proposal does not constitute
a phased approach to the implementation of security
arrangements for the capital, as outlined in the IGAD
communique of 31 January. The time it would take to
fully deploy these forces would incur further delay
of the formation of the Transitional Government of
National Unity. Therefore, I plan to offer a compromise
proposal on security arrangements for Juba that would
be sufficient to ensure security for Mr. Machar's
return and consequently allow for the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity. I would
request the Council to endorse the principles that
underpin my intended plan - security arrangements
that are appropriately phased, sequenced and realistic.

Thirdly, given the fragility of the security situation
in South Sudan, the continued risk of conflict and the
ongoing insecurity affecting the humanitarian relief
effort, the Council should demonstrate its resolve to
take all necessary measures against those who seek
to impede implementation of the Agreement, and to
underscore the seriousness of the situation faced by the
Sudanese people, half of whom are projected to need
humanitarian support to survive.

Finally, while the task of implementing vital
economic, humanitarian and transitional justice
processes should fall principally to the South Sudanese,
the United Nations could assist with a number of them,
including the provision of support to the African Union
in its obligation to establish the independent hybrid
judicial body, the hybrid court for South Sudan, and
to the commission for truth, reconciliation and healing

due to be established by the prospective Transitional
Government of National Unity.

The Agreement, as I said earlier, has great potential.
But for that potential to be realized, no more time
should be lost, and the pace of implementation must
be accelerated. Focusing the attention of the parties on
implementation, and showing that the consequences
of failure have ramifications far beyond individual
decision makers, is critical. I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity and for its continued attention to
the situation in South Sudan.

