Mr. De Moura (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): We are pleased to
see Minister Mudenge here and to have heard his brilliant
statement. We are also pleased to be here ourselves in order
to join our voice to those of other delegations in addressing
the situation in Angola.

Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election as President of the Security Council for the month
of October. We are convinced that your long diplomatic
experience, together with the invaluable contributions of the
other members of the Council, will ensure the success of
this meeting.

We extend to your predecessor, His Excellency
Mr. Alfredo Cabral, Ambassador of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, our congratulations for the outstanding
capabilities demonstrated in his functions during his
mandate.

It is a great pleasure to recognize in this meeting the
presence of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, with a mandate
from the summit meeting of heads of State from the Organ
on Politics, Defence and Security of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to conduct a joint, in-
depth analysis of the current status of the peace process in
Angola. We are still convinced that this Organ for
international peacekeeping and security will continue to
deploy efforts for the re-establishment of peace and legal
order, wherever they may be at risk, by taking appropriate
measures to ensure the rule of order and democracy.

That is why we have gathered once again to take part
in deliberations on the complex peace process in Angola.
Were it not for the delays deliberately caused by UNITA,
this session would have been held under the aegis of peace
and national reconciliation. Unfortunately, however, this is
not yet the case. As His Excellency the President of the
Republic stated recently:

"The peace process in Angola is now at a crossroads
between peace and war."

 

This meeting of the Security Council is therefore of
paramount importance to the United Nations role in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, negotiated and
signed by the Government and UN ITA with the mediation
of the United Nations.
In this context, we would like once again to express
our gratitude and appreciation to the members of the
Council and their Governments for their interest in,
patience with and support for the Angolan peace process.
We wish likewise to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, to his dynamic
Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, and
to representatives of the troika of observers - the United
States of America, the Russian Federation and
Portugal - for their unswerving and vigorous efforts in
the field to bring about imaginative solutions for stepping
up implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

We likewise salute the contributions made to the
peace process by the eminent personalities - some of
whom are members of the Security Council - who
visited Angola during the period prior to 11 July 1996,
the date of the adoption of Security Council resolution
1064 (1996).

Regrettably, the progress made since June has been
limited and insignificant. The delays and the relative
peace raised questions and doubts, and also undermined
the confidence that had been gained. However, my
Government took many initiatives, with assistance and
support from the observers, to keep the process on an
irreversible track.

Nevertheless, the current situation in Angola is
characterized by a serious crisis of confidence - the
result of the systematic delays caused by UNITA, under
a variety of pretexts, with respect to compliance with and
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, and also at the
level of the Joint Commission.

In fact, with the exception of the ceasefire now in
place, the confining to quarters of UNITA troops and the
start of demobilization of underage troops - all of which
are very positive - other fundamental measures have
been postponed due to a lack of cooperation and political
will on the part of UNITA. I should like to mention by
way of example the return of UNITA members to the
National Assembly, which they left in 1992; the return of
the expected total number of general officers to the
Angolan Armed Forces; the completion of the selection
process of a total 26,300 UNITA military troops for

 

induction into the Angolan Armed Forces; the
re-establishment of government administration, given the
continued illegal occupation of certain areas of the national
territory; and the free circulation of goods and people in the
areas under its control.
The Government has already fulfilled all its duties as
envisaged in the Lusaka Protocol, except those related to
the disarming of the civilian population. Those tasks cannot
be accomplished unless State administration is restored in
the areas now under UNITA control.

As members are aware, the President of the Republic,
with a view to accommodating the leader of UNITA, and
taking into consideration some suggestions from authorities
and friendly Governments, decided to invite Mr. Jonas
Savimbi to occupy one of the two vice-presidencies of the
Republic.

To effect that concession and for the sake of national
reconciliation, we made proposals to amend the national
Constitution and would put the amendment before the
National Assembly. As members may realize, we made
concessions that went so far as to violate the principle of
sovereignty and our own Constitution, because the position
of second Vice-President is not provided for in the current
Constitution - the one that was negotiated and approved
with UNIT A's participation.

As far as my Government is concerned, the position
of Vice-President of the Republic, with executive
responsibilities defined under the Constitution, would
represent far more than the simple "special status"
contained in the Lusaka Protocol, one of the frequent
complaints lodged by the leader of UNITA.

On the other hand, the refusal of the leader of UNITA
to take part in the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security summit meeting of Heads of State, where he
would join in the efforts of those African statesmen in the
campaign for peace and national reconciliation in Angola,
is clear evidence that Mr. Savimbi's designs differ from
those of the Government and the international community,
which are endeavouring to ensure peace in Angola.

It is easy to conclude that this position of UNITA and
its leadership is designed to delay the completion of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, in order to make it
impossible for the State to carry out its functions, and to
aggravate the social and economic situation of our
population and of our country. It is designed to wreak

 

havoc in the country and on order and stability, with all
the attendant consequences, and to block governmental
efforts to implement its programme to raise the standard
of living and improve the well-being of the peoples and
of all those who live in Angola and who are committed
to the development of this long-suffering nation.
Judging from this scenario, my Government feels
that the time has come to exert greater pressure to compel
UNITA to carry out in good faith those tasks of the
Lusaka Protocol still pending completion. It is not
overstating the matter to remind the Council that one of
the pressure mechanisms already adopted is contained in
Security Council resolution 864 (1993) of 15 July 1993.
It provided for the application of sanctions against
UN lTA which have never been fully applied. We do not
wish to return to war. We are striving for a lasting peace.
We want to have an authentic reconciliation and we wish
to foster development based on respect for the rule of
law, democracy and human rights.

It is in this context that my Government considers
that this meeting is the time for the Security Council to
apply the second package of sanctions under paragraph 26
of Council resolution 864 (1993). We believe that only by
taking a firm stand and by exerting effective pressure will
we succeed in forcing and even helping UNITA and its
leader to abide by Security Council decisions and to
honour its commitments. We believe that it is time for
UNITA to abide by those commitments, which were
undertaken freely before the people of Angola and the
international concert of nations.

Finally, my Government hopes that this meeting will
represent a historic turning point in the process of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, bringing Angolans
new hope that the peace process is staying on track and
doing away with the obstacles to the peace process still
pending.

Before closing, I would like to avail myself of this
opportunity to reiterate that the Angolan Government
remains seriously committed to the search for a negotiated
settlement that will lead to the restoration of peace and
national reconciliation. However, we shall never renounce
our responsibilities under the Constitution to preserve
domestic order and to protect the vital interests of
Angola.

