Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me thank the
Brazilian presidency for convening today's meeting
and for preparing the draft resolution currently under
consideration.

It is a pleasure to welcome Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao to the Council today. We have listened
to his intervention with great interest and commend
him on his achievements. Germany will continue to
support his country bilaterally in cooperation with our
European Union partners, and not least as a member of
the Council and within the United Nations community.

I also welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq. I thank her for the
briefing and would like to commend her able
leadership of the Mission. Germany takes note with
satisfaction of the fact that the overall situation in
Timor-Leste remains stable. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) certainly
has made its contribution, and we would like to pay
tribute to the work of the men and women who make
up the Mission.

Before I offer some national remarks, let me
underline that my Government aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union.

Germany supports the extension of the mandate
of the Mission for another 12 months, as recommended
by the Secretary-General. UNMIT, in cooperation with
the Government of Timor-Leste, has achieved
considerable results but, given the remaining
institutional weaknesses and persisting fragilities, we
are still facing considerable challenges. Germany
therefore considers it imperative to continue to invest
in Timorese capacities and institutions closely in line
with national strategies, priorities and needs. National
ownership is key to successful support.
The next 18 months will be crucial for building
the foundations for lasting peace in Timor-Leste, with
next year's elections being an important milestone. In
that regard, Germany supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to leave the Mission's composition and
authorized levels of personnel unchanged while
continuing the gradual decrease of police as conditions
on the ground permit.

It is encouraging that the resumption of primary
policing responsibilities by the national police has
continued to make progress and that completion in all
the districts and units is likely in the coming months.
However, an adequate level of UNMIT police will be
required, both to intensify the support to capacity-
building and skills transfer and to lend operational
support to the national police if needed. We believe
that the proposed level allows for the necessary
flexibility.

While we work towards the gradual transition to
full Timorese control in all areas where currently
international support is still required, it is clear that the
United Nations has a longer-term commitment to
Timor-Leste, including beyond UNMIT. If current
trends can be sustained, the post-UNMIT period is
approaching fast. Germany is therefore of the view that
we need to continue to intensify discussions about the
strategy and the modalities for the transition and the
preparation for the future and scope of the United
Nations on the ground post-UNMIT. We must make
every effort to ensure that UNMIT support in areas
where there is a continued need beyond the term of the
Mission's final mandate is effectively transferred to
State institutions, bilateral and multilateral partners,
United Nations country team entities or civil society.

In the view of my Government, current progress
will only be sustainable if the preconditions for the
development of a vibrant civil society - functioning
State structures and an adequate judicial framework -
are in place. Germany agrees with the Secretary-
General's call for continued efforts to be undertaken at
all levels of society to combat impunity and to
strengthen public confidence in the justice system.
Public institutions themselves must be role models for
the rule of law and for accountable action nation-wide.
It is in that context that we share the concern about the
so-called certification of police officers who face
disciplinary and criminal charges. This very visible
issue should be addressed thoroughly.

Inclusiveness is another decisive factor for
achieving economic growth and sustainable
development. The opportunity for women and young
adults to contribute their share cannot be
overestimated. We invite UNMIT to continue to focus
on these groups of society and on implementing the
women, peace and security agenda.

Let me conclude by thanking UNMIT and its
partners once more for their commitment to creating
the conditions for the Mission's future withdrawal and
by encouraging our Timorese partners to continue the
vigorous implementation of their ambitious national
reform agenda. The Government's motto "Goodbye
Conflict, Welcome Development" aptly sums up the
aspirations we share.

