Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We are grateful for the valuable
briefing made by Mr. Miroslav Jenca, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
The treatment afforded to the sensitive issue of the
Palestinian question in a forum such as this usually leads
to actions on the ground that undermine the expected
two-State solution. The serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and the various terrorist
acts tend to be the focus of our attention in debates such
as this. On this occasion, however, we appreciate the
commitment to intra-Palestinian reconciliation agreed
to in recent days, under the auspices of Egypt, which
we hope will further the peace process between Israel
and Palestine. We hope that such agreement will make
it possible for the Government of National Consensus
to resume its responsibilities in the Gaza Strip and be
better able to meet the pressing humanitarian needs
of its population, particularly in the provision of basic
services. We also ohpe that it will lay the foundation for
the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, under the control of a legitimate and
democratic Palestinian Government. We furthermore
expect that the agreement, by having a positive impact
on security conditions, will pave the way for the
gradual elimination of restrictions on the movement of
goods and people to and from Gaza. For that purpose,
a definitive renunciation of the use of violence and
a recognition of the existence of the State of Israel
are imperative.

In that context, it is necessary to lend a renewed
sense of urgency to the efforts of the international
community to promote direct negotiations between the
parties in order to achieve the two-State solution - two
States living side by side in conditions of peace and
mutual recognition. In that regard, Peru encourages
and supports the more visible commitment being
undertaken by the Quartet, the renewed support for
the Arab Peace Initiative in Amman, the good offices
deployed by various European States, the efforts of the
United States and the very praiseworthy efforts of Egypt
in the name of peace. We also highlight the personal
commitment expressed by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres during his first official visit to the region of
helping the parties to resume meaningful negotiations.

Peru, a country committed to multilateralism and
the development of international law, attaches the
utmost importance to compliance with resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, such as resolution
2334 (2016), which calls upon Israel to cease its
settlement practices, demolition of homes and evictions
in the territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem. Peru notes with concern the reports provided
by Mr. Mladenov regarding the intensification of those
practices throughout the year. Such practices seriously
endanger the territorial integrity of the Palestinian
State and make the two-State solution increasingly
distant. Moreover, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016), we reiterate the call to all parties
directly involved to put an end to acts of violence,
human rights abuses and inflammatory rhetoric, which
exacerbate feelings and deepens resentment.

In that regard, Peru recognizes the inalienable right
of Israel to safeguard its own security and existence
by exercising legitimate self-defence, in accordance
with the principles of proportionality and lawfulness.
Since 1947, when Peru was part of the United Nations
Special Committee on Palestine, we have maintained
an unchanging and clear position on the issue. We
support the solution of two States living within
secure and mutually recognized borders as a basis for
peaceful coexistence.

Along those lines, during its forthcoming
participation as a non-permanent member of the
Council during 2018 and 2019, Peru will continue to
support the facilitation of a minimum framework of
understanding for the resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties, as well as an improvement of the
situation on the ground.

