Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
important meeting. I also wish to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, and the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, President
Festus Mogae, for their commitment and enlightening
briefings. I would like to focus on two points.

First of all, our mobilization is more necessary
than ever, given the suffering that is affecting more and
more civilians. Despite the rainy season, the fighting
continues in South Sudan, with tragic consequences
for civilians. The recent clashes around Pagak have
led to more people fleeing their homes, thereby further
increasing the flow of displaced persons and refugees.
The humanitarian situation remains catastrophic.
Although the state of famine has been lifted in
certain areas of the country, the spectre of starvation
and malnutrition still hangs over too many civilians.
Women and children are always the first victims.

In that context, I would like to commend the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), which has adopted a robust posture so as
to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians. We call on it
to continue working to that end, but the unacceptable
obstacles to its efforts and to that of humanitarian
workers are still too numerous. France vigorously
condemns them.

The primary responsibility to protect civilians rests
with the Government of South Sudan. We therefore call
on it to do its utmost to ensure smooth cooperation
with UNMISS and to facilitate access for humanitarian
organizations and workers. That includes allowing
access to all areas where civilians are at risk.

Finally, almost a year after its establishment, the
Regional Protection Force must also be allowed to
deploy fully. We welcome the most recent positive
developments in that regard, but there are still many
challenges and bottlenecks that must be resolved.

The Council must also assume its responsibilities.
We must ensure that a cessation of hostilities is
concluded and implemented as soon as possible. We
must also continue to seriously consider ways to reduce
the level of violence in the country; France has long
believed that an arms embargo would contribute to
that goal.

Secondly, the encouraging signs on the political front
must, with our support, be focused on and materialized.

Certain recent political developments offer grounds
for hope that true political progress can take place. We
welcome in particular the establishment, during the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Council of Ministers held on 2 July, of modalities and
a timeline for the implementation of the high-level
revitalization forum for the peace agreement in South
Sudan. That decision should make it possible to fuel
current efforts to relaunch the political process.

We also welcome the actions taken by various
players in support of the political process. We commend
the efforts of the IGAD Special Envoy, the High
Representative of the African Union, the Special Envoy
ofthe Secretary-General and, ofcourse, yours, President
Mogae, as well as those of Uganda and Kenya, whose
initiatives should help move the peace process forward.
France supports the efforts of all of these players, and it
should be noted that effective coordination among them
is a key condition for ensuring the success of their work.

This mobilization must make it possible to achieve
progress in the implementation of the 2015 peace
agreement, which remains the cornerstone of the
political process. The national dialogue must be truly
inclusive so as to create a positive and lasting dynamic.

Nor must we lose sight of the need to fight impunity
or of the imperative of ensuring accountability for those
who have committed human rights violations. This
means establishing, as soon as possible, a hybrid court,
with the African Union playing a leading role therein.

Summer 2015 was one of hope, with the signing
of the peace agreement. Summer 2016 was one of
disillusion and violence, with the Juba crisis in July.
This summer must be one of sustainable progress; we
owe it to the people of that country, who have suffered
for far too long.

