Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of March. May I also congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Madeleine Albright of the
United States, for the great interest she showed in African
issues during her presidency of the Council.

Your personal commitment, Mr. President, and that
of the brotherly people of your neighbouring country,
Botswana, to the cause of Africa's development, peace
and stability is well known in our southern African
region, particularly to those of us who have had the
privilege of walking a mile or two with you. It comes as
no surprise to us, therefore, that your unseared conscience
dictated that you exhume and give another chance to the
pleading SOS of the Somali people, which had been
buried by deliberate forgetfulness and connivance.

The delegation of Zimbabwe appreciates the
Secretary-General's efforts to keep the Council informed
about the sad situation in Somalia. While applauding the
Secretary-General's intention to maintain the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, we request that steps
be taken to relocate that office to Mogadishu. We are
persuaded that a political presence of our global body in
Somalia will help re-establish the good offices that could
trigger the resumption of an inclusive process of
consultation and negotiation aimed at national
reconciliation leading to the establishment of a
broad-based national government.

 

Zimbabwe commends the dedication and determination
of the United Nations, non-governmental organizations and
other international humanitarian agencies in their valiant
efforts to render assistance to the people of Somalia. We
encourage them to maintain their most fruitful endeavours
in Somalia so as to prevent the recurrence of the dire
humanitarian situation which prevailed in that country prior
to the deployment of UNOSOM. in 1992. It is regrettable
that the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Somalia will
remain treacherously risky, and the benefits thereof will
continue to evade certain needy communities in that country
for as long as the conflict there remains unresolved. The
people of Somalia and those who continue to risk their lives
while delivering emergency aid to that war-torn country
must not be let down.

We therefore encourage the Secretary-General to
continue carrying out quiet diplomacy in Somalia in
consultation with the Organization of African Unity and the
neighbouring States to try to determine how the
international community can actively assist the people of
Somalia. The complexity or straightforwardness of the issue
should not determine whether or not the people of Somalia
will receive help; neither should judgement be passed so
easily on their worthiness or unworthiness of help.
Whatever the assessment of the pros and cons of the matter
might be, the people of Somalia are as much in need of
help as the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

If the United Nations is to maintain its image and
credibility, it should steer clear of all appearances of double
standards. The impression should never be created that
those Member States which have a secure hold on political
power and other resources will direct our global
Organization to be involved seriously only in those conflicts
to which they themselves are inextricably linked either by
kinship to those who are victims or by physical or
geographical proximity to them.

As we call upon the United Nations to assist in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia, we
acknowledge the fact that our Organization cannot impose
peace on that country or, indeed, on any other. We realize
that the Somali people are ultimately responsible for
ensuring that peace returns to their country. We therefore
reiterate our call on the Somali people, particularly their
political leaders and parties, to pursue and establish
sustained and sustainable dialogue towards a lasting
political solution.

I cannot conclude my statement without appealing to
the brotherhood of humankind and the global-Village spirit
which His Excellency President Robert Mugabe of the
Republic of Zimbabwe invoked in his statement on the
occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The people of Somalia must realize that the conflict in
their country holds them and the rest of us in poverty and
insecurity. They are harming not only themselves, but all
of their neighbours in this global village. They have a
responsibility to themselves and to the rest of the world.
The international community, for its part, must realize
that the conflict in Somalia poses a threat to peace and
security. It causes death and destruction and breeds
refugees for whom we have to care. It affects the world
economy and destroys our environment. The United
Nations must do what only it is mandated to do by this,
our global village: to maintain peace and security in the
world.

When history judges this generation, Somalia,
Rwanda and others like them may speak louder than all
other witnesses.

