First, let me thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for their briefings. I would like also to commend the brave and devoted work done by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and all humanitarian organizations to reach the millions of Syrians in need. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the economic crisis have further worsened the existing humanitarian catastrophe in Syria. Millions of Syrians depend on the continuation of the cross-border operations for their survival. In the north-west, 3 million out of 4 million Syrians are internally displaced. Nearly 1,000 tent camps are hosting more than 1.4 million displaced persons; 80 per cent of them are women and children. To improve conditions for the internally displaced persons living in tents at the border area, we have built 11,000 brick houses so far. That is financed by our own resources but is clearly not sufficient to meet current needs. We expect donors to step in to assist in this effort. Since the establishment of the cross-border United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, in 2014, 88 per cent of the operations have been conducted through the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam border crossings. Since 10 January, those two border gates have been the sole channels for aid delivery, being used by more than 7,000 United Nations trucks. As of today, cross-border operations are continuing at record levels to respond to the acute humanitarian needs. As part of the prevention and preparedness efforts for COVID-19, approximately 11,000 test kits and thousands of other pandemic- related items are being delivered to Idlib through the Mechanism. However, this corresponds to less than | per cent of actual needs. Let us be clear: there is no cross-line access from the regime-held areas to the north-west, and cross-line operations cannot substitute for cross-border assistance. The Council knows all too well that the regime considers the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people as terrorism, calls its own people who are looking for a better future terrorists and blames those who stand by the Syrian people as supporters of terrorism. The shameless allegations of aid diversion are the product of that sick mind. Let me shed some light on the Monitoring Mechanism activities exclusively performed by the United Nations for cross-border humanitarian assistance. As underlined by both the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, cross-border operations are one of the most scrutinized aid-delivery systems in the world. From the start to the very end, convoys and aid items are monitored at various stages and with the most developed technologies. In Turkey, trucks, once loaded with humanitarian items and confirmed by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism, are accompanied by Turkish and United Nations officials from the trans-shipment area to the border crossing point. Scanners examine each truck to provide a detailed view of its contents. The system in place ensures a highly accountable, effective and transparent operation. If the cross- border mechanism is terminated, we will lose the existing means of notification, transparency, monitoring and control. So let me ask the Council a simple question: would it prefer that humanitarian aid delivery be deprived of the benefits of this robust system? While we have the collective responsibility to ensure the survival of those vulnerable people, will we put aside our promises and leave Syrians to the mercy of the murderous regime that has brought nothing but more suffering to its own people? Is this the future that we foresee for them? The state of the ongoing negotiations on the renewal of the cross-border mechanism is a source of concern. This mechanism has no alternative and must continue unabated. We must do everything possible to reach each and every Syrian in need. Obstructing that goal is unjustifiable. I would also like to touch upon the rightful appeal by 18 Syrian non-governmental organizations that requested the inclusion of Tel Abyad border crossing in the mechanism. As is well known, we have offered the Council that option in order to meet the humanitarian needs in the north-east, and it is still on the table. As I have said before, that crossing is already in use. Since November 2019, our country's authorities have channelled 412 humanitarian aid convoys through that crossing. In four years, almost 500 attacks on health facilities killed hundreds of civilians and health-care personnel in Syria, mainly in the north-west. Respecting international humanitarian law entails protecting humanitarian workers and civilian infrastructure. The United Nations deconfliction mechanism is an indispensable instrument to that end. Turkey will continue to be fully engaged with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs towards the implementation of the United Nations deconfliction mechanism, and we call on all to do the same. Given that the regime's massive military campaign against its own people forced 13 million Syrians to flee their homes and destroyed countless lives, we need more United Nations involvement in the country, not less. In the absence of the United Nations cross-border mechanism, the besieged people of Syria will be further starved and bombed into surrender. The abuse of humanitarian issues as a matter of petty negotiations cannot be tolerated. We should not forget that a lasting political solution can be achieved only if basic humanitarian assistance continues to reach people in need throughout the country. The termination of the mechanism would also have negative implications on the political process. The Security Council should therefore uphold its obligation to protect civilians in Syria by renewing the cross-border mechanism for at least 12 months. Finally, I note that this forum has been abused once again today as a platform for utter misrepresentations, lies and delusional accusations by the so-called representative of the criminal Al-Assad regime. He does not represent the Syrian people, and I will not dignify him with a reply. Turkey will continue to be the voice of the Syrian people's demands until their legitimate aspirations are fulfilled.
