Mr. Voronkov (spoke in Russian): First of all, I
would like to thank the Polish presidency for convening
today's meeting. It is an extremely important one.
Using Iraq as an example, we will be discussing how
coordinated efforts within the United Nations system
generate speedy and positive results.
(spoke in English)

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like to
start by expressing my solidarity with the peoples and
the Governments of countries where terrorist attacks
were recently perpetrated. Regrettably, the list is a
long one and includes Afghanistan, Belgium, France,
Indonesia, Iraq, Libya and Nigeria. Our prayers are
with the victims and the survivors of those heinous
attacks. I also call upon all Member States to redouble
their efforts to strengthen international cooperation to
address terrorism in a comprehensive manner and bring
those responsible to justice.

I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the joint visit to Iraq
we conducted with Ms. Michele Coninsx in March.
The visit was conducted within the framework of the
common efforts ofthe United Nations Office ofCounter-
Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to facilitate the delivery
of counter-terrorism-related technical assistance to
Member States in accordance with resolution 2395
(2017). In that resolution the Council underscored
the need for the two United Nations entities to work
closely together.

The visit took place at the invitation of the
Government of Iraq and with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, for which I am
grateful. I am honoured to have the opportunity to
brief the Council today alongside my colleagues CTED
Executive Director Madame Michele Coninsx and
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), as well as Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Bahr Aluloom.

Iraq has been affected by, and is suffering severely
from, the consequences of terrorism. The military
setback of Da'esh clearly demonstrates the long-term
resolve of the Iraqi authorities in their fight against
terrorism. The continued vigilance and determination
of the Iraqi Government to consolidate the military
victory against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) through a comprehensive approach focused
on both prevention and resilience is of the utmost
importance. In that regard, I would like to stress the
continued commitment of Iraq in addressing the 16
recommendations made by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-
terrorism, on advancing Iraq's efforts to implement key
counter-terrorism priorities.

During our joint mission with CTED to Iraq, we
were able to hold high-level consultations with a number
of ministers and senior officials. In order to understand
better the realities on the ground, we visited Fallujah to
discuss the additional support the United Nations could
provide to the local population.

All our interlocutors stressed Iraq's continued
commitment to fighting terrorism as it transitions from
a military-focused counter-terrorism approach to a more
comprehensive one, which also includes preventive, law
enforcement and criminal justice components. It was
the conclusion of our Iraqi interlocutors that national
reconciliation and reconstruction, owned and driven by
the Iraqi people, are essential to prevent the resurgence
of violent extremism and terrorism in Iraq. I would like
to express my words of appreciation for that particular
approach.

During our visit to Fallujah, we had an opportunity
to meet with the mayor of the town and a number of
survivors. We witnessed the large-scale devastation
caused by ISIL. I was personally touched by the
admirable resilience of the Iraqi people while observing
the reconstruction work in areas surrounded by mine
fields and booby traps, and the faces of the young
people studying in rehabilitated school premises.

Our joint delegation reiterated the United Nations
strong support for Iraq. Based on the priority needs
identified during the mission and on resolution 2395
(2017), the Office of Counter-Terrorism, together
with CTED, proposed five areas in which it could
provide technical assistance to Iraq: first, advice for
the development of a comprehensive national counter-
terrorism strategy; secondly, training in countering
the financing of terrorism; thirdly, the prevention of
violent extremism through youth skills development
and vocational training, including for youth in Fallujah;
fourthly, the prevention of violent extremism through
strategic communications; and, finally, capacity-
building to prevent and respond to weapons of mass
destruction-related terrorism.

In order to advance our fruitful dialogue and
in consultation with the Government of Iraq and
UNAMI, we were able to dispatch a joint Office of
Counter-Terrorism-CTED scoping mission to Iraq at
the beginning of May to identify the specific elements
of programmatic support under the five priorities I
mentioned. The scoping mission held meetings with
a range of Iraqi ministries and national agencies, the
diplomatic community, as well as the United Nations
country team and the World Bank. Based on the
findings of the scoping mission, the Office of Counter-
Terrorism is now working on the development of project
concept notes on the priority thematic topics. The
projects could have a measurable impact on the ground,
while avoiding duplication with existing initiatives.
The Office of Counter-Terrorism is also planning to
deploy a consultant to support Iraq in finalizing its
national counter-terrorism strategy. The practical
implementation of those projects, in consultation with
the Government of Iraq, will start next month. We took
a total of three months to go from the initial stages to
the start of project implementation.

As the Secretary-General has often emphasized,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism is committed to
delivering on key counter-terrorism capacity-building
priorities of Member States, as one United Nations, in
a coordinated and coherent manner, and as requested
by Member States. Our first joint Office of Counter-
Terrorism-CTED mission to Iraq, in collaboration with
UNAMI, was a concrete step in that direction. We plan
to further build on that approach in other regions of
the world.

