The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belarus, Cuba, Egypt, the Gambia,
Indonesia, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan, Rwanda,
Somalia and Tunisia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/188, containing the text of a letter
dated 18 March 2005 from the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

At this stage, I would like to make some
introductory remarks with regard to the objectives,
scope and procedures of this wrap-up meeting.

Today, the Security Council is holding a wrap-up
meeting on the African dimension in the work of the
Security Council. In prior consultations, members of
the Council agreed that this should be a public meeting
that non-members of the Council would be encouraged
to attend. I would like to commend those delegations
that have requested to participate in this meeting. In its
national capacity, the Brazilian delegation sent a letter
to the Secretary-General (S/2005/ 188), to which is
annexed a background paper that provides information
regarding the discussion we are now to undertake.

Over the years, inter- and intra-State conflicts in
Africa have required the attention and involvement of
the Security Council, in line with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The response of this Council to
each particular case has varied during these years, and
a number of best practices and lessons learned have
been gradually incorporated into its usual approach.
Action by the Council has resulted in some cases of
success and others in which the re-emergence of
conflict has occurred. The current mandates established
by the Council benefit highly from those experiences
of the past.

The Security Council's assessment of its work,
methods and procedures must be an ongoing process.
The wrap-up meeting we are holding today should
offer an opportunity to discuss the manner in which
that is reflected in the daily work of the Council when
addressing African subjects.

During this month of March, the Council has
already adopted five resolutions on African issues. A
number of reports - more than 10 - have been issued
and considered by the Council. More than 20 formal
and informal meetings related to the situation in
different countries in Africa have been held.

This wrap-up session should not be an occasion
for readdressing the particularities of specific
situations in Africa; it should provide for an
institutional debate that builds on previous discussions
vis-a-vis the current agenda of the Council and its
methods of work.

On the procedural aspects related to this wrap-up
session, it has been agreed that members and non-
members of the Security Council are to alternate with
every three speakers in delivering their statements. The
order has been established by drawing lots. We would
encourage concise and focused statements, which
should not go far beyond the five minutes that have
been stipulated. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their text in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.


