Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): May I offer
you my congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. My thanks also go to the
Ambassador of China for the excellent way in which he
directed our work last month.

The Council is today addressing a question of the very
greatest importance, that of security assurances to the non-
nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My Government
recognizes that States which have renounced nuclear
weapons are fully entitled to look for specific assurances
that nuclear weapons will not be used against them and that
the Security Council will take action in the case of nuclear
aggression against such States. The resolution which has
just been adopted by the Council reflects that recognition in
precise and unprecedented terms. The United Kingdom and
the other nuclear-weapon States have responded to the
continuing concern of those non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the NPT that all the nuclear-weapon States should
give these assurances and that the negative security
assurances given by them should be in analogous terms.

This resolution is of historic importance and it
makes a very significant step forward beyond the terms
of the Council's resolution 255 (1968), which was
adopted in 1968. For the first time, a Council resolution
relates to both positive and negative assurances. For the
first time, all five nuclear-weapon States have given
negative assurances in such a clear-cut and comprehensive
way. For the first time, the five nuclear Powers have
acted together to provide a common positive security
assurance, as reflected in the resolution. Furthermore, the
resolution develops resolution 255 (1968) by setting out
the kinds of Council measures which might be taken in
response to a request from the victim of an act of nuclear
aggression, including in respect of compensation under
international law, and technical, medical, scientific or
humanitarian assistance. We believe that in so doing this
resolution will contribute substantially to international
peace and security.

The fact that the five nuclear-weapon States have for
the first time acted collectively in sponsoring this
resolution is a reflection of the profound changes in the
international political and security climate in recent years.
This improved climate, to which the resolution will
further contribute, has also enabled and encouraged the
nuclear-weapon States, including the United Kingdom, to
make very significant reductions in their nuclear forces.

The United Kingdom has never maintained nuclear
forces at other than the minimum level it has judged
necessary. Since the end of the cold war, my Government
has reassessed that level and adjusted its nuclear forces
accordingly. The United Kingdom has eliminated entirely
its surface maritime nuclear capability. It has reduced by
half the number of its free-fall bombs. The remainder will
be withdrawn by the end of 1998 and will not be replaced
by any air-delivered system. We will rely instead on
Trident as our sole nuclear system. These reductions to
the United Kingdom's sub-strategic forces, together with
the decision that, when Trident is fully in service, each
submarine will deploy with no more than 96 warheads,
mean that our warhead stockpile will be 21 per cent lower
than in the 19705 and the total explosive power of those
warheads will be some 59 per cent lower than in the
1970s. These are massive reductions.

This is not the occasion to set out in detail my
Government's position on the future of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. My Secretary of
State will do so here in New York next week in his
address to the Review and Extension Conference. Nor is
it my intention to prejudge the outcome of that

 

Conference. That Treaty is the cornerstone of international
efforts to avoid the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. It has already made an invaluable contribution
to international peace and security. Its very existence has
been crucial in encouraging and enabling the nuclear-
weapon States to act together to cosponsor the resolution
now adopted by the Council. Without it, it would have been
far more difficult, if not impossible, for the nuclear-weapon
States to have acted as they have done. The United
Kingdom is accordingly convinced that it is in the interests
of all countries that the Treaty be extended indefinitely and
without qualification. We urge all States parties to the
Treaty to support such an extension at the forthcoming
Review and Extension Conference in the long-term interests
of international peace and security and to enable nuclear-
weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States to continue working
together to achieve a safer and more prosperous world.

