Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould like
to thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this open debate on a topic of great importance for
all Member States, namely, justice and the rule of
law. I would like to acknowledge all those who have
spoken before me and welcome the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/341) on measuring the effectiveness
of the support provided by the United Nations for
the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

Colombia attaches great importance to the rule of
law and sees it as a key element in the maintenance
and strengthening of institutions and the efficient
administration of justice. For example, in Colombia,
international treaties on human rights and international
humanitarian law are part of our constitutional body
of law, which, according to our national jurisprudence,
means that their provisions are binding and normative
as constitutional provisions that supersede domestic
law. In applying those principles, we act in accordance
with the principles that underlie such treaties and in line
with our country's belief that efforts to strengthen the
rule of law should be based on States' own initiatives,
in accordance with their particular needs and their
institutional capacities.

Colombia believes that the administration of
justice is one of the primary roles of States and that
the strength of their democratic institutions depends
on it. We therefore welcome the interest shown during
the development and implementation of measures
launched by the Government of Colombia to ensure
the rights of victims to truth, justice and reparations,
which go hand in hand with a system of reforms to the
justice system. Among those reforms, I would like to
highlight Law No. 975 of 2005, known as the Justice
and Peace Act, which lays out the provisions for the
social reintegration of illegal armed groups, and Law
No. 1448 of 2011, or the Victims and Land Restitution
Act, which establishes measures to provide assistance
and comprehensive reparations to the victims of my
country's internal armed conflict. In addition, we have
tools such as the Legislative Act No. 01 of 2012, which
altered the political Constitution of our country and is
known as the Legal Framework for Peace, which is a
transitional justice strategy to investigate and punish
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Those provisions could serve as
a point of reference for programmes that seek to
strengthen the rule of law in countries in situations
similar to Colombia's.

While Colombia recognizes the importance of
the International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity for the most heinous crimes against humanity,
it must also be stressed that strengthening States'
national capacities to prosecute and punish such crimes
is in the interest of lasting and sustainable peace.

We are aware of the challenges posed by the full
implementation of the rule of law. We are committed
to continuing to try to work towards that end and to
achieve well-being and prosperity for all of our citizens.
In that context, we welcome the support that the United
Nations can provide us in our efforts to strengthen the
rule of law in Colombia.

We are also well aware of the responsibilities
associated with the proper administration of justice.
Under Law No. 1395 of 2010, we are seeking to
eliminate bottlenecks in the judicial sector, so as to
make it a more effective tool for a more speedy and
complete justice for all citizens.

Colombia would like to stress how important it
is for the analysis of different situations to take into
account the particular characteristics of each situation,
including the different legal traditions and systems
and challenges of different kinds, in order to avoid
conceptualizations or generalizations that cannot be
adapted to the realities on the ground.
It is extremely important that the United Nations,
and in particular the Security Council, adopt a
cooperative approach with States when it comes to
strengthening the various areas that could be improved
in the rule of law. Hence it is important to broaden
communication between the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council.

To conclude, I should like to stress that the actions
taken by the United Nations in this field are most
effective when they complement the efforts made
by States. It would be very difficult to understand
if decisions taken by the Security Council in the
framework of abstract topics of general application
were to be applied to specific situations against the
course set by legitimately constituted authorities with
a view to strengthening the rule of law.

