Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and welcome
the Minister of the People's Power for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Jorge
Arreaza, to the Chamber.

I fully agree with my German colleague that the
topic of today's meeting should have been "Threats
to international peace and security", given the threats
to Venezuela posed by a number of States. In fact, I
think that the topic should be different. We should not
be discussing the situation in Venezuela, but rather
that surrounding Venezuela. Today, we find ourselves
forced to attend the next episode of the United States'
spectacle with regard to Venezuela. For those who have
been unable to follow the entire story, I will provide a
brief recap of previous episodes.

In a sovereign Latin American country, an
impostor suddenly appeared. He began proclaiming
himself President of the country and was immediately
recognized as such by the United States of America.
A number of European and Latin American countries
hesitated at first before they too recognized him as
President. According to that group of countries, the
legitimate leader of the country, Nicolas Maduro,
won the elections last spring in an unfair manner,
owing to the opposition boycotting those elections.
The fact that Washington, DC, itself had encouraged
opposition leaders to withdraw from that election is, of
course, not mentioned. I believe that those now talking
about due constitutional process and the legitimacy
of the authority of Juan Guaido on the basis of the
Venezuelan Constitution understand that their claims
are hypocritical, null and void of any legal basis and
simply absurd.

What we are now witnessing is the abuse of
constitutional law. Are they not ashamed to speak in
this manner? Do they not realize that it is abundantly
clear to all of us? Do they not understand that no self-
respecting lawyer or judge would subscribe to that
mockery and disregard for the law? They should at least
read the conclusions of the German Bundestag and its
legal service, which has clearly pronounced on all this.

At the same time, we are hearing moans and groans
over the terrible economic situation in Venezuela, its
starving citizens and skyrocketing prices, among other
problems. We are told that Venezuela must be saved
at any cost, for the sake of its citizens. The fact that
United States sanctions have been imposed against
that country since 2013 - which many believe to be
the cause of the current economic situation - is, of
course, kept quiet. The fact that the overall damage to
the country's economy as a result of those sanctions is
estimated at $345 billion is, of course, ignored.

And now, in a situation in which Venezuela has
reached the boiling point, Washington, DC, blames
Nicolas Maduro for all of the country's troubles
and organizes an operation it calls "the delivery
of humanitarian assistance". This culminated on
23 February, when an unverified and uninvited American
cargo arrived in Cucuta, Colombia. Attempts were
made to illegally smuggle the cargo into neighbouring
Venezuela, using the civilian population as human
shields. The legitimate Venezuelan authorities, in
fulfilling their duty to protect the national border,
mobilized their security forces with the sole objective
of ensuring the inviolability of the country's border.

The video footage clearly shows that people coming
from Colombian territory behaved aggressively and
initially provoked the Venezuelan military and police
officers on duty.

At that moment, the first victims among the
demonstrators also appeared. People in uniform drove
a car from the Venezuelan side and rammed a barrier
on the Colombian side at high speed. This insane act

was captured on videos posted on social networks that

leave no doubt that it resulted in injuries and perhaps

even deaths. The media immediately began trumpeting

about victims dead at the hands of the bloodthirsty

regime. The purposeful ramming of people anywhere

in the world means only one thing, terrorism, but in

Circuta it is proclaimed as the heroism of deserters

challenging the authorities, while Juan Guaido

approvingly slaps the so-called "heroes" on the back.

The so-called humanitarian workers on the Colombian

side of the border very quickly turn to violence, with

stones and Molotov cocktails flying at the defenders of
the Venezuelan border. I think Council members can

agree that a scenario like this is reminiscent of almost
anything but the delivery of humanitarian aid. By the
way, the protesters themselves later set fire to one of the
trucks with one of the Molotov cocktails. In the pictures
that have flown around the world one can clearly see one
of the demonstrators on the Colombian side, whether
accidentally or on purpose, throwing a lighted bottle
into a truck that never got to cross the bridge.

So on 23 February, by all indications, we observed
an attempt to illegally cross a State border in order to
bring in an unknown cargo. I would like to ask Council
members which of their countries would have acted
differently in this case. One country even wants to build
a huge wall along one of its borders to prevent illegal
entry. At this point, how can we not recall 1986, when
humanitarian aid for Nicaragua turned out to be a batch
of weapons for the contras? That episode is giving us
some deja vu today.

Let us call a spade a spade. This is not humanitarian
aid. If the United States really wanted to help the
people of Venezuela, it would be acting through any
of the United Nations agencies accredited there, as
other countries are successfully doing. For example,
last week we delivered 7.5 tons of medical supplies
to Caracas through the World Health Organization
and encountered no obstacles, especially since the
Venezuelan authorities are willing to accept the
humanitarian technical assistance that the country
needs. In order to make this process work, all that
has to be done is to unblock Caracas's ability to
make the payments for supplies of essential food and
medicine. But the Americans and their allies do not
want to do things lawfully. They have another goal.
Calling it humanitarian is a travesty. What happened
on Saturday was more like what is called force feeding
here in the United States than aid. If anyone does not
know what that is, it is a kind of torture. Apparently,
having trained on their prisoners at Guantanamo, the
American authorities have now decided to force-feed
an entire country.

If anyone believes that the United States and
its allies had the right to act this way, take a look at
General Assembly resolution 46/ 182. It established
the normative legal framework for international
humanitarian assistance. Just now my colleague the
Permanent Representative of Germany listed almost all
the principles of humanitarian assistance but forgot one
very important one. The resolution clearly states that in
the provision of humanitarian assistance,

"The sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States must be fully respected in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations."

It goes on to specify that

"the affected State has the primary role in
the initiation, organization, coordination and
implementation of assistance" and that "humanitarian
assistance should be provided with the consent of the
affected country and in principle on the basis of an
appeal by the affected country".

Was there any such appeal? No.

At this point I would like to thank all our colleagues
from United Nations agencies and their partners in
major humanitarian organizations for refusing to
support this act of political provocation. We demand an
end to these violations of General Assembly resolutions
and respect for the borders, sovereignty and national
unity of the people of Venezuela, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.

Instead of a hypocritical attempt to import
$20 million worth of so-called aid, it is vital that the
frozen Venezuelan state enterprises' accounts in
American banks be immediately unblocked in order
to free up $11 billion allocated by the Government for
the purchase of medicines, food and essential goods.
And what about the $7 billion in assets of Petroleos de
Venezuela? And the $1.2 billion in Venezuelan gold in
the United Kingdom? Washington and London have
just recently robbed the Venezuelan people of a total of
$30 billion in oil and banking assets. Let us call a spade
a spade. A sovereign country is being blatantly robbed
before our eyes. They are trying to reduce it to penury
so that within the framework of the humanitarian
intervention and the responsibility to protect, concepts
unrecognized in international law, they can change a
regime they do not like. One might then ask why Russia
and other countries against such noble concepts. The
answer is staring us in the face. Have there been so few
examples of this - and in the history of Latin America
alone? Let me cite an American historian, Harry Stout.
He says, "I have charted 280 military interventions
outside the United States on every corner of the globe".
He goes on to say,

"the American consensus consists in America's
faith in the institution of war as a divine instrument
and sacred mandate to be exercised around
the world."
I appeal to the countries supporting the self-
proclaimed President Juan Guaido. Are they really so
naive as to believe that they are immune to this kind
of thing? Have they not heard the American leaders
declaring that Cuba and Nicaragua are next? Do they
imagine that they will not come for them? But this
warning is not only for them, it is a warning to all, to
anyone who refuses to play by Washington's rules. And
those who support Washington in this are complicit in
violating the Charter and international law, and perhaps,
heaven forfend, in an armed intervention, which they
claim to categorically reject. We especially do not
understand why Venezuela's neighbour Colombia,
instead of resolving its own numerous internal
problems in implementing its Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, has decided to throw itself into helping to
organize a reckless venture against its neighbour. That
is particularly disappointing considering that Colombia
itself has only recently emerged from a protracted civil
war whose consequences will take a very long time to
overcome and for which sustainable peace is still not
guaranteed. Incidentally, when times were hard for
Colombia, its neighbour Venezuela opened its borders
to more than 5 million refugees, many of whom still
live there.

This is a warning against taking reckless steps to
implement a military scenario in Venezuela, which we
are hearing about more and more often. They could have
the worst and most unpredictable consequences for both
the region and the whole world. We urge all the States
of the region, regardless of their political preferences,
to express their firm support for the Charter of the
United Nations and for refraining from the threat or use
of force and from massively blatant interference in the
internal affairs of a sovereign State. We have said it
before, and we will say it again and again. Any solution
to Venezuela's problems is the exclusive right, remit
and responsibility of Venezuelans themselves, and
they must be able to own that without any provocative
interference from outside. The international and
especially the regional assistance should be aimed at
finding a formula that can put an end to the turmoil
within this country in full respect for its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We therefore welcome the
goals expressed and pursued by Mexico, Uruguay,
Bolivia and the countries of the Caribbean Community,
the participants in the Montevideo Mechanism. For our
part, we are ready to assist in the quest for a mutual
understanding between all of the constructive and
patriotic forces in Venezuela, especially since the
Venezuelan authorities are calling for and insisting on
the imperative of an intra-Venezuelan dialogue.

Rather than discussing the possibilities of dialogue
and national reconciliation, National Assembly
President Juan Guaido is calling on States to keep the
military option open. It is difficult to describe such
appeals as the responsible behaviour ofa politician who
cares about his country and his people. The humanitarian
show put on by Washington on 23 February ripped the
masks off those who usually remain backstage. They
were all out there, taking centre stage.

It is now perfectly clear that Washington's sole
aim in Venezuela was neither to resolve Venezuela's
problems nor to care for its people, but to achieve
regime change and to threaten to do so via military
intervention. The fact that this is being done in
contravention of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and civilized norms is of no concern
whatever to its perpetrators. Unfortunately, disrespect
for these core principles of international relations has
long been the norm for the United States. It scarcely
pays attention to them.

Let me conclude with a little experiment. On
21 February, the United States delegation proposed a
text of a Security Council press statement on the events
in Haiti, which all members of the Security Council
unanimously supported. IfI may, I will read out this
brief document:

"Members of the Security Council expressed
concern about violent demonstrations and the
death ofinnocent civilians and urged all citizens to
express themselves peacefully.

"Members of the Security Council reaffirmed their
commitment to working with the people and the
Government of Haiti towards a more secure and
prosperous future.

"Members of the Security Council underscored
that it is important for all actors to demonstrate
a willingness to engage in good faith in efforts to
address Haitian political and socioeconomic issues."

My question is as follows: Are our American
colleagues willing to adopt, as a Security Council press
statement, a similar text regarding Venezuela? It is hard
not to notice that we are touching on a virtually identical
situation. The difference lies solely in the fact that, with
regard to Haiti, Washington, DC, decided to side with
the legitimate authority - at least for now. For some
reason, we have no doubt what the response to this will
be, but we would still like to hear it directly from our
United States colleagues. We will circulate this press
statement among members of the Security Council.

