Mr. Hyseni: It is with deep appreciation that I
take this opportunity to speak before the Security
Council and inform it about the steady progress my
country, the Republic of Kosovo, has continued to
make in all areas during the reporting period.
Celebration of the second anniversary of my country's
independence precisely three months ago was another
solemn and appropriate occasion to look back and take
stock of achievements, progress, key events and
developments in Kosovo during these two years of
independence.

The recognition of Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State has continued. Since the last Security
Council deliberations on Kosovo (see S/PV.6264),
three more countries - the Kingdom of Swaziland, the
Republic of Vanuatu and the Republic of Djibouti -
have recognized the independence of my country. I
wish to extend our profound thanks and appreciation to
the peoples and the Governments of those countries for
supporting the legitimate right of the people of Kosovo
to freedom and independence.

That makes 68 nations around the world that have
extended formal recognition to the youngest State in
the world. But on top ofthat, Kosovo is blessed to have
equally supportive countries among those that are still
non-recognizing countries, such as those that have
supported Kosovo's membership in the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank. And I am very
happy to inform the Council that many other countries
around the world have announced early recognition or
have said that the procedure of formal recognition is
under way.

Internally, since the last Security Council debate,
Kosovo has seen a number of positive developments,
as well as challenges. The overall security situation has

remained calm and stable. Discussions and efforts to
make Kosovo's European perspective and integration
more tangible have marked the reporting period. As we
are firmly committed to vigorously pursuing the goal
of European Union (EU) and NATO membership, the
Government of the Republic of Kosovo has engaged in
a comprehensive process with institutions of the EU in
order to give new dynamism to Kosovo's European
perspective. Based on our Constitution, we have
recently established a Ministry for European
Integration, an institution that will coordinate the work
of all line ministries related to specific requirements
deriving from the European integration process. The
establishment of the Ministry and the swift
appointment of the Minister show the profound
importance the Republic of Kosovo attaches to its
European perspective.

Kosovo equally supports the European
perspective of all the other countries of the Western
Balkans. In line with that, we consider that cooperation
and mutual assistance among the countries in the
region are crucial to a speedy integration in the
European Union of all seven countries of the Western
Balkans.

The Republic of Kosovo has already started to
implement a wide range of ambitious reforms to meet
the required European benchmarks. Of course, we
understand that this is going to be a very demanding
journey. We are of the View that, just like other
countries in our region, Kosovo should also soon be
invited to open a visa liberalization dialogue with the
European Commission.

Trade and the economy is another important
sector in which we seek a more specific European
perspective. A trade agreement between the Republic
of Kosovo and the EU is an objective of ours. We are
making every effort to reach that goal. On 16 April, the
Government of the Republic of Kosovo handed over
the completed questionnaire on trade relations with the
European Union. We hope that this and other
preparatory work at all levels will enable the
Commission to start negotiations soon.

The Government of the Republic of Kosovo has
stepped up its efforts to address and resolve many
issues of the utmost importance for our economy:
justice and security, as well as the fight against crime,
corruption and cross-border criminal activity. The
Government of the Republic has established a special

task force to tackle the issues of corruption and
organized crime. The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo provides indispensable assistance in
the police and justice sectors. We are working closely
together.

Let me emphasize here how crucial bilateral and
regional cooperation is in fighting organized crime. An
example of close cooperation to fight illicit cross-
border activity was the recent visit to Skopje of the
Kosovo Interior Minister to meet with his Macedonian
counterpart. On that occasion, they reconfirmed the
commitment of both countries to cooperate in fighting
organized crime and cross-border criminal activity. The
Government of Kosovo has strongly condemned the
incident that occurred recently in Macedonia in the
Vicinity of the Kosovo border.

On the economic front, the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo recently signed a contract with the
Bechtel-Enka consortium on a major project to build
the Morine-Merdar highway. The construction of the
four-lane motorway, connecting Kosovo with Albania
in the west and with Serbia in the east, has already
started. The highway will provide Kosovo - and
indeed the entire region - with a highly profitable
corridor, which will be very beneficial to all countries
in the Western Balkans and beyond.

Moreover, the restructuring of socially owned and
public companies and enterprises has also continued,
through either privatization or concession, as is the
case with the concession to operate the Pristina
International Airport. Another crucial major project
under way is the new Kosovo coal-based power plant,
which is part of the governmental energy strategy.

The institutions of the Republic of Kosovo have
continued to work on improving conditions in the
minority community areas, especially in Serb-majority
areas. To confront the new challenges, overwhelming
support has been provided to the newly established
municipalities and to the recently elected leadership of
those municipalities. Over the reporting period, both
President Sejdiu and Prime Minister Thaci have
continued to reach out to the Serb community through
frequent visits to Serb-majority municipalities. The
authorities of the Republic of Kosovo have reached out
to Zallq returnees as well, condemning strongly the
incidents involved.
Furthermore, decentralization based on the
Ahtisaari plan remains a political priority for the entire
country. The Kosovo Central Election Commission has
scheduled municipal elections to take place on 20 June
for the newly established Serb-majority municipality of
Partesh.

It is with reluctance, though, that I must yet again
say that, through its disruptive and profoundly
destabilizing interference, the Republic of Serbia has
continued to be very unhelpful. Encouragement and
support for illegal structures in the north has continued.
The announced so-called elections to be organized by
the Republic of Serbia in the north of Kosovo are
another example of irresponsible and unacceptable
interference. Acts such as those are aimed at
undermining efforts to enforce law and order as
contained in the comprehensive strategy for the north.
To the extremely misleading reactions and comments
to the Kosovo Government/European joint strategy for
the north, I say that all that the strategy seeks to
achieve is proper and normal living conditions for all
Kosovo's citizens throughout our country's territory.
Normalcy through the restoration of law and order
throughout my country is much wanted by all Kosovars
regardless of their ethnic or religious background. We
are there to provide that for them.

Bilateral cooperation with neighbours, as well as
regional cooperation, continues to be in the focus of
the Republic of Kosovo as a high priority. The
Republic of Kosovo has very good relations with its
immediate neighbours - Albania, Macedonia and
Montenegro - and has been cooperating closely on a
wide range of issues of mutual concern. We invite the
Republic of Serbia to join in the efforts of other nations
of the Western Balkans to establish an environment of
cooperation and understanding in the region, including
the normalization of relations with the Republic of
Kosovo. My Government stands ready to engage in
talks with Serbia on a long list of issues of mutual
interest, as two independent and sovereign States.
Dialogue would help to ease tension and normalize
relations between our countries.

The recent discovery in Serbia of a mass grave
containing the bodies of hundreds of Kosovo Albanians
has triggered a new wave of profound sadness, with
thousands of Kosovar families affected by still
unresolved questions concerning missing persons from
the Kosovo war. It is disgraceful that, even 11 years
after the war, the whereabouts of another 1,862 people
are still unknown. We call upon all stakeholders to do

their utmost to finally resolve the issue of missing
persons.

In conclusion, let me emphasize Kosovo's strong
commitment to becoming a contributing member of the
international community. The Republic of Kosovo
looks forward to working with all the members of the
Council as we promote the shared goal of international
peace and security. Once again, I wish to thank the
Council for the opportunity to present the views of the
Republic of Kosovo.

