Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to brief members of
the Security Council on developments in Kosovo since
the last briefing on 26 July 2001.
I will focus today on outlining developments in
the main priority areas: preparations for Kosovo-wide
elections and the transfer to provisional self-
government; engagement of the minority communities
and implementation of confidence-building measures
to bridge the divide between communities; and efforts
to improve law and order.

First, as regards the implementation of the
Constitutional Framework, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is now
finalizing the structure of the institutions of provisional
self-government, in which the departments of the
current Joint Interim Administrative Structure will be
streamlined into a more manageable number of
ministries. In order to build political consensus on the
future structures, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has consulted the local leadership,
who have expressed general support for a reduced
number of ministries. In order to gain acceptance and
understanding of provisional self-government among
the local population, more than 300,000 booklets
explaining the Constitutional Framework have now
been distributed in Albanian and Serbian, and a
Turkish translation is in preparation.

Alongside preparations at the central level, the
consolidation of municipal structures continues, with
further efforts to devolve authority to municipalities in
various sectors as specified in UNMIK regulation
45/2000 on municipal self-government, in order to
build democratic-governance capacity. Parallel with the
devolution of authority, however, has been an
increasing tendency on the part of the municipal
assemblies to challenge UNMIK's authority in several
areas, such as public utilities and socially owned

property.

Regarding preparations for the general elections,
UNMIK is currently in the midst of voter registration,
which began on 30 July and will run until 8 September.
Voter registration covers four categories: those who
chose not to register last year; returnees and other new
civil registrants since the municipal elections;
registrants from the 2000 municipal elections who need
to correct or amend their information, or who need to
be reassigned to new, smaller polling stations; and
lastly, out-of Kosovo registrants. Voter registration runs
alongside the ongoing civil registration process, in the
course of which some 700,000 identity cards have so
far been issued to the local population.

As of 24 August, the total number of people
within Kosovo processed by voter service centres was
39,265. Of these, 4,937 are from communities which
chose not to register last year - mainly Kosovo Serbs.
In Serbia proper, a total of 25,351 people have
registered, and 494 have registered in Montenegro. In
Vienna, the International Organization for Migration
has received a total of 27,848 mail-in applications.

Given that we are more than half way through the
voter registration period, these figures, particularly for
the Kosovo Serb community, are disappointingly low.
The institution-building pillar is, subsequently,
increasing its public information campaign and
drawing on members of municipal election committees
and local village leaders to help encourage not only
registration, but also participation when the election
takes place.

Despite the fact that several Serb leaders have
endorsed registration, including Mr. Covic,
Mr. Trajkovic and Bishop Artemije of the Serb
National Council-Gracanica - the latter two also
having registered themselves - the majority of the
Kosovo Serb community, both inside and outside
Kosovo, seemed to be waiting for an unequivocal
signal from Belgrade. Since over the weekend both
President Kostunica and Prime Minister Djindjic called
on Kosovo Serbs to register, we hope that now Kosovo
Serbs will register in greater numbers. With time
running out, we call again on the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to fully support the
efforts of UNMIK to have as many Kosovo Serbs
register as possible, and to encourage them to
participate in the elections.

Last month we informed the Council that five
Kosovo Serb parties had applied for party certification.
It transpires that these parties only submitted partial
applications and were requested to provide full details
for certification. As of now, none of these five parties
has submitted the full certification package. Indeed,
some have indicated that they will not do so until there
is an agreement to run a unified Democratic Opposition
of Serbia (DOS) list in the elections. In order to
accommodate eventual certification later, the
institution-building pillar has extended the deadline for
coalitions to certify for the elections. But again, there
is not much time left.

We endorse the message that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General gave to
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Covic, who was
recently appointed as head of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/Serbian joint coordination centre. In that
message, given two weeks ago during their first
meeting together, the Special Representative
underlined the necessity that the Kosovo Serb
community buy into the electoral process in order to
consolidate the basis for an acceptable security
environment and living conditions.

I would like now to touch upon the engagement
of Kosovo minority communities and relations with
Belgrade. There has been progress in several areas of
mutual concern to UNMIK and to the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, primarily on the issue
of missing persons and returns. On the missing persons
issue, there is now an enhanced programme of visits to
grave sites, both in Kosovo and Serbia proper; an
exchange of photographic and other information
relevant to post-mortem verification work; the
composition of a joint consolidated list of missing
Kosovo Serbs; and protocols for the repatriation of
identified remains. One of the first results achieved by
the Contact Group on Detainees and Missing Persons
was UNMIK's 15 August return to Yugoslav authorities
of the mortal remains of a Kosovo Serb woman.

With regard to returns, there was an initial
organized return under a security escort provided by
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) on 13 August, of 54 Kosovo
Serbs to the Osojane Valley, in the Pec region. That
was followed by the return of a further 30 persons on
22 August. The Osojane site is one of the 10 locations
identified in 2001 by the action plan of the Joint
Committee on Returns for Kosovo Serbs. The return
took place without incident, apart from a protest staged
by Kosovo Albanians in Istok on 23 August.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is providing
temporary shelter and basic needs while the returnees
reconstruct their houses with the aid of funding from
the European Agency for Reconstruction and bilateral
donors. In order to aid the reintegration of the Kosovo
Serb community in Osojane, additional funding will be
channelled to nearby Kosovo Albanian and Roma
communities.

By concretely supporting the issues of missing
persons and returns, UNMIK is addressing two of the
five main concerns that were outlined by President
Kostunica during the meeting with the Security
Council mission last June. The third one, normalization
of the tax-collection mechanism in northern Kosovo, is
being settled satisfactorily. The two remaining points
raised by President Kostunica are more difficult to
address. Cooperation in education and police matters
has to be handled carefully so as to take account of
legitimate Kosovo Serb interests while, at the same
time, safeguarding the integrity of UNMIK's
transitional administration.

Relations with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have generally improved over the past
month. An important step forward was made on 15
August with the meeting between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Commander of KFOR and Mr. Covic, The Special
Representative clearly reiterated the need to implement
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) in all of
Kosovo, and in particular to ensure that no parallel
security and administrative structures are in place,
especially in Mitrovica and northern Kosovo. Together
with KFOR, and through the UNMIK Belgrade office,
the Mission is exploring administrative ways and
means to improve working relations with the joint
coordination centre. At the meeting, both parties
agreed to meet regularly - a commitment that has
already materialized with the holding, on 21 August, of
a second, very constructive meeting, which took place
near Pristina.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to take up issues relating to
security and law and order.

On 16 August, Mr. Jean-Christian Cady took up
his functions as Deputy Special Representative for
Police and Justice. Under his leadership, efforts will
continue to strengthen law and order, including
completing a package of legislation to tackle organized
crime. Work has also begun to improve conditions at a
witness protection location. In addition, a witness
protection director has been appointed. Progress has
also been made on creating a specialized office to
combat organized crime. That office is scheduled to
open on 1 September.

Following a number of politically motivated
criminal incidents, the Political Violence Task Force,
which was established in the run-up to the 2000
municipal elections, has been reactivated to provide a
multi-agency, coordinated response to politically
motivated crimes, a response involving all the relevant
bodies. The most serious of those incidents in recent
days was the attempted assassination of a politician
from the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) in
Srbica, in the Mitrovica region.

The Department of Justice is proceeding with the
so-called quick-build detention facility, that is, a
temporary prison that is quickly set up. In addition to
that project, it is also proceeding with the
refurbishment of the war-damaged Dubrava prison. The
two projects will require six to 12 months properly to
complete, as well as an increased number of
international staff to manage them. There are two
urgent priorities that depend on our ability to recruit
staff with the requisite expertise. I am referring to the
development of an effective framework for parole and
probation services, as well as the provision of qualified
staff to address the needs of mentally ill inmates
requiring psychiatric services.

Efforts continue to build further the capacity of
the Kosovo Police Service (KPS), and to develop an
adequate rank system within the KPS. Two senior
command courses have now been completed at the
Kosovo Police Service School, which is run by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). As a result, a total of 32 senior commanders
have now been trained to serve in Kosovo.

I would also like during this briefing to touch
upon matters relating to the situation in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Council members
are undoubtedly aware of the letters addressed to the
Secretary-General from the President, the Foreign
Minister and the Prime Minister of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. A copy of the Secretary-
General's response to President Trajkovski has been
circulated to Council members. As that response
indicates, UNMIK and KFOR remain fully committed
to countering Albanian extremism and to restoring
normal security conditions. UNMIK will continue to
support KFOR in its efforts to sever any possible ties
that may develop between radical elements in Kosovo
and the self-appointed National Liberation Army that
operates in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

KFOR is supervising the activities of the Kosovo
Protection Corps, known as the KPC. It reports that
there is no evidence that the KPC as such has been
involved in the recent incidents in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. When individual members of
the KPC are found to be involved in criminal activities,
they are immediately subject to disciplinary measures,
which may include dismissal, and they are liable to
criminal prosecution. I believe that yesterday one
member of the KPC was subjected to this process.

Since March KFOR has increased its presence at
the border of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Albania. It has conducted a Kosovo-
wide operation to seize weapons and seek out those
suspected of being members of armed groups. In this
connection, I have some figures that have been
communicated to us by KFOR that I would like to
share with you. KFOR reports that since 31 May over
600 individuals have been detained and over 600 rifles,
1,400 grenades, 1,000 anti-tank weapons and 139,000
rounds of ammunition have been seized throughout
Kosovo, mainly in the border area. Where KFOR has
detained individuals, and where sufficient evidence of
criminal activity exists, UNMIK is committed to
investigating and prosecuting these cases to the fullest
extent of the applicable law in Kosovo.

UNMIK is greatly concerned at the continuing
closure of the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, a result of road blockades
inside the country. The border closure not only affects
the Mission's ability to support its operations in
optimum conditions, but it also has negative long-term
consequences for the Kosovo economy.

I would like to say a few words about the
economy of Kosovo. This border closure is coming at a
time when tax collection mechanisms, especially in
northern Kosovo, had finally been accepted. Two
hundred seventy Kosovo Serbs had applied for the 17
vacancies in the UNMIK tax collection and customs
service. This should improve the tax resources
collected through UNMIK. Total revenue collected so
far by UNMIK passed the 200 million deutsche mark
level just before the end of July. This is more than
twice the amount of revenue raised in the same period
last year, so obviously this means considerable
progress has been achieved.

There are ongoing efforts to attract investment to
Kosovo and to foster economic activities, in particular
through the commercialization of companies. Nine, to
date, have undergone this process. As a result of these
various measures, there has been a 180 per cent growth
in jobs in the industries involved, which is not a
negligible amount. Commercialization has engendered
extra investment and has also led to progress in the
banking sector. The banking and payments authority of
Kosovo has approved two new branches for the new
Bank of Kosovo. Significant progress is reported in the
transport sector as well. In July alone 115,000
passengers were processed by the Pristina airport,
contributing as well to Kosovo's revenue collection.
The passenger train running between Pristina and Pec
is now a regular service. A train tunnel was opened in
northern Kosovo, which might in the future make it
possible to connect Kosovo with Serbia proper.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the note of
cautious optimism sounded during the last briefing to
the Council at the end of July has been tempered
recently by the figures that I gave you a moment ago
regarding the voter registration by Kosovo Serbs. We
wish those figures were a lot higher. But it is hoped
that the clear signals that have come from Belgrade
will help to reverse this currently unsatisfactory trend
in terms of pre-election registration. Progress has been
made in several areas of mutual concern to all the
communities. I am thinking, for instance, of missing
persons and returnees.

But we must recognize that it would be
unrealistic to expect major developments in a very
short time. The situation in Kosovo can only change
progressively. Tolerance and respect for others take
time. They are not developed overnight. They can
come about only through the participation of all in
forming Kosovo's future. That is why again we renew
our appeal for massive voter registration within the
communities concerned and call upon those
communities to participate in the elections.

