Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on your assumption of your responsibilities as
President of the Security Council for the month of
August. I wish also to express our profound
appreciation to Ambassador Le Luong Minh and the
delegation of Viet Nam for their able stewardship of
the Council's work in the past month.

I would like to join others in thanking the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his comprehensive briefing, Ambassador
Wolff of the United States for his statement on behalf
of the Multinational Force in Iraq, and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for his important remarks.

The continued improvements in security across
Iraq during the past three months have given the
country and its people a chance to achieve peace,
stability and prosperity. My delegation recognizes the
contribution of combined political and military efforts
to that progress.

Despite the positive developments, security in
Iraq remains fragile. The recent suicide bombings in
Baghdad and Kirkuk that claimed a considerable
number of civilian casualties are a reminder that
investment in security is still of paramount importance.
We recognize the significance of the military efforts by
the Iraqi Security Forces in building peace and stability
in Iraq. We welcome the fact that the Iraqi Security
Forces are gaining confidence and capability, with an
increasing number of units capable of leading
operations.

My delegation continues to underline the
importance of the protection of civilians. As indicated
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/495), civilian
casualties in Iraq have often been caused by the failure
of all parties to the conflict to make the distinction
between combatants and civilians, as well as by
disproportionate attacks on civilian areas. My
delegation therefore reaffirms that all parties should
respect international human rights and humanitarian
law and continue to take the necessary measures to
ensure the protection of affected civilians. We also
share the concern of the Secretary-General over the
psychosocial impact of violence and deprivation on
millions of Iraqi children. We recognize the need for
greater efforts and resources to address that challenge.

Military initiative alone cannot offer a solution.
Achieving sustainable peace in Iraq will also require
meaningful and inclusive political dialogue and
reconciliation across the various divides. Significant
support from all segments of the Iraqi population is
critical to the achievement of long-term stability in the
country. My delegation therefore believes that it is
important for the people of Iraq to resort to peaceful
means in settling disputes and to engage in political
dialogue and reconciliation. The reconciliation meeting
in Helsinki on 29 April 2008, which involved
30 representatives from Iraq's main political and ethnic
groups, was a welcome step.

My delegation also recognizes the importance of
the political progress that Iraq has achieved to the
stability of the country. We welcome some recent
positive steps aimed at strengthening unity within the
Iraqi Government. The upcoming provincial elections
will be an important stage in the democratic process in
Iraq. We welcome the role of the Independent High
Electoral Commission of Iraq in that regard. We also
recognize the challenges that Iraq continues to face in
the early passage of its electoral law and in the
constitutional review process. We welcome the
commitment of the Government of Iraq to making
progress in those efforts.

The current growing relations between Iraq and
its neighbouring countries are a laudable development.
We welcome the convening in Kuwait of the third
expanded Ministerial Conference of the Neighbouring
Countries of Iraq on 22 April 2008, as well as the first
annual review conference of the International Compact
with Iraq in Stockholm on 29 May 2008. We continue
to attach primary importance to the International
Compact with Iraq, which serves as a new partnership
between Iraq and the international community in
achieving the consolidation of peace and
comprehensive development.

The continued presence of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and its
contribution in Iraq remains pertinent and essential,
considering the ongoing efforts of the Government and
the people of Iraq towards economic development,
embracing democracy, good governance and the rule of
law, and promoting peace and stability.

UNAMI's role in supporting the secretariat of the
International Compact with Iraq in Baghdad and in the
review of its management to increase its effectiveness
is commendable. Its assistance to the electoral
processes at the governorate level, its support for
reconciliation efforts and its contribution to
establishing a process to address disputed boundaries
are also laudable. We recognize the request of the
Government of Iraq for UNAMI to continue its
presence and its work in Iraq. Mindful also of
UNAMI's important contribution to building a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Iraq, my delegation
very much welcomes such a request.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reaffirm our
support for the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq and the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq.

