Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
Your presence here, Madam President, underscores the
importance of this debate. We would like to thank you
for your initiative to be here today to preside over the
Security Council. We also welcome the presence of
Mr. Adada, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo,
as well as that of Commissioner Djinnit.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
provides a special framework for the development of
relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Fortunately, in recent years we have
made progress in that direction - as called for by the
Charter - thanks to the African Union (AU), which
has played a leading role, and thanks also to the
European Union (EU). The Security Council and the
international community have largely benefited from
the noteworthy efforts made by the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CAEMC). That is true both
in terms of managing crises in Africa and as regards
the deployment of peacekeeping forces on the
continent. Whether in Burundi, Darfur, cote d'Ivoire,
the Central African Republic, Liberia or Somalia, the
African Union and the subregional organizations have
done a fine job of charting the course in that regard.
And your country, Madam President, has made an
important contribution to several of those efforts.

We must now expand that cooperation, and we
take note of what Mr. Djinnit said this morning in that
regard. Likewise, it is also desirable that the United
Nations develop similar cooperation with other
regional organizations.

Generally speaking, as several speakers have
already mentioned, the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations must be based on
complementarity and on respect for the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
enshrined in the Charter.

France and its European Union partners - and
here I wish to associate myself with the statement to be
made by later by the representative of Germany - are
increasingly involved in the maintenance of peace,
both by supporting the United Nations and by working
to build the capacities of regional organizations. In the
framework of its cooperation with the United Nations,
the European Union has deployed two operations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - Operation
Artemis and the EU-led force in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is important to learn lessons
from those operations in order to devise new methods
that will enable us to enhance interactions between the
United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations, and the EU. Such cooperation is also
very important with respect to Darfur.

I would add that building African capacity to
prevent, manage and settle conflicts is a priority for us.
That would enable African regional and subregional
organizations better to meet some of the objectives that
they have set for themselves. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations can make a contribution in
that respect given its expertise in the area, which
makes it a key player in that respect. We were
interested to hear what was said this morning by
Mr. Annabi on the subject of developing a partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
The EU, for its part, is fully committed to
building Africa's capacity in the area of peacekeeping,
and in that respect is working on the basis of the efforts
already made bilaterally by several Member States,
such as the 10-year capacity-building programme for

the African Union (RECAMP), initiated by France and
taken up at the European level. The RECAMP 6 cycle,
for the period 2007-2009, will thus represent a
synthesis of the joint strategy of the United Nations,
the European Union and the African Union with
respect to security in Africa.

We welcome the President's proposal to request a
report from the Secretary-General on means of
strengthening the support of the United Nations for the
capacities of regional organizations, in particular those
of the African Union. We are also pleased to see that
the report allows us to consider, within the existing
legal framework, the possibility of deepening the
dialogue between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

Finally, I should like to thank South Africa for the
draft presidential statement that it prepared and which
we fully support.

