Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Ambassador Jones Parry, for his success in conducting
the work of the Council last month. We thank you for
promptly convening this emergency Security Council
meeting to examine the dangerous situation that has
arisen in the region.

The Security Council is holding this emergency
meeting in the shadow of the dangerous developments
threatening the peace and security in the Middle East
and stemming from the current Israel's Governments
policy of war, with unforeseeable consequences. The
Israeli attack against sisterly Syria is a dangerous
escalation of violence that threatens international and
regional security. It is a violation of the United Nations
Charter and international law and is in defiance of all
the agreements, conventions and principles of
international law. Israel's actions today offer a textbook
example of the foregoing. As if it were not enough to
conduct a policy of violence against the defenceless
Palestinian people, the Israeli Government, through its
policy of provocation, went on to launch an attach
attack against a Member State and current non-
permanent member of the Security Council.

My country condemns the Israeli raid against the
Syrian Arab Republic and its violation of Lebanese and
Syrian airspace. My country deplores this blatant
aggression and the gross violation of international
legality and the laws on the sovereignty of States. We
denounce any action conducive to war.

The current Israeli Government is called on to
desist from its current policy, which has dragged the
region into a cycle of violence and tension. It must
exercise reason and wisdom rather than engage the
language of war and aggression against others. It must
respect the principles of international law, including
respect for the sovereignty of States in the region.

Here, I would like to pay tribute to the policy of
restraint adopted by the Syrian Arab Republic in the
face of aggression. Syria believes that international
forums are the best recourse and far preferable to a
language of war that victimizes people.

Finally, the Kingdom of Bahrain calls on the
Security Council to apply the Charter against aggressor
countries. We call on the international community to
take every measure to pressure Israel to stop the
practices that are undermining all peace efforts and
threatening stability and security in the region.

