Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their reports (S/20l3/678 and S/2013/663, respectively),
as well as the President and the Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism for their reports (S/2013/679).
These reports, along with the extensive briefings today,
reflect the tireless efforts of both Tribunals to comply
with the objectives set out in the completion strategies.
Nevertheless, beyond this judicial work, there is a
central aspect in the mandates of the Tribunals that we
should not in any way overlook: the promotion of peace
and reconciliation.

This year, we are celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the establishment of the Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, and next year we will celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the Tribunal for Rwanda.
We acknowlegde their considerable achievements and
progress in developing international jurisprudence, in
delivering justice to victims, in apprehending fugitives
and in trying those individuals who bear the greatest
responsibility for serious human rights violations and
Violations of humanitarian law. Furthermore, both
Tribunals have contributed to strengthening the national
justice systems, working closely with local authorities.

The work of the Tribunals finds itself at a very
crucial stage as they attempt to conclude effectively
cases that are still underway while referring pending
tasks to the Residual Mechanism. The Mechanism
ensures that no gaps will remain in the fight against
impunity, given the considerable number of ongoing
functions that persist beyond the closure of a Tribunal.
In that respect, we congratulate the President, the
Prosecutor and Registrar of the Mechanism for the
timely opening of The Hague branch in July of this
year. We would like to highlight this historic ocassion,
when for the first time the three Tribunals are fully
operational: the ICTY, the ICTR and the Residual
Mechanism.

We welcome the signing on 26 November of the
headquarters agreement between the United Nations
and the Government of Tanzania for the Arusha branch.
We also ackowledge the close cooperation between the
ICTY and the personnel of The Hague branch in the
few months it has been operational, especially given its
double workload.

It has been a productive year for the ICTY, as shown
by its various decisions, as well as the election by the
General Assembly on 18 November of an additional
judge (see A/68/PV.53).

With respect to the ICTR, we note that it continues
its deliberations on important appeals while the transfer
of functions is underway, in particular through the
transfer of archives to the Mechanism. However, as the
closure of the Tribunal nears, we are concerned by the
human rights situation faced by those who have been
acquitted or those who have served their sentence but
are still waiting to be relocated. We firmly support the
strategic plan prepared by the Tribunal for Rwanda
to relocate those individuals. We also believe that we
have an obligation to find the proper way to resolve that
situation before the ICTR concludes its work. We call
on all States to continue to actively address that matter.

We continue to be concerned by the reports of both
Tribunals on the difficulties in retaining staff, which
is one of the main obstacles to achieving the strategies
objectives. That is why we must support the Tribunals
both politically and financially. We will be closely
following this issue in the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.

Our mandate as Chair the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals is coming to an end. Next
Monday, I will be presenting an oral report to the
Security Council with an evaluation of our work and
experience. At this moment, I would simply like to
take advantage of the ocassion to thank the principals
of the Tribunals, the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Security Council Affairs Division for all their support
and contributions. Likewise, our sincere gratitude goes
to each of the delegations for their collaboration and
active participation over the past two years when we
have had the privilege of chairing this Group. We very
much appreciate this opportunity, which has allowed
us to fully assume a leadership role in the discussions
about peace and justice.

Lastly, we believe that the Tribunals have had an
important role in consolidating the rule of law and
in promoting reconciliation and long-term stability,
not only in the Balkans and Rwanda, but in the entire
world. Their jurisprudence has had far-reaching effects
and has been a source of inspiration for all national
and international jurisdictions, in particular for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. We
hope that more measures can be taken to preserve their
legacy and to facilitate the transfer of the knowledge
and experience acquired to other jurisdictions.

