Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
support the statement delivered by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the Middle East region is a grave
concern to the international community. The Palestinian
people continue to fall victim to the aggression by Israel,
which occupies their lands, murders their children,
destroys their heritage and undermines their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination.
The statements by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu against the establishment of a Palestinian
State are unacceptable and deserve to be universally
repudiated.

The Security Council should categorically reject
such aggression and adopt, without further delay, a
draft resolution demanding that Israel immediately
halt the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territory and other Arab territories. Such a draft
resolution should also call on Israel to immediately lift
the blockade on the Gaza Strip, as well as to halt the
construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
and the separation wall in occupied Palestinian
territories. It should also call for accountability for war
crimes and collective punishments committed by Israel
in the occupied territory.

The undemocratic right to exercise a veto in the
Security Council, which has allowed Israel to act with
impunity in the conduct of Israel, must cease. This
organ must comply with its obligation to promote a
negotiated solution that would bring about an end to
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and the
peaceful coexistence of two independent States on the
basis of the establishment of an independent, sovereign
and viable Palestine State. A just solution must also be
sought to the issue of Palestinian refugees, in line with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

Cuba reiterates its fervent condemnation of the
Israeli settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in East Jerusalem. We similarly
reject all measures, policies and practices associated
with this settlement campaign that also include the
construction and expansion of the illegal settlements,
as well as the separation wall, the destruction and/
or confiscation of Palestinian land and property, the
forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian families and the transfer of settlers to
occupied Palestinian territory, to mention just some
of the violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions.

We also condemn and demand an immediate halt
to violence, provocations and incitement to hatred and
terrorism on the part ofIsraeli settlers. We also call for
a halt to arbitrary detentions, mass imprisonment and
genocide against this people. We also call for an end
to reprisals and blackmail of the Palestinian National
Authority. There must be full respect for the agreements
as signed between this State and the State of Israel.

Cuba reiterates its unequivocal solidarity with the
Palestinian people and our firm and resolute support
for all actions aimed at promoting recognition of the
State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-l967 borders
with its capital in East Jerusalem.We also recognize the
right of the State Palestine to become a full Member of
the United Nations.

The reconstruction of the Gaza Strip following the
horrific bombing campaign and massive destruction
inflicted by Israel in July and August 2014, which only
further exacerbated the difficult living conditions of
the inhabitants given the cruel and illegal blockade,
also deserves the attention and urgent support of the
international community in order to bring new hope to
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians suffering under
the yoke of destruction and war.
Peace in Syria will be possible only by respecting
the right of its people to decide its own destiny. A
political solution through dialogue and negotiation is the
only alternative to the conflict in Syria. Those fuelling
the conflict from abroad with the stated goal of regime
change are responsible for the thousands of civilian
victims whose lives have been lost over four years of
fighting. We reiterate our concern at seeing the loss of
innocent lives as the fallout of the Syrian conflict. We
once again condemn all acts of violence that have taken
place in that country targeting the civilian population.
However, the supposed protection of human life and
combating terrorism cannot serve as a pretext for
foreign intervention. Unfortunately, some States seek
to dissociate the phenomenon of terrorism from the
humanitarian situation in Syria in order to prolong the
crisis, when the main reason for the emergence of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is the generalized terrorist
phenomenon that enjoys outside support.

Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism in all guises and
forms, wherever they take place and by whomever they
are perpetrated, including State-sponsored terrorism,
whether they occur in the Middle East or anywhere else
in the world .

The United Nations should seek an immediate
ceasefire in order to pave the way to dialogue and
negotiation, and should also support all efforts along
this path, such as those being undertaken by the Russian
Federation and other international actors. The prestige
of the Organization should invariably be used to oppose
those seeking to stoke the conflict by importing arms
and mercenaries.

The Syrian Government has demonstrated its
willingness to establish peace. We reiterate our
acknowledgement of its decision to abide by the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the steps it has taken to
destroy its stockpiles and chemical-weapon production
facilities. We urge the international community, in
particular the States parties to the Convention, to
support the Syrian Government and people in fulfilling
their obligations under the international legal regime.

The vast human, financial and material resources
that are currently consumed by wars in the region
would be better used to ensure health care and quality
education; to build infrastructure projects, which
generate progress; to protect and promote all human
rights, including the right to development; and to
eradicate poverty and promote social justice. These
should be our priorities as members of an Organization
that was founded 70 years ago to protect international
peace and security and uphold human dignity.

The Security Council plays a crucial role in
supporting the achievement of the well-being, peace
and development that all the peoples of the Middle
East deserve. The States members of the Council must
exercise a firm, effective and clear resistance against
the recourse to war and be advocates of peaceful
solutions without foreign interference that safeguard
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
preserve the life of the individuals involved in or
affected by conflict in the region.

