Mr. Kabtani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank the German presidency of the Security Council for having convened today's meeting at United Nations headquarters. I also wish to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for their valuable briefings about developments in the humanitarian crisis plaguing Yemen. I wish further to thank the representatives of civil society for their briefings, which touched us deeply. Tunisia is gravely alarmed by the ongoing deterioration of the situation in Yemen at all levels, particularly the dire and unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The situation continues to deteriorate, imperilling thousands of residents of that fraternal country as a consequence of the military escalation and internecine strife that have gone on unabated. This is liable to further escalate, leading to disastrous consequences in the light of the difficult circumstances stemming from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, insufficient access to health infrastructure and lack of resources in Yemen to combat the pandemic. Given this crisis, Tunisia calls on all parties in Yemen to eschew military options. The events of the past year have reflected the fact that military alternatives cannot lead to a solution to the crisis; quite to the contrary, they exacerbate and prolong the crisis and further worsen the suffering of ordinary civilians. There is a need for a comprehensive and immediate ceasefire. This is now of pressing importance. It must be consolidated, with compliance by all parties, so as to lead to the lasting peace called for by the Secretary- General and in resolution 2532 (2020). We reiterate our appreciation for the efforts undertaken at the level of the United Nations and internationally. We appreciate the proposals of the Special Envoy, including for a comprehensive ceasefire throughout the country, the immediate revival of the political process and economic and humanitarian and measures to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people, build trust among the parties and step up efforts to counter the pandemic. In our view, this is a pragmatic and comprehensive approach. It could be a good opportunity to leave violence behind and move towards a solution. We call on all parties in Yemen to embrace peaceful dialogue to reach a political settlement in line with the agreed terms of reference, specifically the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the texts arising from national dialogue and resolution 2216 (2015). In the same vein, we reiterate the need to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements, to continue to honour commitments with regard to Al-Hudaydah, to comply with the measures agreed with the Office of the Special Envoy and to increase the full and meaningful participation of women in the political process. Tunisia supports the efforts undertaken by the United Nations and the Special Envoy. At the same time, we underscore the importance of pooling international efforts to help the legitimate Yemeni Government to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic, enact the necessary economic reforms and ensure unfettered humanitarian assistance to the people of Yemen in need. To end the crisis and rebuild stability, both in Yemen and the region, military activity must cease and all parties must honour the overriding interests of Yemen so as to end the suffering of the people and guarantee their participation in the political process. The FSO Safer oil tanker holds more than a million barrels of oil. It is in a state of grave deterioration and threatens an unprecedented ecological disaster. We reiterate the call for an immediate solution to end this crisis and for inspection and maintenance teams to be dispatched. To conclude, we reiterate our steadfast position of principle in favour of a political solution, to which there is no alternative, through constructive dialogue and national reconciliation to end the crisis and to ensure respect for the sovereignty, unity and independence of Yemen.
