Mr. Vieira de Mello: Completing what my
colleague Jean-Marie Guehenno has just said, in
answering specific questions addressed to me let me
first of all thank all the members - and yourself, Mr.
President - for the unanimous support that you have
given to human rights protection and to justice and the
rule of law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
fundamental pillars of the durable peace process which
we all hope is in motion in that country - as anywhere
else, needless to say.

The representative of Pakistan - and here I will
also be answering questions put to me by the
representatives of Bulgaria, the United Kingdom and
Spain - asked how we can secure such objectives. I
presume he meant in the short to medium term. Well,
you have all answered by stating that peace is a pre-
condition for peace to be truly achievable, and
therefore the Pretoria Agreement must be implemented
by all the parties to the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Neighbours must also fully contribute to this. The Ituri
peace commission agreement that was recently reached
between President Kabila and President Museveni
could serve as a test.

As Mr. Guehenno has just said, MONUC and my
Office will continue to work in total cohesion, but for
them to be more effective they must receive a clear
mandate and the means for the implementation of all
the human rights-related provisions in the Pretoria
Agreement. This was clear in some of your statements,
as well as in what Mr. Guehenno has just said. Many
such provisions are obvious, in different articles of that
agreement; others are implicit. Certainly here the task
is immense. With a clear mandate, we can achieve a
great deal, provided the parties fully cooperate.

I would also add, as I did in my statement, that
suspects who have been clearly identified and who I
name in my report must be suspended from their
military duties and must be arrested. The early
establishment of a transitional, special jurisdiction -
the nature of which is not for me to suggest, but I will
come back to that when I answer the questions from the
representative of Cameroon - to tackle the many gross
violations of human rights over the years - on the
basis of evidence provided by ourselves, MONUC,
other sources, and a possible special commission of
investigation - is clearly another means of achieving
these goals. The truth and reconciliation commission is
essential, in my opinion, as part of this new justice
structure in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, I would say on this question that we must
demand that all the parties allow humanitarian agencies
access to populations in need. In my opinion, this is not
a negotiable matter. As I said, this is not possible at
present, particularly in rebel-controlled areas and in
trans-boundary activities between rebel-controlled
areas.
(Spoke in French)

Answering the questions from the representative
of France, I wish to inform him that the special
rapporteur for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will, on 27 February, start a 12-day trip to visit
Kinshasa, Kisangani, Gbadolite and Goma. As for the
other special rapporteurs referred to by the
representative of France, there is indeed a request by
the Commission on Human Rights which goes back to
1997, that the special rapporteurs for summary
executions and for the Congo and for the Working
Group on Disappearances go together to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But that has not yet
been possible, for security and financial reasons. I do
not have the funds necessary to finance such a mission.
But, obviously, I hope that improvement in the
situation on the ground, and the implementation of the
Peace Agreement, will make it possible to send this
mission as soon as possible.

(Spoke in English)

The representative of the United States asked if
my Office had been requested by the parties to offer
advice and technical assistance on the creation of new
institutions under the Pretoria Agreement. The answer
is that I did not receive such a request, but I certainly
made the offer to all of them, and in no uncertain terms
I repeat that offer here today. I believe Mr. Guehenno
has answered the second question, regarding the
present and future role of MONUC.

On the question of the military court to be
established by the MLC in Gbadolite,the United States
expressed disappointment that my Office cannot help. I
think Mr. Guehenno has indicated that we must be
flexible, for reasons that I certainly understand in terms
of monitoring the proceedings of that court, and in
terms of acknowledging the willingness of Mr. Bemba
to accept responsibility for the actions of his military
forces on the ground. However, as far as my Office is
concerned, I would find it difficult to observe the
proceedings of a military jurisdiction that is established
by a rebel movement, which therefore lacks legitimacy.
I fear that if we were to do so - I am speaking for my
Office now - we might lend credibility and validate
those proceedings, which I do not think is within my
competence.

I was also asked whether there had been any
follow-up action by the RCD-Goma to calls made by
my predecessor, and indeed by this Council. What I can
report is that the RCD leadership promised to prosecute
all suspects. According to the chief of its department of
external relations, the trials would be open and
suspects would have the right to defend themselves. On
27 December the Conseil operational de guerre,
meeting in Kisangani, had a short trial of a small
number of military and police officers alleged to have
masterminded the massacres of 14 May 2002. Quite
apart from the questionable legitimacy of such courts
and proceedings, the list of the accused did not include
any of the well-known high-ranking military officers
that eye-witnesses and human rights groups had
identified as having directed or led the massacres. Nor
did it include any high-level civilian officials. Instead,
those arraigned were mostly persons accused of
genocide or attempted genocide or incitation to ethnic
hatred in connection with the killing of a small number
of Rwandans in the early stages of the events. As I
said, I have provided the names of those high-ranking
military officers to the RCD leaders with whom I met
in Kisangani last January.

Turning now to questions put to me by other
members, in particular by the representative of
Spain-

(Spoke in Spanish)

She asked how to get access to the vulnerable
populations. I think the answer is simple, but it is
difficult to implement. The first element is cooperation
by the parties, especially by the rebel movements, so
that they allow access by the humanitarian
organizations under conditions of security for their
workers. Secondly, if possible, there should be a
mandate and a greater capacity on the part of MONUC
to provide military protection to our colleagues from
the humanitarian agencies.

(Spoke in French)

The representative of Cameroon asked what
measures could be taken by the international
community so that those responsible for these many
abuses will not, or no longer, enjoy impunity. First, we
spoke of an international commission of inquiry. The
second step is to establish a special jurisdiction during
the transition phase, which I think is absolutely
possible and desirable. The third is something referred
to by the representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo himself, which is creation of a jurisdiction
similar to that which now exists in Sierra Leone.

Lastly, the representative of Cameroon asked me
what I thought about bringing cases to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). This is possible in that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has ratified the
Rome Treaty, and therefore it could bring matters
before the ICC if it wished to do so. In any event, the

establishment of a commission

reconciliation seems to me to be part of the range of
measures that are desirable in order to put an end to the
climate and culture of impunity.

As requested by the representative of Cameroon
and the Council President. 1 will make the written
report available to the Council as soon as possible.

(Spoke in English)

Finally, with regard to your question.
Mr. President, as to whether the parties are ready to
bring the perpetrators to justice. Mr. Guehenno has
already answered that. On the basis of my own contacts
on the ground. I believe that at present, the
Government and the MLC seem to be prepared to do
so. I am still awaiting, as I said, a clear, tangible and
credible reply from the RDC-Goma. I have not had any
contacts with the Union des Patriots Congolais and
therefore I cannot tell you whether they are prepared to
do so or not.

Your last question was Whether there is any
chance of identifying those political leaders who
provide cover for violence against women or the
exploitation of children, in particular with regard to
their respective war efforts. I believe the answer to
your question is yes. Mr. President.

