Mr. Hasegawa: It is my privilege to address the
Security Council as it considers the Secretary-
General's end of mandate report on the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). I wish at the outset
to acknowledge the presence today of Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, who has made a
special effort to come to New York in the midst of the
crisis that Timor-Leste is going through.

This Security Council meeting is indeed critically
important for Timor-Leste, as the Council is expected
to decide on how best to respond to the requests for
continued United Nations assistance, as set forth in
three separate letters addressed to the Secretary-
General by Timorese leaders. As the situation in
Timor-Leste has undergone a rapid change since the
Secretary-General's report was issued two weeks ago,
it is also pertinent for Council members to adjust their
perceptions and assumptions. It was very helpful of the
Council to decide a week ago to postpone the meeting
to enable Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta to appear
before it to personally provide an insight into the
recent political and security developments and the
future requirements for international assistance to
Timor-Leste.

This morning I wish first to provide the Council
with a brief overview and the context of the most
recent security and political developments; secondly, to
inform it about the arrangements and progress made for
a smooth transition to a sustainable development
assistance framework; and finally, to set out the
rationale for establishing an integrated office after
UNOTIL completes its mandate in order to meet the
electoral security and political requirements identified
by the Timorese leaders.

I would like to start with a brief account of the
latest security and political developments in Timor-
Leste relating to the dismissal since mid-March of 594
soldiers - more than one third of the armed forces -
from the Timorese defence force (F-FDTL). The
dismissed soldiers staged a demonstration demanding
that an independent commission be established to
address the issue of discrimination and to seek a fair
investigation into their grievances. The 594 former
members of the F-FDTL remained peaceful throughout
the duration of the demonstrations, over four days.
However, on Friday last week, a mob of "non-594"
youths and some political elements broke off from the
camping group and attacked the Government office
building. As the Policia National de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) force was not able to deal with the situation
and retreated, the Government decided to deploy the
military to restore law and order.

During the riots, Government offices were
damaged and numerous properties - including cars,
shops and houses - were destroyed. According to the
Government's estimate, 45 houses were totally
destroyed and 116 were damaged. While the physical
damage caused to properties was minuscule in
comparison with the destruction that took place in
1999, the psychological impact on the people proved to
be immense. As many as 14,000 became internally
displaced persons as they sought refuge in churches
and other public buildings at various locations
throughout Dili. Thousands of people have also started
to move out of the capital city, Dili, and into the
surrounding mountains and outer districts. That has
also had an impact on UNOTIL itself. More than 1,000
people - families of local staff members - have
come to take refuge at the UNOTIL headquarters
compound.

According to a UNOTIL estimate, five persons
have been killed and at least 60 injured by firearms,
stone throwing or stabbing. However, there have also
been repeated assertions by the leader of the 594 group
that the number of deaths caused by the deployment of
the F-FDTL on 28 and 29 April was far larger than
officially announced. While the UNOTIL Human
Rights Unit and police advisers have visited the sites
and checked with local residents, they have not found
any credible evidence to date that supports those
allegations.

UNOTIL human rights officers will continue to
monitor the human rights situation. Yet I agree with the
President on the need, as expressed in his letter of 2
April to the Secretary-General (S/2006/230, annex), to
address grievances through the independent
commission and to strengthen the institutional
foundations of the Ministry of Defence and the
F-FDTL and their capacity to manage their human
resources development. For that reason, the United
Nations should respond to the President's request and
provide civilian advisers to assist in the drafting and
implementation of the organic law and in setting up
management mechanisms for the Ministry of Defence
and the F-FDTL.

Let me now turn to the implementation of
UNOTIL's capacity-building programme for State
institutions, mandated in resolution 1599 (2005). The
programme has been largely successful. The transition
to a sustainable development assistance framework has
been completed in almost all areas. I am pleased to
report that, out of the 45 positions that the Security
Council established a year ago, the Government and
other State institutions have identified bilateral and
multilateral development partners to take over all but
one of 40 positions and Timorese nationals have
acquired sufficient expertise to take over the remaining
five. Even in the most challenging justice sector,
international legal advisers have been successful in
providing cross-ministerial legal training for 32
national legal officers, including 11 judges, nine
prosecutors and seven public defence lawyers, who are
now fit to practice in their respective positions.

For the development of the PNTL, UNOTIL
police training advisers have completed a series of
training programmes and have assisted in developing
19 operational and training manuals on the conduct of
community police and specialized police forces. While
a great deal of progress has been made in enhancing
the professionalism of the Timorese police officers,
there is still the need, as shown by the 28 April
incident, for further intensive training so that they can
acquire the required levels of professionalism and
competency. Furthermore, there is a need to strengthen
the PNTL's Professional Ethics Office and other human
rights mechanisms that will serve to curb the potential
for the abuse of power. I call upon the international
community to provide further assistance for that
purpose.

Our military training advisers, together with
United Nations police training advisers, have also
worked successfully towards the transfer of individual
border management skills to the Border Patrol Unit -
the UPF (Unidade de Patrulhamento de Fronteira), as it
is called officially. However, the UPF will continue to
struggle with the task of managing a l72-kilometre-
long border with the insufficient number of only 296
officers having rudimentary equipment and limited
experience and formal education. The UPF officers are
expected to face challenges during the 2007 electoral
period and would benefit from additional international
assistance to prevent tensions and conflicts arising
along the border during that crucial period.

On the issue of human rights, I wish to commend
the Government of Timor-Leste for several important
accomplishments. The Office of the Provedor for
Human Rights and Justice, an independent national
institution entrusted with the legal mandate to monitor
and investigate human rights violations, opened its
doors to the public on 20 March this year. Another
major achievement is the ratification of all seven
human rights treaties by the Government, which is now
in the process of completing reports under two of those
Conventions. These are clear signs that this newly
independent democracy is committed to fulfilling its
human rights obligations at both the national and
international levels.

Allow me now to present the rationale for
establishing a small integrated office after the
completion of UNOTIL's mandate. It is my view that
such a United Nations presence would be of the utmost
importance in assisting and supporting Timor-Leste in
maintaining peace and stability, which constitute the
enabling environment essential for the conduct of free
and fair national elections in 2007.

In the preparations for the 2007 parliamentary
and presidential elections, the Government has moved
swiftly, with the assistance of international advisers,
towards finalizing the draft electoral laws for
submission to the Parliament. As the time left for the
first post-independence national elections grows short,
additional support should be provided in a systematic
manner to all State institutions involved in the electoral
process, including the Secretariat for the Technical
Administration of the Elections, the independent
National Electoral Commission (CNE), the Court of
Appeal and other organs. In order to ensure a credible
process, the CNE in particular needs adequate
resources - both human and material - for
monitoring and voter education throughout the 13
districts. The transparency of the electoral process will
directly affect the legitimacy of the outcome of the
elections and the prospects for the development of a
healthy multiparty democratic system in Timor-Leste.

In aspiring to free and fair elections, I wish to
emphasize that the continued presence of the United
Nations police will be essential to ensure that law and
order and respect for human rights are maintained
before and during the electoral campaign period. The
impartiality of the Timorese police cannot be
guaranteed in a tense political electoral environment.
United Nations police training and advisory personnel
will be required to train the Timorese police on
electoral policing procedures and practices, including
security responsibilities during and immediately
following the elections, and to assist in the monitoring
of and the reporting on the conduct of elections and in
the development and implementation of a
comprehensive election security plan, thereby
forestalling the development of volatile and possibly
violent situations. The Secretary-General proposed a
phased deployment with 25 United Nations police -
15 trainers and 10 advisers - during the initial period,
subject to changes as the electoral campaigns intensify.

The maladies afflicting the F-FDTL internally,
which are mirrored by the tragic events last week,
indicate an acute need to develop the F-FDTL
managerial capacity. Given the latest developments, the
Secretary-General's recommendation for 10 military
officers is particularly relevant. They could support the
Ministry of Defence and the F-FDTL in the
implementation of policies, rules and regulations,
instructions, procedures and principles governing all
areas of defence and military services, such as
personnel administration, personnel services, training
and doctrinal development, operations, logistic
systems, combat arms, communications and
engineering. Those military officers would be needed
in addition to the three civilian advisers who will assist
the Ministry of Defence in the development of organic
law and other statutory instruments governing military
services. Additionally, the military officers could
advise the UPF, the border patrol unit, in management
of the border security operations.
With the proposed four human rights officers and
the two human rights advisers under the civilian
advisory group, the Human Rights Support Section will
be engaged in activities to promote respect for human
rights within State institutions and civil society,
through capacity-building, advice and training, before,
during and after the elections. The provision of an
adequate number of human rights officers and advisers
should be considered as an absolute necessity,
particularly during the period leading up to the 2007
elections.

Lastly, the Secretary-General recommends the
retention of a small Civilian Advisory Section. While
the main focus of the integrated office will be electoral
assistance, the new office is expected to play a more
active role in interacting with the Timorese authorities,
including on the issue of a reliable justice system and
respect for human rights. To this end, it is essential that
the international community continue to foster the
genuine national commitment to justice and human
rights that exists in the Government, in civil society
and among the Timorese people. The 10 civilian
advisory support positions include those to support the
Ministry of Defence, as alluded to earlier, three public
prosecutors to assist in the coordination of the
prosecution services, one legal adviser to the Prime
Minister and the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal,
and two human rights advisers, just mentioned, at the
Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice
and at the National Parliament.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that, while the
leaders and the people of Timor-Leste have made
significant achievements over the past five years in
consolidating peace and democracy, State institutions
are increasingly challenged to address the grievances
of various groups and the rising expectations of the
people, as well as the potential risks associated with
the conduct of the first post-independence presidential
and parliamentary elections. The latest developments
have reminded us that not only is democracy in Timor-
Leste still fragile, but also that the internal security
situation is easily assailable.

As Einstein once said "the significant problems
we face cannot be solved at the same level of thinking
we were at when we created them". With regard to
Timor-Leste, the country that was given birth by the
United Nations in 1999, what is required of us now is a
change in our perceptions, assumptions, or the lens
through which we view this country in crisis. The
leaders and the people are calling for our assistance to
help them solve the problems that we did not intend to
create when the United Nations helped restore their
independence in 2002.

As I close this presentation, I wish to express my
appreciation for the trust and confidence that the
leaders and the people have shown in the United
Nations. We have been learning from the Timorese
people as much as they are learning from us. Finally, I
wish to express my sincere appreciation to all the
civilian police and military staff of UNOTIL, who have
worked so hard in discharging their mandate. They are
now set to return to their home countries, leaving
behind a legacy of dedication, commitment and passion
for peace, stability and the development of Timor-
Leste.

