Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
Government for convening this very important open
debate and for your ongoing commitment to the
Colombian conflict, which, as Council members
were able to see first hand today with the emotional
participation of my compatriot, Ms. Yenny Londofio,
is a flesh-and-blood reality in many conflict affected
countries. I welcome the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UNICEF, with whom we have been working very
closely for a long time.

As stated in the concept note (S/2018/625, annex),
the protection and care of children who have been
affected by armed conflict are fundamental to achieving
sustainable peace and successful reintegration is the
cornerstone of any peace process.

Colombia has been no exception. The situation
of children has been particularly difficult in recent
decades. Of the more than 8 million victims of the
armed conflict, almost 39 per cent have been children
and adolescents, which is an awful and very high
figure. Between 2013 and 2018, 410,934 children were
recorded as victims ofthe conflict and are on their way
to reparation.

We are therefore grateful for the annual report
presented by the Special Representative (S/2018/465),
which acknowledges the progress achieved thanks to
the peace process and removes the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo as
a recruiting group from its annexes, following its
transformation into a political party. We consider that
good news because it allows our institutions to continue
to work to strengthen strategies that seek to create
environments and spaces for prevention and protection,
in particular in rural parts of Colombia, which Yenny
spoke about this morning.

I would also like to share with the Council our
experience with the coordinated work we have been
doing with the Office of the Special Representative in
recent years, which has involved a coordinated effort
among Governments and could be used in other areas
of the world. In May, in Bogota, we were able to hear
about comparable experiences in Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Sierra Leone and Colombia, which helped us identify
challenges and possibles solutions.

Council members and the Swedish delegation,
which follows this issue closely, can continue to count
on Colombia's commitment during the implementation
of the post-conflict phase, in particular with regard to
indigenous children and those of African descent, as
well as children living in marginalized areas. As Yenny
said, we have to keep working to provide, if not her, at
least her daughter, and all children affected by various
conflicts, with a better future.

