Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's important meeting and inviting my delegation
to participate in it.

Once again, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has turned a deaf ear to the stern warnings of
the international community and has responded with
even more serious provocations. Along with its nuclear
programme, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's missile provocations on 4 and 28 July pose a
very serious threat to international peace and security
that requires concerted action at the global level. Such
reckless acts of defiance to repeated calls from the
international community must be met with strengthened
measures that can ensure that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea will have to bear the consequences
of its flagrant violations of international norms
and obligations. That is why the Republic of Korea
welcomes and fully supports the Council's unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2371 (2017). I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the United States for
its leadership and commitment, as well as all the other
members of the Council, including China, for their
spirit of cooperation.

Resolution 2371 (2017) introduces robust measures
for a sectoral ban that will significantly block the flow
into the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of hard
currency that might otherwise be diverted to its illicit
programme ofweapons of mass destruction. We believe
that these measures will help significantly to curb the
ability of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
further develop its weapons of mass destruction-related
activities. By unanimously adopting this resolution
today, the Security Council has once again demonstrated
that the international community will remain strongly
united in its commitment to stop the reckless and
destabilizing behaviour of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

In order to pressure the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to change its course, full and thorough
implementation of the Security Council's multiple
sanctions resolutions is of the utmost importance. The
Republic of Korea will remain committed to supporting
other Member States in their ongoing efforts to fully
and effectively implement these resolutions, including
resolution 2371 (2017), adopted today.

Pyongyang still seems to be operating under
the delusion that its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes can ensure its security. On the contrary, its
obsessive pursuit of such programmes will only serve to
strengthen the already firm resolve of the international
community. No matter how far the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea moves in pursuit of its nuclear
ambitions, our resolve to stop this will never diminish.
Pyongyang should therefore refrain from further testing
our robust collective resolve, and I sincerely hope that,
by choosing the path towards denuclearization, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea will eventually
stand on the right side of history.

