Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): The conflict in Angola is a
complex one, and it requires diligence and tact, among
other things. In this context, my delegation hails the
commitment of Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye in representing
the Secretary-General in this delicate task.

Peace and stability can come to Angola only if and
when the two parties to the conflict equally demonstrate the
necessary political will to see beyond their differences and
to work towards a common goal: peace. The international
community can only complement the efforts of the two
parties, as it has been doing over the years. It is in this
context therefore that the Government of Namibia
welcomes the positive developments in the sisterly country
of Angola. While we recognize the obstacles encountered
in the normalization process - which are noted also in the
Secretary-General's report - we continue to encourage the
Government of the Republic of Angola and UNITA to
continue to seek a peaceful resolution to the problem. The
recent contacts between the two parties are thus a source of
high hopes.

The transformation of Radio Vorgan into a non-
partisan broadcasting facility will, we hope, be completed
despite the remaining hurdles.

We note the positive aspects mentioned in the report
on the military front, as well as police aspects. However, as
a country that has emerged from conflict, we are
particularly concerned about the recently laid mines, as
these will magnify the magnitude of future development
efforts by the Angolan people. We therefore urge the
international community to continue to support the
emergency and humanitarian assistance programmes for
Angola, for these are prerequisites for the consolidation of
peace, stability and development in Angola.

No doubt, the demobilization and reintegration
challenges will be overcome in the immediate future.
However, we welcome the steps being taken, especially the
services of the Social and Counselling Programme - and
perhaps equally or more important, vocational training for
the soldiers. Our experience shows that the sooner
reintegration is addressed, the better development plans can
be pursued.

In spite of some positive developments, it is the
View of my delegation that the measures currently
imposed by the Security Council on UNITA should be
maintained in order to ensure UNITA's full compliance
with the commitments it made under the Lusaka Protocol.

The people of Angola will value and measure peace
and stability only when their socio-economic conditions
improve. Thus, the Government's economic stabilization
and economic recovery programme warrants technical,
financial and other assistance. Indeed, the significant
presence of the United Nations in Angola remains valid
today and is now more critical than ever. While progress
has been made, the United Nations task there has not yet
been completed. We therefore support the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA), as proposed by the Secretary-General.
It is our sincere hope that, during this extension, the
remaining issues will be resolved.

Finally, Namibia reiterates its readiness to continue
to contribute to the peace process in Angola until peace
is achieved.
