Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I very much appreciate
today's clear and informative briefings by Mr. Lowcock
and Mr. Feltman, and I would like to share a few
thoughts from Poland's point of view.

Since the Council's adoption on Saturday of
resolution 2401 (2018), we have been seeing yet more
extremely worrying developments on the ground. As I
said in my last statement on the subject (see S/PV.8188),
the heavy fighting in Syria has unfortunately not only
continued but is increasing. In that context, we should
persist in our efforts to take every possible action to
ensure the resolution's full and safe implementation.
We call on all to work to alleviate the suffering of
civilians, including children, by giving them free and
safe access to humanitarian assistance. That should
include voluntary evacuation, which should be strictly
overseen by the United Nations and its implementing
partners and based solely on medical need, in order
to ensure that the process is genuinely voluntary. We
would like to stress that all the relevant actors should
use all their influence to help to improve the conditions
on the ground immediately.

We urgently call for a cessation of hostilities
throughout all of Syria for 30 days, as stipulated
in resolution 2401 (2018). In that context, it is also
important to note that the cessation of hostilities may
also offer an opportunity for the talks being held under
United Nations auspices in Geneva to gain momentum,
so that a political solution can finally be reached.
For that reason, we call on all parties to fulfil their
commitments to the existing ceasefire agreements.

It should be emphasized that the implementation
of the ceasefire announced by resolution 2401 (2018)
should ensure the safe entrance and stay of humanitarian
and medical personnel without prejudice to their health
or life. When such personnel enter hard-to-reach areas,
we should know precisely how long they can stay while
delivering assistance under the ceasefire, otherwise
their lives could also be in danger.

In conclusion, let me stress the importance of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of the implementation of humanitarian resolutions.
The unanimous adoption of the resolution is just the
beginning of the process. We call on all actors with
influence on the ground to take all steps necessary to
ensure that the fighting stops, that the Syrian people are
protected and, finally, that urgent humanitarian access
is enabled and that the necessary medical evacuations
can take place.

