Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Once more
the Council has persisted in adopting further unwise
decisions against my country, which is rewarded for
putting an end to the longest conflict in Africa with
further sanctions and procedures, which only serve to
further complicate the situation on the ground.

The world in its entirety knows full well that the
differences that lasted for about two months within the
Council over the question of accountability have
nothing whatsoever to do with the achievement of
stability in Darfur. The disagreement over the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is long-standing
and well known. There are resolutions regarding the
ICC that have been stalled for years. Then the Darfur
question came to be used in order to endorse this
principle, which has been the subject of controversy for
years - and not for the sake of justice. It is a paradox
that the language used in bargaining over this
resolution was the same language that buffeted the
Council before, in another African question, and
everyone knows that full well. Justice here is a great
good used in the service of evil.

Moreover, the resolution just adopted is full of
exceptions, in view of the fact that the State concerned
with these exceptions is not party to the ICC. By the
same token, we would like to remind the Council that
the Sudan also is not party to the ICC. This makes the
implementation of a resolution like this fraught with a
series of procedural impediments and legitimate
reservations as long as the Council believes that the
scales of justice and law are based on exceptions and
the exploitation of the crises of the developing
countries and their affliction with conflicts and civil
wars in the settlement of political positions and
bargaining among major Powers. The fact remains that
the Council today did not settle the question of
accountability in Darfur. Rather, it exposed the fact
that this Criminal Court was originally intended for
developing and weak States, and that it is a tool for the
exercise of the culture of superiority and to impose
cultural superiority. It is a tool for those who believe
that they have a monopoly on virtues on this world, rife
with injustice and tyranny.

This august Council, by adopting this resolution,
has once again ridden roughshod over the African
position. The initiative by Nigeria, in its position as
Chair of the African Union, was not even the subject of
consideration, let alone the subject of interest, or of
consultations - even brief consultations - to evaluate
it; this while the African Union is present on the
ground in Darfur, where it is playing a role whose
effectiveness and efficiency were affirmed by the
representative of this Organization in all of his reports.
Moreover, this resolution was adopted at a time when
the Sudanese judiciary has gone a long way in holding
trials. This judiciary is capable and qualified and is
resolved to uphold accountability and enforce verdicts,
without exception.

We thank those countries that colonized us earlier
and taught us laws. But some here wanted to activate
the ICC and exploit the question of Darfur as a mere
pretext, in spite of knowing that such exploitation of
the issues of concern to people and profiting from
crises and conflicts simply for political gain and
bargaining has nothing to do with justice and humanity,
let alone the preservation of international legitimacy
and international peace and security, and other such
slogans and titles.

Everyone knows that the question of
accountability is a long and complicated process that
cannot be concluded overnight. While the Council is
keen on holding my country to account and to urge it to
hold trials and achieve security and stability overnight,
in a territory whose area approximates that of Iraq, we
find that very same Council continuing to use the
policy of double standards. The Council even goes so
far as to affirm that exceptions are only for major
Powers and that this Court is simply a stick used for
weak States and that it is an extension of this Council
of yours, which has always adopted resolutions and
sanctions only against weak countries, while major
Powers and those under their protection ride roughshod
over the resolutions of this Council, cynically disregard
them and consider them a dead letter.

We hear many expressions here such as "the
accountability of the Council" and "confidence in the
Council" from the members of this Council. Is there
any credibility or confidence left in this Chamber? To
the claim made by some that this resolution sends a
message to all the parties that no one will now enjoy
impunity, I would add in order to avoid
hypocrisy - "Except if he belongs to a certain
category of States".

History is replete with examples of former
empires that exercised hegemony and practised
colonialism. This Organization was born out of the
ruins of the empire of the Third Reich. Perhaps we are

witnessing a new age of hegemony in a new guise -
and perhaps history will once again spawn a new
international organization out of the ruins of a new
empire.

In conclusion. 1 would like to reiterate 7 as I
indicated in my previous statement 7 that such unwise
resolutions contain provisions that make their
implementation practically difficult. Such resolutions

will only serve to weaken the prospects for settlement
and further complicate an already complex situation.

