The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Germany and Italy in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reichel
(Germany) and Mr. Fulci (Italy) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them letters
dated 8 September, 22 October and 6 November 1998
from the President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed
to the President of the Security Council, documents
S/l998/839, S/l998/990 and S/l998/1040, respectively.
Members of the Council also have before them document
S/ 1998/ 1082, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
Slovenia has joined as a sponsor of the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1998/ 1082.

It is my understanding that the Councilis ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.


