Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. My delegation has no doubt
that with your diplomatic experience, you will
successfully direct the affairs of this important organ
during your tenure of office. At the same time, permit
me to pay tribute to your predecessor, the representative
of the United States, who, in the course of his presidency,
declared January the "month of Africa" in the Security
Council and worked tirelessly not only to make his
declaration meaningful, but also to ensure that the Council
did not ignore other areas of conflict on its agenda.

It is our hope that the momentum which was
generated during the month of January will be maintained
as far as possible in the coming months. Now that the
Council has apparently refuted the notion that African
issues were being given far less attention than those of
other parts of the world, we hope that the Council will
take appropriate and concrete action to help resolve the
various conflicts which it considered during the month of
January before they escalate further.

Perhaps as an extension of its work in January, the
Security Council may wish to consider holding occasional
joint sessions with the Economic and Social Council,
another principal organ of the United Nations, whose
functions also touch on the very survival of peoples
throughout the world. Joint sessions on silent but
potentially deadly conflict-related phenomena such as
refugees, HIV/AIDS, malaria and malnutrition, which
plague Africa today, would highlight the interrelationship
between the roles of the two Councils as far as peace and
human security are concerned.

The situation in Sierra Leone was not discussed
formally in open meetings of the Security Council in
January. However, intensive consultations were
conducted behind the scenes on the draft resolution now
before the Council. In our View, the decision to authorize
an expansion of the peacekeeping operations in Sierra
Leone - the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) - is so far the most significant outcome of
the "month of Africa" in the Security Council.
Highlighting African issues in open and formal meetings
of the Council is useful. Of course, African States would
welcome the adoption of action-oriented resolutions on
those issues. For our part, we are grateful to the Council
as a whole and to those Member States which helped lay

 

the foundations for today's action on the situation in Sierra
Leone.
We should also like to commend the Secretary-General
for translating his knowledge of the peculiar circumstances
in Sierra Leone and the subregion into bold and appropriate
recommendations to the Security Council on our behalf,
especially since the signing of the Lorne Peace Agreement
last July. My delegation also welcomes the stance which
the Secretary-General's Special Representative in Sierra
Leone took recently in response to unwarranted remarks
about the Secretary-General and the role of the United
Nations in the peace process.

The Government of Sierra Leone was seriously
concerned about the possibility of a security vacuum in the
country at the time of the imminent withdrawal of the
remaining Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) troops from
Sierra Leone. This, coupled with the relatively slow pace
of the disarmament and demobilization process, was why
we kept appealing to the international community to assist
ECOMOG in ensuring the security of the State - a
function which, under the terms of the Lorne Agreement,
was linked to the phased creation and deployment of the
restructured Sierra Leone armed forces. In this regard, let
me emphasize here that Sierra Leone did not expect
ECOMOG to remain in the country indefinitely.

The new timetable for the withdrawal of the remaining
Nigerian contingent of ECOMOG, as well as the Security
Council's decision to expand the military component of
UNAMSIL to a maximum of 11,100 personnel, should
allay some of our fears about the security of the State. The
same applies to the Council's decision to give UNAMSIL,
if not all, at least many, of the functions being performed
by ECOMOG. In this regard, the Sierra Leone Government
welcomes wholeheartedly the fact that the revised mandate
and additional responsibilities of UNAMSIL are fully
backed by Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

No one who has seen evidence of, or has read about,
the conflict in Sierra Leone should be surprised by our
elation over the fact that the Security Council is again
authorizing UNAMSIL to afford protection to civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence. We consider
this one of the most significant provisions of the new
resolution.

In closing, I would like to assure the Council that
notwithstanding some problems of unfortunate events, such
as those of January 1999, the overwhelming majority of
Sierra Leoneans who want genuine peace continue to
have faith in the ability and commitment of ECOMOG to
protect the nation. They trusted and still trust ECOMOG.

I know they are already developing the same degree of
confidence in UNAMSIL's ability to facilitate the
disarmament and demobilization process.

The adoption of this draft resolution will cast
another ray of hope across Sierra Leone. It will serve as
an additional assurance that this Council cares about their
safety and security. It is also another confidence-building
measure. The timely implementation of its relevant
provisions should also contribute immensely to the
consolidation of peace in the country.

