Ms. Sison (United States of America): At a time
when the Security Council is grappling with crises
from South Sudan to Syria, when the Council's and
the United Nations response to terrorism is ever
more important, and with threats from pandemics to
proliferation requiring united action, it is appropriate
that we discuss our working methods. I would like to
touch on three aspects: first, how we conduct meetings,
including in consultations; secondly, the importance
of the deliberations of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters; and
finally, the selection of the Secretary-General.

My delegation and others have tried to make
Security Council meetings here in the open Chamber
more topical and more oriented towards action. We
have also tried to bring humanity into the Chamber and
by that I mean real people. One of the most memorable
Council events I was ever a part of was the meeting
during our presidency on human trafficking, when we
heard from Nadia Murad Basee Taha, a Yazidi victim of
trafficking by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(see S/PV.7585). Her searing account was unforgettable
and drove home the need for Member States - for all
of us - to act to combat trafficking.

Against this backdrop we do believe that the
connection between human rights abuses and threats
to international peace and security is clear and
real and merits Council attention, which is why we
wholeheartedly support briefings in the Council by
officials from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We should not have
to surmount procedural obstacles to learn more about
dire human rights situations in North Korea or Ukraine
or anywhere else. Behind closed doors in consultations,
the Council needs to be more interactive and more
oriented towards results.

During our most recent presidencies, the United
States injected into our proceedings additional ways
for us to actually talk with each other, which has meant
turning more regularly to the briefer for follow-up. It has
meant urging Council members to jump back into the
discussion, even if they had already made a statement.
And it has meant Council members sometimes asking
each other questions to clarify positions. The dictionary
definition ofa consultation is a meeting for deliberation,
discussion or decision, and we want to put an accent on
that "decision" part. As a Council, we must ensure that
our decisions must emerge from real discussions will
we truly get at the facts.

I would like to thank the Japanese delegation for its
extremely capable stewardship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters and the Angolan delegation for its work last
year as well. Just the other day, the Council reached
agreement on a note the Working Group produced on
how to integrate newly elected members into our work
(S/2016/619). In the past few years, the Working Group
has made important contributions to the Council's daily
work, drafting notes that improved our approach on
preparing products, strengthened the continuity of the
work of the Council's subsidiary organs and clarified
how we set speaking order at meetings.

We understand that the Japanese Chair would like
the Working Group to consider ways to revamp the note
S/2010/507 of the President of the Security Council. We
look forward to working with Japan and the rest of the
Council on this effort. And consistent with the spirit
of transparency, the process by which we are selecting
the next Secretary-General has also undergone positive
changes this year.

Using General Assembly resolution 69/321 as our
guide, we were pleased to participate in the many
innovations created this year in response to calls
from Member States and from the wider public to
increase transparency in the selection process. We have
supported its implementation every step of the way
and have encouraged candidates to take advantage of
the new procedures, especially the General Assembly
informal dialogues. I would like to thank President of
the General Assembly Lykketoft for his commitment to
the dialogues and for his enthusiasm in carrying out the
letter and spirit of resolution 69/321.

The time has come for us in the Security Council to
fulfil our responsibility, as laid out clearly in the United
Nations Charter and to show the world that we are up
to the task of recommending for appointment the best
person to lead the Organization as the next Secretary-
General. We look forward to getting under way and to
our first straw poll on Thursday. We think the Council
should be decisive and aim for early agreement that
would give the next Secretary-General time to prepare
to assume the office. The United States looks forward
to working with all Council members in this process.

