Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me first of all to thank
you for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council to denounce the crime perpetrated by the
Israeli Government in the early morning hours of
yesterday that claimed the life of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin
and six other Palestinians who had been praying in the
mosque after dawn.

That Israeli terrorist operation, which constitutes
a war crime, is a continuation of the policy of
assassination and killings that is perpetrated by the
Government of Israel against the Palestinian people in
flagrant defiance and stark violation of the resolutions
of international legitimacy and the principles of
international humanitarian law. The Syrian leadership
condemned this evil crime and stressed that the acts by
the Israeli Government when it assassinated Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin represent a heinous crime that took
place in the context of other acts of killing and
destruction by Israel against the Palestinian people. It
represents a grave escalation of the volatile situation in
the region.

The Syrian Government emphasized that -
regardless of the pretexts put forth by the Sharon
Government - the international community should
condemn, in all political and humanitarian forums, that
Government's policy of murder, destruction and
violation of international law and should work
seriously to put an end to that policy. The Syrian
spokesman's statement also stressed that the deliberate
murder of a disabled Palestinian political leader is the
epitome of the policy of terror pursued by Israel -
which targets Palestinian civilians, a defenceless
people labouring under the yoke of occupation - an
authority, armed with blind power, that continues to
defy international law and divine teachings.

The boast by the Israeli head of Government that
he directly supervised the perpetration of this crime
proves what we have said time and again before the
Council: the practice of terrorism is an official Israeli
policy that should be challenged and condemned in the
context of combating international terrorism. The
spectacle of the Israeli Prime Minister and his Cabinet
members celebrating in a toast the Israeli fighter pilots'
success in assassinating a disabled, wheelchair-bound,
elderly man who was barely able to see or hear was
truly nauseating.

However, that should not distract our attention
from its proper focus: the path pursued by the Israeli
Government, which has spared no effort to undermine
every international attempt to pacify the situation in the
Middle East and to create conditions for a resumption
of the peace process with a view to the restoration of
the Palestinians' inalienable rights, the establishment
of a State on their territories and Israel's withdrawal
from Syrian and Lebanese territory, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Arab
initiative.

On the basis of humanitarian, ethical, political,
strategic and security criteria, we believe that the
Israeli head of Government's perpetration of the crime
of assassinating Sheikh Ahmed Yassin cannot be
justified - let alone taken lightly - whatever its
motives or its repercussions. Israel's commission of
that crime proves yet again that the Israeli Government
will use any flimsy pretext to provoke the Palestinians
and to suppress their aspirations to freedom and justice.
All these events prove that Israel's crimes of
assassination and its building of the expansionist wall
to achieve an illusory Israeli "security" will not
produce the desired result. The Israeli Prime Minister
might use excuses to justify this and many other
heinous crimes, but the fact before us - which no one
can deny - is that these events have only one cause:
Israel's continued occupation of Arab and Palestinian
territories and its rejection of every effort to arrive at a
just and comprehensive solution to the Middle East
problem.

We followed the discussions in the Council
yesterday and today on a statement that would
condemn the heinous Israeli crime. It is truly
regrettable that the Council has failed thus far to adopt
a position in that regard. The fact that the Arab Group
has turned to the Security Council is an expression of
our Group's commitment to international legitimacy.
We emphasize that the Council's continued silence on
the Israeli practices will only lead to further violence,
killing and destruction in our region.

We therefore appeal to the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility and to condemn the crime of
assassinating Sheikh Ahmed Yassin - a crime that has
already been condemned by the international
community. We also call upon the Council to fulfil its
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security and to adopt all measures to force Israel to
respect international legitimacy and the relevant
Security Council resolutions as a prelude to moving
forward with a resumption of the Middle East peace
process so that we can find a just and comprehensive
solution that will put an end to occupation and will
guarantee security for all.

