We thank Acting Assistant Secretary for Humanitarian Affairs Rajasingham for his briefing. We also extend gratitude to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its humanitarian workers, who currently provide aid to 7.2 million people inside Syria. Unfortunately, widespread instability continues to undermine that tremendous humanitarian response. According to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/813), violations of the Idlib ceasefire agreement have increased and extremist armed groups continue to target Turkish-Russian joint patrols. Furthermore, regime-held areas in the southern parts of Syria still suffer from continuing kidnappings and repression. Estonia demands the release of all arbitrarily detained people, especially women and children. The fragile security situation is coupled with the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Across Syria, at least 2,500 people have been infected with the virus. As testing remains low, the actual number of infections is probably much higher. It is worth noting that COVID-19 has already directly affected the Syrian political process, as the Constitutional Committee talks were postponed after three cases among the Committee's members were diagnosed in Geneva earlier this week. At the same time, inside Syria, the people in overcrowded internally displaced persons camps are the most vulnerable to the virus. Estonia requests all parties to allow unimpeded humanitarian access to those areas. Answering to our Russian and Chinese colleagues on the issue of sanctions, I repeat once again that there is absolutely no evidence that European Union (EU) sanctions are hindering the humanitarian response in Syria. Food, essential goods and medical supplies are not subject to EU restrictive measures. The sanctions target only specific individuals who support the Syrian regime. As such, after nine years of war, the Syrian regime bears the primary responsibility for the deteriorating humanitarian situation. The findings of the Secretary-General's board of inquiry implied that earlier this year, similarly to other independent investigations throughout this long, well-documented war.
