Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister McCully for convening this meeting,
and Special Coordinator Mladenov for his informative
briefing and for all his essential work.
When the Security Council convenes every
three months for an open debate on the Middle East,
our discussion inevitably returns to a similar set of
themes. They are the gut-wrenching and ever-growing
humanitarian catastrophe in Syria; the urgent need
to breathe new life into the efforts to achieve a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; and
the importance of finding political solutions to those
profound challenges, which have an impact far beyond
the borders of any one country, or even the region.
The longer those conflicts drag on, the greater the
humanitarian consequences that must be addressed,
and the deepening humanitarian crises exacerbate the
conditions in which enmity and violence thrive, making
it even harder to reach those durable political solutions.

That has been the pattern in Syria. This month we
cross the calamitous threshold of 4 million refugees
from the conflict, making Syria the largest refugee
crisis in a quarter-century. Another 7.6 million Syrians
have been displaced within the country's borders, and
approximately half of all Syrians, 12.2 million people,
need humanitarian assistance. Yet the international
community is not just failing to keep pace with the
urgent needs of this population, we are falling further
and further behind. Just a quarter of the 2015 United
Nations appeal for Syria has been funded - one quarter,
for the greatest humanitarian crisis in a generation. The
shortfall has immediate and profound consequences
for Syrians in need. As a result of the funding gap,
the World Food Programme has been forced to cut its
food assistance for more than 5.5 million Syrians, and
750,000 Syrian refugee children are not in school. The
shortfall also has considerable repercussions for Syria's
neighbours, which have shown immense generosity and
compassion in taking in millions of Syrians, and whose
Governments and communities are left to fill in the
gaps when the international community fails to step up.

As we have said all along, this humanitarian crisis is
man-made. It is fuelled by the widespread atrocities of a
regime, seemingly unsatisfied by the carnage wrought
by its barrel bombs and use of chemical weapons, that is
now dropping entire Dumpsters filled with explosives
on neighbourhoods, and that did not even suspend its
bombings on the celebratory holiday of Eid Al-Fitr. As
one resident of Aleppo told a reporter, "Here, Eid means
Assad's bombs". According to recent reporting, when
residents fled an upsurge in fighting in the city of Dar'a
in late June, the regime expanded its aerial bombing to
target the open fields and villages where civilians took
shelter. At least four hospitals in the villages where
civilians fled were hit by aerial bombs, including one
strike that reportedly killed five children in a hospital
in the village of Taibeh. A doctor who leads a makeshift
12-bed clinic in Idlib province described the horror that
followed air strikes on a nearby town on 4 June. More
than 130 wounded, many of them children, arrived
within hours. The doctor said,

"Bodies were everywhere 4 on the tables, in the
hallways, on the floor. The floor was full of blood.
Medical staff and volunteers picked their way
between the wounded, doing what they could."

Overwhelmed and able to provide only basic
treatment, the clinic had to turn away 50 people. The
doctor said, "The only choice we have is to replenish
our supplies, gather our hopes and prepare for the next
tragedy".

The humanitarian crisis is also fuelled by the terror
of violent extremist groups such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which in May released
a video of children executing 25 soldiers in Palmyra,
and which, just last week, posted footage of a child
decapitating a Syrian army captain. A 14-year-old
Yazidi boy who was abducted by ISIL and forced into
one of their so-called cub training camps, designed to
indoctrinate children as young as 4 or 5 years old, said
that he and more than 100 other child recruits were
given dolls on which to practice beheadings. In Dayr az
Zawr, ISIL recently beheaded women for the first time,
for the alleged crime of sorcery.

We must do more than name these challenges and
call for them to be addressed. Instead, it is on us to
come up with solutions that are pragmatic, principled
and effective. For example, while it is important to call
on Syria's neighbours to keep their borders open to the
Syrians fleeing violence and persecution 4 thousands
of whom are trapped at the border and struggling to
survive - we also have a responsibility to help those
neighbouring countries shoulder the immense costs of
hosting massive refugee populations. We must condemn
every use of chemical weapons in Syria, but also develop
a way of identifying those who perpetrate, organize,
sponsor or otherwise have a hand in such attacks, as the
proposed joint investigative mechanism of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons would do, so that those responsible
can one day be held accountable. And after two months
of consultations with stakeholders, the Special Envoy
ofthe Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, continues
to work diligently to create a path towards a resolution

of Syria's crisis. His efforts deserve the Council's full
support.

In the Israeli-Palestinian context, we risk falling into
a similar pattern, especially with regard to rebuilding
Gaza. Only 28 per cent of the funds pledged for Gaza's
recovery at the Cairo conference in October have been
disbursed. That means that around $2.5 billion that
was committed to assisting the people of Gaza nine
months ago has not materialized. As has been said, we
are seeing a similarly profound gap in funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which currently
has a more than $100 million shortfall. UNRWA
officials say 4 and we have heard the same thing again
today - that if the shortfall is not met they will be
forced to close its more than 700 schools, which serve
some 500,000 students, nearly half of them in Gaza.
Countries concerned about the humanitarian situation
in Gaza must follow through on their commitments
to the people who live there, and do their part to fill
UNRWA's significant budget deficit. The United States
has disbursed 95 per cent of the $400 million we
pledged at the Cairo conference, and we provided more
than $398 million to UNRWA in 2014, more than any
other bilateral donor.

Of course, it has to be said that addressing Gaza's
immediate humanitarian needs deals with the symptoms
of conflict but not the root causes. We continue to
believe that achieving a two-State solution through
negotiations remains the best path forward, not only
for resolving many of the issues in Gaza but also for
Israel's security, Palestinian aspirations and security,
and regional stability. We continue to look to the Israeli
Government and the Palestinians to demonstrate,
through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to
a two-State solution. Only then can trust be rebuilt and
a cycle of escalation avoided in the future.

In conclusion, on Monday the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2231 (2015), endorsing the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. If implemented, the
deal would cut off all pathways for the Islamic Republic
of Iran to develop the fissile material required for
a nuclear weapon, while putting in place a rigorous
inspection and transparency regime for verifying Iran's
compliance. The true measure of the deal, of course,
will be in its implementation. But also important, for
the purposes of this debate and the Security Council
in general, is what the Plan of Action tells us about
how to tackle some of the world's most seemingly
intractable problems. The first thing it tells us is about
persistence. The deal was reached after two years of
talks and gruelling negotiations between the P5+1
nations, the European Union and Iran. The second is
pragmatism. The deal does not tackle every concern
we have about Iran's destabilizing actions, but rather
focuses on the gravest single threat to the region. The
third is enforceability. The Plan of Action does not trust
that Iran is not pursuing a nuclear-weapons programme;
it puts in place rigorous verification measures that
have the force of a unified international community
behind them. The Security Council should take it as
its challenge to apply those lessons to the other serious
crises facing the region.

