Mr. Ouedraogo (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, on behalf of Mr. Alassane Ouattara, current
Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), to express our gratitude to
the Security Council for the opportunity given to us to
once again address the Council.

Twenty days ago, on 15 June, the Council afforded
me and the high-level delegation accompanying me an
opportunity to participate in an interactive meeting
with the members of the Council on the request made
by ECOWAS for the authorization of the deployment of
an ECOWAS stabilization force in Mali under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. In the course
of that constructive exchange, we shared the same
perspective on the challenges to be overcome. Above
all, there was general consensus that we need to provide
an adequate collective response to the stalemate in the
situation in Mali and to the suffering of the people
affected by a crisis whose direct implications on
regional and international security are now quite clear.
I should like to commend the strong political support
shown by the members of the Council for the request
made by ECOWAS, which today has resulted in the
adoption of a resolution aimed at supporting the efforts
ofECOWAS - which are also supported by the African
Union - to resolve the crisis in Mali.

Every passing hour brings obvious risks for a
worsening of the political, humanitarian and security
situation in Mali. Things are getting worse by the
day, with a continuation of the Constitutional crisis
in Bamako and a standstill in the humanitarian and
security situation in the north of the country, marked by
serious violations of human rights and basic freedoms,
the desecration of holy places, the destruction of
cultural heritage, the proliferation of weapons and
the increasing entrenchment of terrorist networks
and jihadist movements, which have pushed out the
Mouvement national pour la liberation de l'Azawad
from territories it occupied. Faced with this serious
situation, ECOWAS heads of State and Government
meeting at a summit in Yamoussoukro on 29 June
reaffirmed their determination to resolve the dual crisis
in Mali and reiterated their previous decisions on the
matter.

The heads of State and Government also decided
to strengthen the political transition under way in Mali
and to ensure greater inclusiveness by expanding the
governance base and by having all the parties involved
urgently adopt a road map that should produce concrete
actions and a fixed calendar for carrying them out. In
that regard, I should like to inform the members of
the Council that framework consultations involving
all major stakeholders are scheduled to take place in
Ouagadougou on 7 July, including the participation of
the mediator and the heads of State of the follow-up
group on Mali.

Moreover, the heads of State and Government
meeting in Yamoussoukro decided to speed up the
deployment to Mali of the ECOWAS stand-by force,
in line with the provisions of article 25 of the Protocol
relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security.
In that connection, a technical assessment mission made
up of ECOWAS, African Union and United Nations
experts will go to Mali on 6 July to make preparations
for the imminent deployment of troops. That will be
done in collaboration with the transition authorities,
which have formally agreed to a request to begin this
process.

I should now like to refer to several aspects
underpinning the ECOWAS approach, which I also
transmitted to the Secretary-General on the Council's
request following our interactive meeting on 15 June.

In accordance with the mandate adopted by
the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council and
approved by the current Chairman of ECOWAS on
16 April, the goal of the various regional initiatives
aims at, first, securing the transition; secondly,
establishing an environment conducive to promoting
human rights and facilitating humanitarian assistance;
and, thirdly, helping Mali's army to re-establish the
country's unity and territorial integrity. The ECOWAS
strategy therefore entails stepping up mediation efforts
vis-a-vis all the parties involved and, at the same time,
ensuring a phased deployment process. The first stage
will be the immediate deployment of a force to secure
the transition and the country's institutions. The second
will involve training and restructuring Mali's army.
And the third, which may not be necessary if mediation
succeeds, will consist of helping Mali's armed forces to
restore the country's territorial integrity.

The success of those initiatives will no doubt
require a great deal of coordination of effort, as well as
the involvement of the entire international community.
It is for that reason that in our current approach we
have emphasized close coordination with the African
Union, the United Nations, countries of the region and
other development partners. That is also the reason
that our partners are closely involved in the technical
assessment mission that will arrive in Mali tomorrow.
The conclusions of the mission will be considered in
the same spirit of coordination at a general planning
meeting of ECOWAS military chiefs of staff. That will
make it possible to fine-tune the parameters for the
deployment - that is to say, modalities, options, costs,
roles, required technical support and so on - as well
as detailed operational plans for the ECOWAS mission
in Mali, which will then transmitted to the Security
Council.

ECOWAS takes note of resolution 2056 (2012),
which has justbeen adopted unanimously by the Security
Council. It represents an important first phase in the
political involvement of the international community in
support of the efforts of ECOWAS to resolve the crisis
in Mali. In its various elements, it will strengthen the
positions upheld by ECOWAS, particularly in terms
of restoring the constitutional order and territorial
integrity of Mali, fighting terrorism, and identifying a
comprehensive strategy for the Sahel region.

In that regard, I welcome the consensus that has
emerged concerning these issues, and reiterate, on
behalf of the current Chairman of ECOWAS, the
gratitude of the 15 members of our subregion to all
Council members for the completion of this process. I
commend in particular the facilitation role played by
the permanent representation of France in this respect.

Given the gravity of the situation in Mali and
the need to maintain regional and international
security, we must ensure above all that the process
evolves sequentially and progressively towards more
robust mobilization of the international community
to dismantle the criminal and terrorist networks in
northern Mali. The magnitude of the operations being
planned clearly calls for significant financial, technical
and logistical resources.

That is why, in accordance with the decision taken
at the Yamoussoukro summit, I reiterate the ECOWAS
request that the Security Council accelerate the process
of adopting a new resolution that, on the basis of the
additional information to be provided by the technical
assessment mission, will support the deployment of an
operational ECOWAS force in Mali in order to secure
the transition and to work with a restructured Malian
army to restore the country's unity and to fight the
terrorism inexorably growing in the region.

In conclusion, Sir, I commend your leadership of
the Security Council, and reiterate my gratitude to all
Council members for their ongoing support to Mali and The Security Council has thus concluded the present
for their assistance in building peace and security in stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

W551 Africa. The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

