Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation joins you,
Mr. President, and other members of the Security Council
in conveying our profound sympathy and heartfelt
condolences to the delegation of Tunisia on the passing
away of President Bourguiba. His selfless contribution to
the struggle for freedom and independence for the peoples
of Africa will be remembered by future generations. His
death is not only a loss to Tunisia, but to Africa as a
whole.

Let me join others in expressing my delegation's
appreciation to see you, Mr. President. We welcome you to
our meeting this morning.

The magnitude of the suffering of the people of
Afghanistan because of the war is comparable to that of
situations in Africa. It is therefore important that we
continue to seek solutions to achieve peace in Afghanistan.

I also want to thank Mr. Renninger for his very
comprehensive briefing this morning.

Our thanks go also to Ambassador Listre for the
recent report and for the information about the work of the
sanctions Committee. We are of the view that his
delegation is doing a commendable job in attending to the
work of the Committee.

My delegation welcomes the slowdown in fighting
between the two factions in Afghanistan after the recent
offensives. We trust that this situation will continue, to
allow for uninterrupted humanitarian assistance. However,
we are concerned at reports about preparations for renewed
fighting by the parties. The report before us is very clear
about the devastating effects of the war on civilians -
especially women and children - who already have to
battle other extreme elements, such as harsh winter
conditions.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country, and we condemn the
violations of human rights perpetrated against civilians. In
particular we condemn and reject all discriminatory
practices and restrictions against women and girls by the
Taliban. We therefore welcome the continuing efforts by
the United Nations - and in particular by the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General - to find a
lasting political solution to the Afghan conflict.

My delegation remains of the view that only a
negotiated political settlement aimed at the establishment
of a broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative
Government acceptable to all Afghans can lead to peace
and national reconciliation. In this regard, we welcome
the renewed commitment of members of the "six plus
two" group to contribute to the peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict. Furthermore, we welcome the efforts
made by other parties - such as the recent peace talks in
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, which were arranged by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference - as well as
other initiatives to promote peace in Afghanistan.

With regard to drug cultivation and production
activities in Afghanistan, my delegation is particularly
struck by and concerned about the magnitude of the
problem and the role it plays in the continuation of the
conflict. We therefore welcome the efforts made by the
United Nations through the Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, as well as the initiatives by the "six
plus two" group, to curtail the cultivation, production and
trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan.

Finally, my delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that was submitted by the Russian delegation.

