The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We are grateful for the presentation of the second
report (see S/2019/407) by the Special Adviser and
Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
Mr. Karim Khan, following our meeting in Baghdad
in June organized under the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Security Council.

As one ofthe countries that co-sponsored resolution
2379 (2017), we reiterate our conviction that the work of
the Investigative Team is part ofa plan, requested by the
Government of Iraq, not only to ensure accountability
for terrorist acts committed by Da'esh, but also to
contribute to reconciliation in the country. In that
regard, we reaffirm our support for the Investigative
Team to continue to operationalize its mandate in order
to carry out its work in an impartial, independent and
credible manner in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant norms of international law,
including international human rights law, international

humanitarian law and the policies and best practices of
the Organization.

We welcome the relationship of respect and
cooperation between the Investigative Team and the
Government of Iraq, as well as with the most diverse
sectors of Iraqi society, including survivors and local
communities, in order that their activities complement
the investigations conducted by the national authorities
of Iraq. We also highlight the special support provided
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.

We recognize the importance of prioritizing
forensic analyses and exhumations, and we note with
interest the excavation carried out in March and April.
With regard to gathering evidence, which has only just
begun, although it is of particular importance to the Iraqi
authorities, we recognize the future potential of using
such evidence for the benefit of other States requesting
it, in line with the mandate of the Investigation Team.

Lastly, we stress the need to ensure that the
Investigative Team has the necessary resources at its
disposal to carry out its work.

In conclusion, despite the progress made in
combating the Islamic State both in Syria and Iraq, the
threat remains present and its influence has permeated
other spaces and taken on new traits. We therefore
reiterate our support for the Investigative Team, whose
success will foster the fight against impunity and the
deterrence of new crimes, while strengthening access
to justice and the rule of law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

