Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their detailed accounts of the current
situation in Yemen.

At the outset, let me also express our condemnation
in the strongest terms of the recent attacks on two
major oil facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Such incidents pose a direct threat to the global energy
supply as well as to broader security and stability in
the Middle East, as they have the potential to further
escalate regional and global tensions. We call on all
parties to exercise the maximum level of restraint.

Let me now address the situation in Al-Hudaydah.
We welcome the recent meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and the activation of the
ceasefire enhancement and de-escalation mechanism,
which enables the establishment of a joint operations
centre. We hope that it will help preserve the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah and build trust among the parties.
However, in our view, it is critical to expedite the
implementation of the remaining stages of the
redeployment of forces from the city. We also encourage
the parties to take meaningful steps to ensure the full
implementation of all the remaining provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement.

Poland is deeply concerned about the surge of
violence across Yemen in recent weeks, in particular
in the south, resulting in a high number of casualties
among civilians and threatening the vital lifelines for the
import and distribution of basic supplies and services
across Yemen, both by air and sea. If the fighting
continues, it will contribute to further instability,
the exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis and the
deepening of Yemen's political and social divisions.

It is therefore paramount that the parties cease
all military operations and engage in a constructive
dialogue to resolve their differences without further
delay. They must also meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and ensure the protection of civilians
at all times.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
are deeply alarmed by the negative impact of the
underfunding of the humanitarian response plan for
Yemen. Without the much-needed financial help, United
Nations humanitarian operations will have to be further
scaled-back. As the survival of millions of Yemenis
depends entirely upon the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, we urge all donors to swiftly disburse the
pledges made during the conference in Geneva. We
also urge the parties to ensure unhindered access, both
in terms of humanitarian aid and personnel into and
across Yemen.

I would like to reiterate once again that there
can be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen.
Violence and military operations contribute only to the
prolongation of the crisis and further deepen the already
immense suffering of the civilian population. Poland
strongly believes that an inclusive, United Nations-led
political process must be urgently resumed in parallel
with the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement,
as it is the only way to end the violence and create the
necessary conditions for a substantial improvement of
the disastrous humanitarian situation.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Mr. Griffiths
for his tireless efforts to bring about a negotiated,
comprehensive solution to the conflict and urge
the parties to engage constructively and without
preconditions with the Special Envoy. Yemen cannot
wait for peace any longer.

