Mr. Szetre (Norway): Norway is deeply concerned
about recent developments in the Middle East, in
particular in Syria, Yemen and Gaza. As a first step, it
is crucial to ease tensions and avoid a further escalation
of violence in the region. Norway supports United
Nations Special Envoys De Mistura, Griffiths and
Salame and Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process Mladenov in their efforts to overcome
political deadlocks and to include all parties in credible
political processes.

In Syria, victories on the battlefield cannot replace
a political solution. Norway urges all parties involved
to engage in good faith in the formation and subsequent
work of the constitutional committee. Meanwhile, we
welcome the emerging consensus in support ofrestoring
stability in the Golan Heights, on the basis of resolution
338 (1973) and the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. Norway remains deeply concerned about
the situation in Yemen. After more than three years of
conflict, Yemen is experiencing the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world. Norway's humanitarian support
totals approximately $34 million, including our
contribution through the Central Emergency Response
Fund. It is imperative that the United Nations receive
full support from all stakeholders.

Our long-standing engagement in the efforts to
resolve the conflict between Israel and Palestine is
based on our firm support for a negotiated two-State
solution. Durable peace will not be possible before all
final-status issues are resolved. Economic development
and institution-building are important steps but can
never substitute for a political solution. Therefore,
Norway reiterates its call for the resumption of a
meaningful political process.

Together with the United Nations, the European

Union (EU) and Egypt, as the chair of the International
Donor Group for Palestine, Norway has intensified
efforts to address the precarious humanitarian situation
in Gaza. Key priorities are increased water and energy
distribution and improved access, job creation and the
movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza. Our
goal is to assist the 2 million people living in Gaza and
enable the Palestinian Authority to regain full control.
The political division between Gaza and the West Bank
must end. Gaza is an integral part of Palestine and of
a future Palestinian State. We commend Egypt on its
mediation efforts to address all outstanding issues,
including access, movement and security. To make
further progress, all Palestinian factions must end
provocative and violent activities. The closure regime
must be eased and the dual-use list revised.

Donors must remain committed to alleviating the
situation on the ground and to providing continued
assistance to the Palestinian people. Norway hosted an
informal meeting with the Palestinian Authority, the
United Nations, the EU and the World Bank in Oslo on
18 July. It was followed by a meeting for all donors in
Ramallah on 23 July, where the Palestinian Authority
and those present at the Oslo meeting presented current
plans and donor activities. Progress in Gaza is our
priority leading up to the ministerial meeting of the
International Donor Group for Palestine, to be held on
27 September in New York.

The nuclear agreement with Iran, which was
endorsed unanimously by the Security Council,
has helped promote regional stability and has been
effective in achieving its objective - to prevent Iran
from developing nuclear weapons. We therefore regret
President Trump's decision to withdraw the United
States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
and to reimpose United States nuclear sanctions. We
strongly urge Iran and the remaining signatories to
uphold the deal and continue fulfilling their obligations.
Norway supports the EU's active engagement in the
efforts to ensure continued implementation.

