Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing today.

I want to say a special word about Mr. Mulet and to
thank him for being here. One look at his resume shows
that he is the right man to lead the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). He had a distinguished
career in public service in his home country of
Guatemala. He has served as the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and as Special

Envoy to Haiti. His long list of academic credentials
is impressive. In other words, Mr. Mulet is a man very
much like the institution he heads - experienced,
professional and independent. All of those qualities are
reflected in the JIM's latest report (S/2017/904, annex).

Our friends from Russia have insisted that we put
off the crucial task of reauthorizing the JIM. until we
have discussed the report. They tell us that they want to
determine who is responsible for the chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. Russia affirmed that desire when it
voted to create the JIM. in 2015 and to reauthorize it in
2016. I share that desire for answers, so let me try to
address their concerns.

The JIM. has fulfilled its mandate to identify the
perpetrators of chemical weapons attacks in Syria. It
had produced a report that concludes that the Al-Assad
regime is responsibility for the 4 April sarin gas attack
at Khan Shaykhun. In addition, the report concludes
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is responsible for the September 2016 sulfur mustard
attack at Umm Hawsh. Our Russian friends tell us they
want to ensure that the report and the work of the JIM
itself are professional and impartial. Again, I agree
with them.

The JIM's report not only identifies those behind
the chemical attacks, it also explains how it reached
its conclusion. It lays out in great detail how the
team carried out such a challenging investigation.
And just as any independent team of experts would,
it takes note of any irregularities that it found in the
information obtained from the investigation. The report
transparently lays out those facts, but determines that
they do not call into question the findings.

Russia has insisted that it is ready to return to
the question of extending the JIM's mandate after the
publication of the latest report. "Give us more time",
they said two weeks ago. "Give us until 7 November",
they said as they acted to protect one of the world's
most murderous regimes from the consequences of its
actions. Today is 7 November.

In the intervening days, we have tried to work with
our friends from Russia in order to ensure that we could
achieve a unanimous reauthorization. We have listened
carefully to Russia's concerns regarding methodology
and site visits, even though most Council members do
not share them. We have much that we can agree on.
We can agree to strengthen the language on the use of
chemical weapons by terrorists. We can also emphasize
the need for all parties to help investigators access sites
in Syria relevant to their investigation, and we can
underscore the ongoing importance of high standards
and sound evidence for each attribution. On those issues
we want to work with Russia and find common ground.
All of those items are found in Russia's proposed draft
resolution. We can accept all of them as a show of good
faith and a desire to find consensus. We have told that
to our Russian friends, and we intend to circulate our
text this afternoon.

However, we cannot put language in the draft
resolution that keeps the Syrians from being
investigated or from having been found to have used
chemical weapons. That is completely up to Syria and
Russia to work out. Yet, even though we have continued
to engage Russia bilaterally and have made efforts to
address its concerns since it vetoed the draft resolution
two weeks ago, our Russian friends continue to push
unacceptable language that is meant only to undermine
the investigators and divide the Council.

The team of experts that the Council created to
investigate those horrific attacks in Syria has done its
job. Now it is time for us to do our job. Since 2012,
there have been hundreds of reports of uses of chemical
weapons in Syria. That is not something that we can turn
away from. Our concern is not about ISIL, the Syrian
regime or anyone else. It is about the people of Syria
and their protection. Ensuring that those responsible
be identified and held accountable is critical to ending
the use of chemical weapons. The Council has created
the tool, the Joint Investigative Mechanism, to do just
that. Now is the time for the Council to unanimously
renew the JIM's mandate in order to ensure that it will
continue to do its crucial work for at least another year.

The arguments for renewing the J IM's mandate are
clear. Its most recent report has only strengthened those
arguments. We must ensure continuity of operations.
Last year's delay in renewing the JIM. cost it nearly six
months of work. We cannot afford such a loss this year
when there is evidence of the ongoing use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Tragically, there is no lack ofcases for
the JIM. to investigate. Just last week, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding
Mission determined that the chemical weapon, sarin
gas, was used in the attack that took place on 30 March,
injuring more than 70 people. That incident bears the
hallmarks of the Khan Shaykhun attack that occurred
just a few days later. I remember vividly the faces of
the murdered children of Khan Shaykhun. I remember
the outrage expressed by the Council. In 2015, the
Council came together in a rare moment of unity in
order to identify those who used chemical weapons
and to ensure that such barbaric acts did not continue.
The result of that rare unity was the JIM, which is the
best tool we have to ensure that no individual, group or
regime is allowed to attack with chemical weapons and
get away with it.

The JIM. will cease its operations in 10 short days.
There can now be no higher priority for the Security
Council than to ensure the continued operation of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. Anyone who prevents
us from achieving that goal is aiding and abetting
those who have been using chemical weapons in Syria.
They are helping to ensure not just that more women
and children will die, but also that those women and
children will die in one of the cruellest, most painful
ways possible. We are better than that. We must
be. Now is the time to show the world. I call on the
Security Council to act immediately to renew the Joint
Investigative Mechanism.

