Ms. Fore: I join the members of the Security
Council today in our shared and steadfast commitment
to protect children affected by armed conflict, prevent
their physical and psychological harm and provide them
with a future. First, however, we must face facts. As
Special Representative Gamba noted, there were more
than 24,000 documented violations against children
in armed conflict in 2018 - up from 21,000 the year
before. Half of those violations involved the killing
or maiming of children. Those are just the verified
incidents; the numbers are higher. We must do better.

We at UNICEF are deeply distressed about the
continued and rampant use of explosive weapons
and their impact on children. Air strikes, landmines,
improvised explosive devices, rocket attacks, cluster
munitions and artillery shelling cause the great majority
of child casualties in armed conflict today. We know
too that children account for more than two thirds of
all civilians killed or maimed by explosive remnants
of war. Their bodies are small and fragile and they are
attracted by the shiny coloured metals. Not only are
children harmed in disproportionate numbers because
of their size and other factors, the severity of the harm
must be borne in mind. They are also much more
likely than adults to be disabled or killed as a result of
blast injuries.

Those appalling facts speak for themselves. Ten
years after the Security Council adopted resolution
1882 (2009), the facts tell us that we have miles to go to
end grave violations against children in armed conflict.
But they do not tell the whole story. There is so much
we can do, and so much we are doing, to come to the
aid of children at risk. Day in and day out, UNICEF and
our many partners work with courageous and resilient
children and young people in conflict zones around
the world. They give us hope for the future - theirs
and ours.

Let me tell members about two of them. Saja is a
13-year-old from Aleppo who has spent half her life
living in conflict. In recent years, she lost her home,
her brother and several other loved ones. She also lost
her left leg to a bomb. But she has not lost hope. Every
day, she makes the long walk to school to continue her
education. Saja says that her most prized possession is
her prosthetic leg. She was an aspiring gymnast before
losing her leg and still practices flips in her family's
tiny apartment. Her wonderful new dream is to compete
in the Paralympic Games.

Then there is Fatima, a young girl I met at a social
support centre in Aden where we provide psychosocial
support for young people. Fatima talked to me about
fleeing the terrible violence in her hometown. She said
she was now learning to reconnect with her peers and
showed me a drawing that she had just made. It was
a picture of a girl and her girlfriend sitting in a park
on a sunny day. Staff members at the centre later told
me that, when Fatima first arrived she drew pictures
of only guns and blood, but that she had begun to heal.

In 2018, UNICEF reached 6.9 million children
and adolescents like Saja with emergency education
in humanitarian crises. We focused greater attention
on the needs of children living with disabilities in
the midst of conflicts. To help prevent disabilities
from explosive remnants of war, we worked on risk
education programmes in places such as Syria, Mali
and Myanmar. Simple posters and leaflets could mean
the difference between life, death or disability for
children in conflict areas.

Also last year, UNICEF provided 3.6 million
children and adolescents like Fatima with psychosocial
support to help them cope with trauma and regain the
childhood that they deserve. But we must do even more
to meet the mental health needs of children affected by
armed conflict That is an area that cries out for more
robust and sustainable funding. UNICEF remains
especially concerned about the mental health, physical
security and basic rights of children associated with
armed groups. Tens of thousands of those children
languish in camps, detention centres and orphanages
in Syria, Iraq and other countries. They are shunned by
their communities because of perceived or actual links
with groups designated as terrorists.

When children leave those groups they should
receive urgently needed protection and humanitarian
assistance after the harrowing experiences they
have endured - often for years. Instead, they are
ostracized, rejected or locked up. Under resolution
2427 (2018) - a critical achievement of the Security
Council last year - children associated with armed
groups should be treated primarily as victims. That
means all children, not just children under a specific
age, including those who may have committed crimes.
They should never be deprived ofliberty solely because
of their alleged or actual association with armed groups.

Boys and girls often join or support armed
groups under extreme duress, coercion, fear or
manipulation - or simply as a matter of survival. The
evidence suggests that they are rarely driven by ideology.
Rather than being detained they should be reintegrated
into society, with a holistic approach to address their
complex needs. Along with many others working on
child protection, UNICEF has developed sustainable
and evidence-based reintegration programmes to do
just that. As Special Representative Gamba said, those
programmes take time but carry great rewards.

UNICEF calls on all Member States to reintegrate
children associated with armed groups into society
and support holistic, evidence-based reintegration
programming. We commend the States that are already
doing so. Member States - indeed, all Governments
and their militaries 4 are themselves accountable for
preventing the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. UNICEF continues to provide a strong voice
on the issue. As we speak, UNICEF is supporting an
age-verification workshop with the Sudanese military
and Rapid Support Forces in Khartoum. Next week,
our teams will conduct age verification with the Rapid
Support Forces in Nyala, Darfur.

At the same time, we remain concerned about
the excessive use of military force against civilians,
including children, who engage in peaceful protest.
Authorities should exercise maximum restraint in such
situations. Otherwise, they risk killing children or
causing grave injuries that lead to permanent disabilities.
Protecting the lives and futures of children affected by
armed conflict is not just the right thing to do; it is in
our collective self-interest. In conflict and post-conflict
situations worldwide, we must engage actively with
young people to prevent spiralling violence and achieve
lasting peace. They are the adults and the leaders of
tomorrow. In the spirit of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, let us
do better - let us do more - to protect vulnerable
children. Our global future will depend upon it.

