Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda would like to join
others in thanking you and your delegation, Madam
President, for organizing today's important debate.
On behalf of my Government and the people of
Rwanda, I would like to offer our sincere condolences
to the Government and people of France, especially the
families affected, for their losses in the terrorist attacks
on Friday.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing. His presence here today once again highlights
his commitment to peace, security and development
as a core part of the work of his Office. I would also
like to thank my good friend Ambassador Skoog, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Ouided
Bouchamaoui for their briefings.

The concept note provided for today's open debate
pertinently highlights the nexus between peace, security
and development (S/2015/845, annex). That nexus is a
fact in that, since the end of the Cold War, the pursuit
of lasting peace has become, together with sustainable
development, a global imperative. Today, it is obvious
that peace is conducive to development and vice versa.

Indeed, development, if achieved, contributes
decisively to the elimination of several ofthe root causes
of conflict, and if poverty is reduced, social inequities
diminish, which allows for a more optimum allocation
of scarce resources, which, in turn, can certainly help to
prevent many of the situations that exacerbate conflict.

As His Excellency President Paul Kagame recently
stated at the Peace and Democracy Prize event in
Tangiers, Morocco, which was held under the theme
"From shocks to co-emergence",

"Peace is the starting point for growth and
development It is a condition produced when
citizens are taken seriously as individuals, as
stakeholders, and mobilized towards good politics
and fully included in governance".

In many situations, however, those goals
are pursued separately, which then renders them
unsustainable. Simply put, policymakers and
practitioners do not agree on which should be the
higher priority.

We believe that current global trends necessitate
a pro-active approach to making peace, security and
development a mutually reinforcing and intertwined
package, at both the national and the international
levels. At the national level, we are of the view that
advancing governance and the rule of law, combating
corruption, improving transparency and accountability,
and building confidence in our people lay a strong
foundation for sustainable development, durable peace
and security. That has been true in our case, and all the
economic and social progress that we have been able
to achieve in the past 21 years rests on our leadership's
commitment to ultimately ensuring that all citizens
enjoy safety, security and inclusive and democratic
governance.

The international community has an important role
to play, in that it should assist in building local capacity
for peace-sensitive development in order to enable
Governments to formulate and implement policies
that take the realities of conflict into account, thereby
minimizing the risk of the need for development
interventions. Conflict sensitivity entails ways of
reducing conflict, helping communities to build peace
and enabling institutions to address the structural
causes of conflict.

In that regard, we value the Peacebuilding
Commission's sustained efforts in post-conflict
situations since 2005, despite the considerable
challenges. We note with appreciation the
recommendations of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the 2015 Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490), which proved once again
that the architecture is inadequate, underresourced and
largely neglected by Member States, as well as by the
Security Council. It is our hope that the international
community will rise to the occasion and find ways to
effectively implement the review's recommendations.

Lastly, with billions of people still living in poverty
around the world and with growing populations, the
depletion of natural resources, the adverse impacts
of environmental degradation and the recent crises in
public health and migration and the spread of all types
of extremism, including terrorism, there is clearly
a need for strong and effective global cooperation.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), along
with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals, builds on
the premise that an integrated approach that addresses
peace, security and development is necessary. Goal 16
specifically recognizes that sustainable development
cannot be realized without peace and security and that
peace and security will be at risk without sustainable
development.

Improving the conditions for social justice, in
particular, is fundamental to the promotion of peace
in a variety of contexts throughout the world. The
Sustainable Development Goals should serve as
effective tools in realizing inclusive development for all
and in determining the right course of action to follow
as we strive to achieve an inclusive and widespread
economic development that gives more people a greater
stake now in avoiding violent disruption, while offering
them credible hope for a better future for themselves
and their children.

