Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I thank the
Tribunal and Mechanism Presidents and Prosecutors
for their briefings and their reports.

I would like to begin by emphasizing the United
Kingdom's continued support for the important work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. Through their efforts, we will hold
to account the perpetrators of some of the most heinous
crimes of the twentieth century.

On the ICTY, we are pleased that the appeals of
the Popovic' et al. and Tolimir cases have now been
completed. We hope that the timetable for the Karadeie,
trial is maintained and that a means can be found to
complete Hadeie trial. Now that the Office of the
Prosecutor has filed a motion to proceed in Hadeie, we
look forward to hearing the trial Chamber's decision on
the case soon. On the Mladie case, we recognize the
importance of new evidence presented in that trial and
we now look forward to the case's timely resolution.
We note that the set-out judgement is due at the end
of 2015 and we also understand the complexities with
the defendant's revoked provisional release. We hope
that the remaining three appeals can also be completed
within the timetable set forth in the ICTY report. We
encourage the Tribunal to continue with its efforts to
conclude its work in an expeditious and timely manner.

It is encouraging that the Office of the Prosecutor
for the ICTY remains satisfied with the cooperation
it has received from the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, and the United
Kingdom welcomes their continued cooperation. It is
also positive that the search for missing persons has
been reinvigorated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support the Prosecutor's call for accelerated searches
for and exhumation of mass graves and identification
of remains, and we urge the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Governments at the State and entity levels to support
those efforts. However, the Prosecutor again raises
concerns about the significant challenges that remain
with respect to regional prosecutions of war crimes,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That risks
breaching the time lines of the National War Crimes
Strategy. We are concerned that only a fraction of
cases have been prosecuted at the national level and
that regional war crimes prosecution continue to face
systemic and persistent challenges.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we are pleased that the Tribunal
remains on track to complete its one remaining case,
Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare), at the end of 2015, with
the formal closure of the ICTR by the end of this year.
But the failure to apprehend the nine fugitives remains
a cause for concern. We encourage all States to provide
their full support to Rwanda and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to ensure
their arrests. The work of ensuring accountability
cannot be completed until those individuals have
been brought to justice. We thank the ICTR for their
efforts in trying to resolve the problem of relocating
the individuals in Arusha, and we are pleased that the
Mechanism has adopted a strategic plan for that. We
also welcome discussions on reparations for victims.
As the Rwandan Government remains in consultation
with the International Organization for Migration on
the draft assessment study with recommendations, we
would be grateful for a progress update.

In regard to the Mechanism, we welcome the news
that it has delivered its first appeal judgement and is
now reviewing referred cases. We also commend the
significant progress on administrative issues, including
the staff at work on the permanent premises in Arusha.
We commend both Tribunals for the ongoing transition
of activities to the Mechanism. A smooth transition
is a priority, and we encourage the Tribunals and the
Mechanism to continue to work together to meet the
joint aims of the completion strategies.

Let me close by echoing Prosecutor Brammetz's
call for the international community to use the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide to reaffirm its
commitment to achieving justice. The anniversary
should be foremost a time to pay respects to the victims
and their families as well as to all innocent victims of
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

