The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

Sweden warmly welcomed the agreement on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in July
2015. It is a victory for diplomacy and a prime example
of peaceful dispute resolution and conflict prevention.
Its successful implementation benefits both stability in
the region and international peace and security. We call
on all parties to fully honour their commitments and
to build on the momentum provided by the agreement.

Sweden welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/1136), which finds that implementation,
overall, is on track. We commend the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran for its compliance with its
nuclear-related obligations, as evidenced by the reports
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The fact
that there has been no information indicating activities
in contravention of restrictions regarding ballistic
missile activity and related technology is welcome. It is
also promising that the procurement channel process is
working, in line with the agreement.

Despite the generally positive picture regarding
implementation, a number of areas for concern remain,
however.

First, we are concerned about reports of arms
transfers, alleged to have originated in Iran, having
taken place. All supply, sale or transfer of arms or
related materials from Iran must be authorized on a
case-by-case basis by the Security Council.

Secondly, there have been reported contraventions
of the travel ban. Only the Security Council can
determine when such travel is justified, and all
countries must meet their obligations to prevent entry
and transit through their territories of individuals on
the list maintained pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015).

Sweden calls on the Government of Iran to
formally respond to the reports of activities undertaken
contrary to the provisions of annex B to the resolution
identified in the Secretary-General's report. We stress
the importance of the Secretary-General receiving all
the necessary information, including the opportunity
to examine specific seizures of arms suspected to
have originated in Iran. A close dialogue between
Iran and the Secretary-General and between Iran
and the facilitator is instrumental in that regard. A
crucial confidence-building measure would be early
ratification by Iran of the Additional Protocol.

The historic agreement is one of the major
diplomatic achievements of the past decade. Successful
implementation requires the long-term commitment of
all parties, based on mutual trust and respect. I hope we
can all work towards that end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

