Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I thank the Council
for the opportunity to provide a short summary of the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), since our last joint
meeting in May (see S/PV.6767), in order to complement
the key points made by Ambassador Singh Puri in the
joint statement.

As Council members know, my tenure as Chair of
the 1540 Committee is coming to a close. Since this is
my lastjoint briefing, I would like to thank the Security
Council and the Secretariat for the support provided to
me and the 1540 Committee during the past two years.
Together, we have raised global awareness of resolution

1540 (2004), facilitated assistance to States to enable
them to strengthen national capabilities to implement
its requirements, laid the foundation for improved
mechanisms for sharing the most effective practices on
national implementation and promoted synergy with
other international organizations.

Those are just some of the areas on which the
Committee will continue to focus its attention, in
accordance with its eleventh programme of work, which
we have transmitted to the Council on 22 August. The
Committee will continue to work with Member States
on the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011), guided by the principles
of transparency, equal opportunity, cooperation and
consistency in its approach.
In accordance with resolution 1977 (2011) and
within its mandate, the 1540 Committee has continued
to engage in various outreach activities to promote
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including the sharing of best practices and lessons
learned, capacity-building and technical assistance in
the areas covered by the resolution.

Since May, the 1540 Committee and its experts
have participated in 14 outreach events organized by
intergovernmental organizations such as, inter alia, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the European Union, the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean of
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, and the Group
of Eight Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, at
times in collaboration with various governmental and
non-governmental entities. In the spirit of transparency
required by resolution 1977 (2011), information about
those outreach events is posted on the 1540 Committee
website.

Resolution 1977 (2011) also calls upon all States that
have not yet presented a first report to the Committee
to submit such a report without delay. All States that
have submitted such reports are also encouraged to
provide, when appropriate or upon the request of the
1540 Committee, additional information on their
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). I am pleased
to report that, since our last meeting (see S/PV.6767),
the number of States that have not submitted a report
yet has been reduced to 24, as the Republic ofthe Congo
recently submitted its first report on the implementation
ofresolution 1540 (2004). As part ofits report to the 1540
Committee, the Republic of the Congo has submitted a

request for assistance in particular areas. The request
has been passed to potential assistance providers for
their consideration. The Committee looks forward to
working with African States to assist them in meeting
their reporting requirements by sharing information
and practices on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) through outreach events, coordination with the
points of contact established by the African Union
Commission, and improved synergy with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the World Health Organization, the
Group of Eight Global Partnership and the Biological
Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit
on providing 1540 (2004)-relevant assistance. The
workshop for African States on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) to be held later this month
in South Africa will also provide an opportunity to
further examine those issues.

The improved reporting record of Member
States is to be welcomed. There appears to be a
better understanding of the challenges of national
implementation and the development of tailored
strategies to facilitate assistance for overcoming such
potential challenges. In that connection, I am pleased
to note that we received a second national report from
Afghanistan.

Paragraph 8 of resolution 1977 (2011) encourages
all States to prepare, on a voluntary basis, national
implementation action plans, with the assistance of
the 1540 Committee, as appropriate, mapping out their
priorities and plans for implementing the key provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004) and to submit those plans to
the 1540 Committee. We are pleased to report that,
since our last meeting, Serbia has submitted its national
action plan for the period 2012-2016. According to the
information received by the Committee, a number of
other States are in the process of updating or preparing
their initial national action plans.

In resolution 2055 (2012), adopted on 29 June,
the Security Council emphasized the significantly
increased workload of the Committee over the course
of its mandate and requested the Secretary-General
to increase the size of the group of experts to up to
nine experts. On 3 July, the Committee informed the
Secretariat that, following extensive consultations on
its group of experts, the Committee agreed on nine
candidates and, in that connection, requested that
the Secretary-General take the necessary measures
to establish the group of experts in accordance with
paragraph 5 (a) of resolution 1977 (2011) and resolution
2055 (2012). I am pleased to report today that six out
of the nine experts are currently on board and we will
soon have the entire group effectively established,
thus enhancing the capacity of the 1540 Committee to
efficiently carry out its mandate.

As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
the 1540 Committee's eleventh programme of work
covers the period through 31 May 2013. I would
like to note briefly that that new programme of
work emphasizes, inter alia, the 1540 Committee's
cooperation with international organizations, including
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), specifically
on considering the expansion of our common strategy
on reporting, as well as to develop a more coordinated
approach to subregional workshops, in line with
paragraph 36 of resolution 1822 (2008) and within our
respective mandates.

With input from the 1540 Committee's working
group on assistance and from the Committee's working
group on cooperation with international organizations,
including the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001),
where appropriate, we will continue to participate in
outreach activities at the international and regional
levels. We will also continue to promote our engagement
with States, as well as effective dialogue and
cooperative action on non-proliferation to prevent the
illicit trafficking of nuclear, chemical, and biological
weapons and their means of delivery.

I would like to conclude my statement by mentioning
that, with the end of my tenure as the Chair of the 1540
Committee drawing near, I encourage the members of
the Council to keep in mind our shared commitment
to prevent non-State actors from developing, acquiring,
manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring
or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their means of delivery.

I will now make a short statement in my national
capacity.

South Africa acknowledges that, in the past decade,

significant work has been done in the fight against the
spread of international terrorism. We will continue to
work with the United Nations, the African Union and
other regional structures in order to uproot the scourge
of global terrorism. The sophisticated challenges
posed by the complex phenomena of terrorism require
comprehensive and collaborative strategies. Having
noted that it is of paramount importance to address the
fundamental causes of terrorism, such as marginalized
people under occupation, socioeconomic and political
disparities, if those deep-seated issues are not dealt
with, they will continue to be a breeding ground for the
manifestation and spread of terrorism.

South Africa maintains that the United Nations
should continue to lead international efforts to combat
terrorism in accordance with legal norms and human
rights. South Africa believes that the success of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
lies in effective and meaningful collaboration
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), as
well as cooperation among the 1267, 1373 and 1540
Committees.
It has been an honour for South Africa to lead
the work of the 1540 Committee in the Council for
the past two years. We consider that to be a vote of
confidence with regard to the importance that we
attach to disarmament and non-proliferation issues.
We are heartened that South Africa will end its tenure
by, among other things, hosting a workshop on the
implementation of resolution 1540 for African States,
from 21 to 22 of November, as well as one in India
on the synergies between resolution 1540 and nuclear
security.

South Africa underscores that the threat posed by
non-State actors acquiring materials that could be used
for nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or their
means of delivery is a danger for all States. However,
we are equally concerned about the lack of complete
and sustainable progress in the area of disarmament
when it comes to weapons of mass destruction. States
have committed to eliminating weapons of mass
destruction through the relevant national treaties and
conventions, yet those dangerous and indiscriminate
weapons still threaten humankind through their very
existence. While many developing countries continue
to implement their commitments under resolution
1540 (2004), it is important that we recall that the
responsibility is with all members of the international
community. The support of fellow States, as well
as international organizations, is crucial to prevent
non-State actors, including terrorists, from acquiring
such weapons or their means of delivery.

We acknowledge the work of CTED, with a
specific reference to the efforts to strengthen analytical
tools for the purposes of monitoring and assessment
in order to ensure the effective implementation of
resolutions 1873 (2009) and 1624 (2005). It is crucial
to continue revising the assessment tools, such as the
overview implementation assessment and the details
of the implementation survey, which will enhance the
work of the Committee through their assistance and
collaboration.

We have taken note of the CTED assessment
conducted in different parts of the world to ensure the
success of the United Nations global counter-terrorism
efforts. In addition, although significant work has been
done to neutralize and eliminate the threat of Al-Qaida,
we acknowledge the evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida,
which has readjusted itself into small organizations
scattered throughout different regions of the world.

We acknowledge the role of sanctions in supporting
the global fight against terrorism. We acknowledge the
work done and the progress made by the Office of the
Ombudsperson in that regard. Transparency, fairness
and due process remain critical aspects of this work. It
is therefore important that States collaborate to further
strengthen the Office of the Ombudsperson to ensure
the continued application of these principles in the
execution of its duties.

We believe that the United Nations should, through
CTED and the CTITF, in cooperation with regional
structures, play a particular role with regard to the
threat of terrorism in Africa, especially as it is playing
out in Mali and the Sahel.

South Africa remains committed to the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and calls on all Member States to
fulfil their commitments in combating terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.

