Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I too want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for his briefing on some of the continuing
critical humanitarian challenges in Africa. We are
grateful for his firsthand report on the initiative
mediated by the Government of Southern Sudan to
bring an end to the mayhem perpetrated by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). We also thank him for his
report on the precarious situation in Darfur. We
appreciate Under-Secretary-General Egeland's
intensive efforts to draw attention to these problems,
including the restrictions imposed on those trying to
deliver humanitarian assistance.

The United States supports the Juba peace
process. We welcome the 1 November 2006 signing of
the renewed Cessation of Hostilities Agreement first
formulated on 26 August. We urge adherence to the
Agreement as a step towards a peaceful solution to the
longstanding conflict in northern Uganda.

The United States is providing considerable
assistance to communities affected by the conflict. This
has included $71 million this year to address the
humanitarian crisis, peace initiatives, rehabilitation and
development needs in northern Uganda. Much of this
aid is food aid. The remainder focuses on HIV/AIDS
programmes, antimalaria initiatives, education,
training, and improving agricultural productivity. We
will continue to assist the region, particularly as the
internally displaced population returns home. Pending
a successful peace agreement, we will support
reconstruction efforts as well.

We are pleased that the international community
has begun using the cluster approach in efforts to
address the humanitarian needs of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in northern Uganda. However, we
believe better coordination is needed among
Governments and agencies involved in these efforts.

Ending the violence in Darfur remains one of the
highest priorities for the United States. We will
continue to work closely with the United Nations, the
African Union and our international partners to end the
violence in Darfur, to hold individuals accountable for
atrocities that have been committed and to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian relief. We hope the consensus
reached at the 16 November meeting in Addis Ababa
will lead to peace and security for the people of Darfur.

The United States provides significant
humanitarian assistance to affected populations in
Darfur and to Sudanese refugees in Chad. We also have
funds in place to respond effectively should current
refugee and IDP populations dramatically increase. In
the last fiscal year, we provided over $500 million in
humanitarian assistance in Darfur and eastern Chad.
We are supporting numerous non-governmental
organizations and international organizations that are
providing assistance. These humanitarian activities
range from food aid to psychological assistance for
victims of trauma.

However, we remain convinced that this is not
enough. In order to end the suffering and save lives in
Darfur, an effective peacekeeping operation, as
elaborated in Security resolution 1706 (2006), should
be deployed under United Nations command and
control.

