Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your wise
leadership of the Council, which we wish full success under
your presidency this month. I should also like to convey
our thanks and appreciation to the representative of
Namibia for his successful stewardship of the Council last
month.

In January 1998, as Indonesia assumed the
presidency of the Group of 77 from Tanzania here at
United Nations Headquarters, I had the privilege and
honour to be Chairman of the African Group of States, on
whose behalf I made a statement on that occasion. I
mentioned the fact that Indonesia had launched two
economic reform programmes, both of which
unfortunately failed. The first took place under President
Sukarno, who relied on the theories of the well-known
German economist Hjalmar Schacht; the second took
place under President Suharto. I said then that the features
of the failure of the second programme seemed to echo
those of the first. I hoped at that time that those features
of economic collapse would not entail political problems.
I also expressed the hope that any such political fallout
would not lead to severe social problems with more
serious implications.

Unfortunately, only four months later, in April 1998,
the outcome was very clear to everybody. Demonstrations
erupted in the streets of Jakarta and other Indonesian
cities, resulting, inter alia, in President Suharto's
resignation. In effect, this took Indonesia into a
transitional stage that has yet to end. The country is
undergoing political and economic restructuring with
certain social implications. To be specific, in this
transitional stage, the question of East Timor has acquired
special dimensions.

In accepting the Agreement that was drafted,
Indonesia agreed to the holding of a popular consultation
and to honour its outcome. That popular consultation was
conducted a few days ago, and constitutionally the
Indonesian Government and all its authorities must act
under that Government's constitutional framework.

Unfortunately, we note that there is disregard for a
number of factors. First, some have not payed due
attention to the fact Indonesia has been undergoing a
transition in the full sense of the word. Secondly, due
attention has not been payed to the social conditions in
East Timor, namely that there are two parties who are for
independence and another party which is for remaining
within a united Indonesia. Of course, we have to look at
the problem in its objective framework as an
extraordinary and indeed an historic state of affairs and
not project the events that are unfolding in East Timor,
despite their harshness and despite the fact that no sane
person would approve of what has been going on there.

 

I say we must project them in the proper context and
as they actually unfolded at the place where the ballot was
conducted and where some people supported independence
while others did not, and therefore the picture that would
emerge would be more realistic than as depicted by some
speakers, though not all of them, thank God.

Those who sincerely and in good faith would like to
address this problem must try to help Indonesia and its
central Government so that it will reach the final, logical
outcome according to its constitution as a sovereign country
that will not compromise its sovereignty. But pouring fuel
on hot, burning flash points will not achieve positive results
and will not lead to a peaceful settlement of the events that
are taking place there.

In addition, we should not look at any issue without
its historic context. Indonesia apparently is quite serious
and did not object to anything: the threats of boycotting, or
imposing some sanctions - indeed some threats have been
waved around even before the Security Council took up this
matter. That would be a futile exercise. To our mind, that
would cast aspersions on the true intentions behind this zeal
in addressing the issue. If the intentions of those calls were
humanitarian, we would have all supported, indeed strongly
supported, all those calls.

However, I cannot be acting as a humanitarian in
dealing with one issue and not act with the same spirit in
dealing with other issues, bloody issues, that are unfolding
in other countries. I respect fully the sentiments that were
expressed here on humanitarian grounds regarding the
political anarchy, or economic chaos - we do not support
killing, looting or any acts of this kind. But why do not we
demonstrate the same zeal and fervent sentiments, for
instance, in dealing with the problems facing the people of
Somalia. And the repeated killings - tens, hundreds of
thousands of people are killed every day in Iraq. How could
I address this issue in humanitarian terms when I address
a certain problem and yet I do not act the same when
dealing with others.

Provocation of Indonesia would not be useful. Threats
and coercion against Indonesia, including this very meeting
which is, to our mind, a form of pressure, will not prove
useful. Rather, this Council should address all acts of
Violence, no matter where they might occur, and we should
support the Government in transition in Indonesia. Rather
than intimidate it, we should cooperate with that
Government in order to achieve a result that would endorse
the overwhelming result of the ballot there.

Therefore, we expect the Council to wait until its
mission comes back. The fact that some members of the
delegation have been in touch with New York should not
be a substitute for the mission's collective report, and it
seems that they are optimistic that the report would be
positive and they would reach some solution with the
central authorities in Jakarta that would consolidate peace
and security in the region. We should all be careful not to
consider peace in East Timor only, but throughout the
archipelago of Indonesia, and indeed across the whole
globe.

