I am grateful for this opportunity to again brief the Security Council via video-teleconference on my Office's activities in relation to the situation in Libya even as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to present unique challenges across the globe, including for the work of my Office. We nevertheless remain resilient and productive in the face of these challenges, and I am pleased to present my latest report to this organ. I congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and wish you, Madam President, every success in steering the essential work of the Council for the month of November. On 23 October, we witnessed the signing of the ceasefire agreement by Libyan parties in Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations. That is indeed a welcome concrete development. We call on the parties to assiduously implement the agreement to usher in the much-awaited peace and stability for the people of Libya. Victims of atrocity crimes in Libya must be reassured that, ceasefire or future agreements notwithstanding, individuals alleged to be responsible for serious crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC) will be promptly arrested and surrendered to the Court to face charges for their alleged crimes. Libya remains a high priority situation for my Office, and our commitment to seek justice and accountability on behalf of the victims remains unshaken. Our investigations have significantly progressed since my previous briefing to the Council on this issue in May (see S/2020/371). Despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, two crucial investigative missions were deployed to Libya to collect additional evidence to further strengthen our cases. As the Council will have noted, on 22 June I issued a statement following the discovery of multiple mass graves in the city of Tarhouna and south of Tripoli. My Office is engaging with the national authorities in relation to those mass graves. So far, reports indicate that over 100 bodies have been recovered by the authorities involved in exhuming the graves. Many of the recovered bodies had been blindfolded and had their hands tied. I wish to take this opportunity to recognize the significant efforts and important work of all involved in preserving the evidence of these crimes, including the commendable efforts of the Government of National Accord. The missions also provided an opportunity to strengthen mutual cooperation with the relevant national authorities and other stakeholders. I express my gratitude and appreciation for the cooperation and support we received from the Government of National Accord and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We continue to constructively coordinate our joint efforts in a constructive manner, in line with the cooperation and complementarity principles under part 9 of the Rome Statute. My Office continues to actively monitor the situation in Libya. In that regard, we have received information indicating that the recently ended offensive on Tripoli that was carried out by the eastern-based militia known as the Libyan National Army (LNA) and its supporting forces forms part of a pattern of violence that includes indiscriminate air strikes and the shelling of civilian areas, arbitrary abductions, detentions and torture of civilians, extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances and the pillaging of civilian property - a repetition of a pattern of violence previously reported in places such as Benghazi, Derna, Ajdabiya, Murzuq and Sirte. We have also received credible information indicating the increased use of mines and improvised explosive devices against civilians. These were discovered following the retreat of forces from Tripoli and its surrounding areas. Mines and improvised explosive devices are reported to have been placed in the garages, kitchens and bedrooms of civilian homes. Many civilians who returned to their homes after fleeing the fighting were either killed or injured because their homes were booby-trapped with such devices. The threat posed to civilians by mines and improvised explosive devices and the scale of their use is deeply disturbing. Between May and July alone, at least 49 people were killed as a result of the use of mines. Let me emphasize that, under the Rome Statute, it is a crime to use mines and improvised explosive devices as a means to indiscriminately attack civilians. I encourage the Council and all States Members of the United Nations to once again convey a clear and firm message to military and civilian commanders, as well as all parties and armed groups involved in the Libya conflict, that the rules of international humanitarian law must be respected and that those who defy such rules will be held individually responsible. My Office has also been following reports of the targeting of civilians who voiced opposition to militias in the east and west of Libya. In that regard, the Council is aware that UNSMIL recently called for an investigation into the alleged use of excessive force by security forces on 23 August in Zawiyah and Tripoli. In addition, my Office continues to receive information regarding allegations of serious crimes being committed in prisons and detention facilities throughout Libya. In my previous report to the Council, I outlined allegations that detention facilities such as Al-Kuweifiya and Gernada, in eastern Libya, and Mitiga prison, in Tripoli, which is controlled by the Special Deterrence Force, were being used to arbitrarily detain civilians under inhumane conditions, including torture. My Office continues to receive evidence of such crimes. I urge all parties to the conflict in Libya to immediately put an end to the use of detention facilities to mistreat, and commit crimes against, civilians. International law and the Rome Statute prohibit such use of detention facilities. I furthermore call for international observers and investigators to be given full access to detention facilities in Libya and full cooperation in that regard. My Office has also been monitoring the situation of internally displaced persons, as well as crimes committed against migrants. Regrettably, migrants continue to be trafficked and subjected to crimes, such as torture. I am deeply concerned that, despite the Council imposing sanctions on Mr. Ahmad Oumar Al-Dabbashi for his involvement in crimes against migrants, he is reportedly continuing to commit crimes. Recent positive developments in the fight to eradicate crimes against migrants are encouraging and must be intensified. In that regard, I note the imposition of sanctions by the European Union against Mr. Mousa Adyab, who the United Nations Panel of Experts has implicated in human trafficking, rape and the killing of refugees. I also welcome the efforts made by national jurisdictions in that regard. I note in particular the sentencing, by the Court of Messina in Italy, of three individuals to 20 years of imprisonment for crimes committed against migrants in Zawiyah. A recurring theme that I must emphasize is the failure to arrest and surrender those against whom the Court has issued arrest warrants. That remains a major stumbling block that prevents my Office from seeking effective justice for the victims of atrocity crimes committed in Libya. Over the years of my reporting to the Council, I have lamented the fact that individuals against whom warrants of arrest have been issued remain at large. That includes two arrest warrants for Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli, who, as a commander of Al-Saiqa Brigade, is alleged to have executed 43 civilians. On 21 September, the European Union imposed economic sanctions on Mr. Al-Werfalli for alleged crimes committed in Libya. My Office's request that the leader of the LNA, General Khalifa Haftar, arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli to the ICC has gone unheeded. I again call on other Libyan commanders to take all necessary steps to surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli. Most recently, I specifically called upon Mr. Agila Saleh, Supreme Commander of the LNA, and Mr. Wanis Bukhmada, Commander of the Al-Saiqa Brigade, to help in that regard. My Office has since received information that Mr. Bukhmada is deceased. It is nonetheless imperative that efforts to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli continue and be intensified. Let me recall and stress the obligation, under article 28 of the Rome Statute, for commanders to prevent or punish the commission of crimes by forces under their effective control, or to submit them for effective investigation and prosecution. Similarly, arrest warrants against Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled remain unexecuted. Mr. Al-Tuhamy 1s still alleged to be in Egypt. I urge all the relevant States, including the Arab Republic of Egypt, to ensure that fugitives wanted by the Court are surrendered without delay. The non-execution of the arrest warrants is the foremost obstacle to our collective capacity to give hope to the people and victims of crimes in Libya. I urge the Council and all Member States to take effective and concrete steps to ensure that safe havens are not provided to fugitives from justice who face serious criminal charges before the International Criminal Court. Inaction in that regard allows abhorrent crimes, such as those alleged in Tarhouna, to continue. There is a collective responsibility to ensure that ICC warrants of arrests are duly executed. In all other respects, my Office continues to receive strong cooperation from numerous States and stakeholders. Our relationships with UNSMIL and authorities in Libya in particular have strengthened, as has our relationship with EUROPOL. I would like to reiterate the pivotal importance of that cooperation in our activities, and I call on the Council and all Member States to collectively support our efforts to strengthen such cooperation. My Office further continues to provide assistance to support the domestic investigation and prosecution of international crimes committed in Libya, in line with our strategic goal 6. I remain committed to fulfilling my mandate with the aim of holding to account those responsible for the most serious crimes of international concern and seeking justice for the victims in Libya. The Council and the international community are once again urged to fully support the ICC's efforts to achieve its mandate in Libya. Let me conclude with a final reflection. As we gather here today, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), to demonstrate our joint commitment to the cause of justice in Libya, I must contextualize this engagement. We find ourselves in an age where powerful forces increasingly aim to undermine the cause of international criminal justice as a continuation of politics by other means. What is required today, more than ever, is greater support for the ICC, its independent and impartial work and the international rule of law - not less. Any act that might undermine the global movement towards greater accountability for atrocity crimes and a ruled-based international order must be avoided. The support of the international community, the Council and its membership to stand firmly in the defence of international criminal justice in Libya and beyond are necessary to ensure international peace and security and to advance the cause of justice for the victims of atrocity crimes.
