Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1, too, should like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Residual
Mechanism for their briefings. We have taken note of
the report of the leadership of the Tribunals and of the
information contained therein on the the proceedings
and work carried out in the context of the conclusion of
their activities.

This year is not just a milestone, the year specified
in resolution 1966 (2010) for the conclusion of the
activities of both Tribunals. This year also marks
the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of
the ICTR. The Russian Federation was a co-sponsor
of resolution 955 (1994), establishing the ICTR in
November 1994. The Tribunal has become a key
organ for international criminal justice, and has made
a contribution to combating impunity for the gravest
crimes under international law and to achieving
national reconciliation in Rwanda.

Both the ICTY and the ICTR were established by
the Security Council to undertake specific tasks, and
of course they were never intended to keep working
for such an extended period of time. In the four years
since the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010), we have
consistently called on the Tribunals to do their utmost
to conclude their work in the time frames set out by
the resolution. The Council created the necessary
conditions to that end. In that regard, we are very
disappointed to note from the reports that the course
of proceedings not only is not accelerating, but in a
number of trials there are even more delays. Some have
stopped altogether.

The trials in a number of cases in the ICTY have
dragged on so long that indictees are reporting health
problems with the passage of time; on that count,
trial schedules have had to be changed or suspended
indefinitely, and indictees even temporarily released, as
happened in the case of Seselj. The duration ofthat case
long ago exceeded a decade, and in no way meets any
standard of criminal justice. The reasons for the many
delays are often purely administrative, such as unequal
distribution of the workflow on judges, unnecessarily
protracted proceedings or inaccurate evaluation of the
legal complexity of cases. The ICTY is again failing to
meet the deadlines established by the Security Council
for the completion of its work. In these circumstances,
the question arises: If the Tribunal demonstrates such
disrespect for the Security Council, what kind of
response can it expect to its own decisions and legacy?

As regards the ICTR, we expect the time frame for
the delivery of a verdict on the remaining case on its
dockets to be delayed no longer, although it is already
well known that the hearing for the case scheduled for
earlier this month never took place. We are compelled
to note with regret that the current situation provides an
unfavourable backdrop for considering the question of
extending the mandates of the judges and prosecutors
of the Tribunals. We trust that the appropriate solutions
will be found that will encourage the Tribunals to speed
up their work and at long last transfer the remaining
cases to the Residual Mechanism. This is all the more
important given the fact that, judging by the report
of the Mechanism, its activities are gradually moving
towards an active phase, and their first decision is due
to be delivered soon.

In recent years, national mechanisms of the fight
against impunity have been developed. An example of
successful cooperation between States in that sphere
was the implementation a few days ago of a joint

operation undertaken by Serbian and Bosnian law
enforcement bodies to detain suspects in the killing

of civilians in the Bosnian village of Strpce in 1993.
Such efforts give us reason to believe that the goals of
combating impunity can effectively be achieved at the
national level.
