Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor in my capacity as chair of the Group of Friends
on the Protection of Civilians and speak on behalf of
the delegations of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Portugal, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and
Uruguay.

Ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a task that requires our constant attention.
Unfortunately, the core challenges identified in the last
three reports of the Secretary-General have not been
sufficiently addressed. Parties to conflict too often fail
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, which requires all parties to conflict
to spare the civilian population from the effects
of hostilities. In particular, increasing numbers of
humanitarian workers, including medical personnel,
have been deliberately harmed or even killed recently;
there is thus a clear need to find ways to enhance their
safety and security. At the same time, humanitarian
access must be maintained and negotiated with all
relevant parties in order to reach those most in need.

Parties to conflict must allow and facilitate the rapid
and unimpeded passage and distribution of humanitarian
relief for civilians in need, in full compliance with
the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182. We
therefore consider progress on the question of access as
highly urgent, as the imposition of constraints is often
done in an arbitrary manner. More must be done, within
the framework of the United Nations Charter, to ensure
accountability but also prevent grave instances of
deliberate delays or denials of access for humanitarian
operations, as well as attacks against humanitarian
workers.

In that regard, we recall that attacks on humanitarian
workers constitute a war crime under article 8 (e) (iii)
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and that accountability and legal protection are
therefore stronger with an increasing membership in
the ICC.

There is a lot to discuss, and the fact that this is the
third open debate under this agenda item this year so
far is encouraging. I therefore wish to thank the United
States presidency for having held a debate on the
protection ofjournalists last month (see S/PV.7003), as
well as the current Argentine presidency for keeping the
protection of civilians high on the Security Council's
agenda.

To ensure a meaningful discussion on the protection
of civilians, a comprehensive humanitarian and human
rights perspective is essential, and we welcome the
diversity of expertise represented around the table
today. This is of particular importance at a time of
internal review processes that aim at strengthening the
protection architecture of the United Nations. With a
view to maintaining the momentum, we very much look
forward to having a further substantive debate on the
basis of the next report of the Secretary-General, which
is due in November.

(spoke in French)

I will now make a brief statement in my national
capacity. A longer version of my statement has been
distributed in the Chamber.

I would like to thank the Argentine presidency
of the Security Council for holding this debate. This
year we are celebrating the 150th anniversary of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
which was founded in 1863 by a group of Genevan
citizens. During the high-level week of the General
Assembly in September, Switzerland will host a high-
level breakfast, aimed at addressing the issues of
protection of civilians and humanitarian aid.

Respect for the law regarding protection varies
considerably from one context to another. Switzerland
notes that its joint initiative with the ICRC to enhance
respect for international humanitarian law is generating
positive momentum. Indeed, a growing number of
States are participating in substantive discussions
within the framework of that process in Geneva.

We remain very concerned by reports of serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights in Syria. We call on all parties to fully comply
with their obligations, to put an end to the violence
and to resolve the conflict through negotiation and
dialogue, as laid out in the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012. Given the extent of the violations and
the number of victims in Syria, a holistic approach will
be required in order to address the victims' right to
know, right to justice, right to reparation and guarantee
of non-recurrence, within the framework of a political
solution to the conflict.

In many areas, access to victims and affected
populations remains one ofthe most complex challenges.
Despite the existing legal framework, humanitarian
actors face increasing difficulty in gaining access to
those affected. That is why Switzerland has started
drafting two publications, in conjunction with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the ICRC, aimed at supporting humanitarian actors
in their efforts to obtain access to victims of armed
conflict and disseminating widely the existing legal
framework that applies to humanitarian access issues.

Finally, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group (ACT), a
transregional group of 22 States whose objective is to
improve the working methods of the Security Council,
Switzerland welcomes the fact that open debates are held
regularly, particularly on the protection of civilians.

