Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative of
organizing this debate. I would also like to thank
Minister Bakoyannis for briefing us on the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Her presence here today is a sign of the vital

cooperation between our two organizations, and I do
not have to tell her that we, as a seat of the
organization and a participating State, fully share the
priorities she just outlined. We can assure her of our
full support in her efforts to promote the agenda of the
OSCE.

The cooperation of the United Nations - and of
the Security Council in particular - with regional and
subregional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter remains an important asset for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We believe that this cooperation must be mutually
reinforcing and complementary.

Over the years, the OSCE has also played an
active role by supporting the implementation of United
Nations principles with regard to various horizontal
issues - which the Chairperson mentioned - such as
counter-terrorism, small arms and light weapons, and
trafficking in human beings. We welcome her emphasis
on the rule of law and gender equality, with a particular
focus on women and security and violence against
women. Both issues are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing with human rights and democracy.

We fully support the Chairperson's determination
to promote the peaceful resolution of protracted
conflicts in the OSCE region. Any sign of progress in
resolving them will be a strong impetus for renewing
trust and bolstering dialogue.

An example of the complementarity of the United
Nations, the OSCE and the European Union is the
recent crisis management in Georgia. We therefore
support the common efforts to find a lasting solution
that will guarantee stability and security in Georgia.
Any solution to the crisis in Georgia must serve the
aim of achieving sustainable peace and stability in the
region and - as we have repeatedly said - has to be
firmly grounded on the principles of international law,
fully respecting Georgia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We congratulate the Chairperson on the
agreement reached on extending the mandate of the
OSCE military observer mission. At the same time,
however, we would also like to see a greater OSCE
presence in Georgia. We fully support her attempt to
resolve the question of a comprehensive OSCE
presence in the whole of Georgia which would also
allow international monitors access to the region of
South Ossetia. In parallel, we support the ongoing talks
in Geneva co-chaired by the United Nations, the OSCE

and the European Union. We are encouraged by the
recent agreement on the joint incident prevention and
response mechanisms and hope that this will lead to
further tangible results in the near future.

As we and others have said, the OSCE continues
to play a crucial role in Kosovo; its work there under
Ambassador Almhofer has our full support. The OSCE
Mission in Kosovo fulfils an important role in
guaranteeing a democratic and multi-ethnic future for
Kosovo, in particular in building and monitoring
Kosovo's democratic institutions and in its support for
human rights and the preservation of minority rights.

Stability in the Balkans is a goal that the United
Nations, the European Union and the OSCE share. We
welcome the complementary and mutually reinforcing
efforts carried out with other organizations on the
ground, in particular with the European Union. We are
looking forward to continued OSCE engagement there.

We also fully support Foreign Minister
Bakoyannis's commitment to carrying forward the
ongoing debate on the future of security in Europe. The
OSCE is the right forum for that debate. For us, it is
crucial to bear in mind the comprehensive security
approach developed over the years by the OSCE and to
focus on how we can further sharpen existing
instruments and confidence- and security-building
mechanisms. As a practical contribution to the efforts
of the Chairperson-in-Office and to further stimulate
the debate, Austria plans to invite security policy
experts from think tanks and international
organizations to a brainstorming meeting in Vienna on
8 May. We hope that this will also reinforce the
synergies among Vienna-based organizations.

