Mr. Normandin (Canada): Canada would first
like to thank the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540
Committee for their continued leadership. We would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Council today, and to
congratulate Mr. Mike Smith on his appointment as
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).

Canada strongly supports the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate in ensuring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and in coordinating technical
assistance through outreach to both donors and
recipients. We also welcome the adoption of the
General Assembly's Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which encourages the CTC and CTED to
continue to improve the coherence and efficiency of
technical assistance delivery in the field of counter-
terrorism.

In a context in which the Security Council will
soon discuss the renewal of CTED's mandate, we
would encourage Council members and CTED's
leadership to ensure that efforts are made to enhance
CTED's relationship with non-Council members. As
the Council is aware, most of the recipients of

technical assistance are not members of the Council,
and neither are a number of important donors, such as
Canada. In our view, every effort should be made to
ensure that the key tools developed by CTED, such as
its technical assistance plan, its database of technical
assistance and its assessments of the implementation of
relevant resolutions, are made available to donors to
ensure that they allocate their capacity-building
resources as usefully as possible. CTED already
reaches out to non-members of the Council on an ad
hoc basis, but we feel that those efforts need to be
better structured and further enhanced.

In reviewing CTED's mandate, a useful reference
is the various recommendations contained in a recent
report on the Security Council's counter-terrorism
programme prepared by the International Peace
Academy and the Centre on Global Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation. In particular, the report proposes that
CTED and the CTC be much more flexible in engaging
with non-Council members in the context of field visits
made by the CTC. There are also useful suggestions in
the report on convening regional meetings at which
both donors and recipients could better coordinate their
capacity-building efforts. We note with appreciation
the fact that CTED already moved in that direction this
summer, by convening a meeting on West Africa. We
hope that there will be more such meetings, and we
would be ready to work with CTED and others to
ensure that future meetings are results-oriented.

Canada is committed to ensuring full compliance
with resolution 1267 (1999) and successor resolutions
by implementing without delay restrictions against
entities listed by the 1267 Committee. In order for that
instrument to be effective, the Committee needs to
ensure, where possible, the accuracy of the 1267 list
and its congruence with the reality on the ground. As
the Secretary-General noted in his September 2007
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2007/555),
national reconciliation will require the inclusion of
new terrorist leaders on the 1267 consolidated list or
the removal of such individuals from the list after
reconciliation, as appropriate.

We are also interested in ensuring the continued
accuracy and quality of the information shared by the
1267 Committee secretariat with Member States. It is
in our common interest that the Committee have the
necessary resources, financial and human, to fulfil its
mandate adequately.

Canada supports efforts to enhance clarity with
regard to the process of listing and de-listing. In that
context, we welcome the recent establishment of a
focal point to receive de-listing requests. We have to
remember that sanctions were designed to be
preventive, rather than punitive. Therefore, increasing
clarity in the procedures will enhance the credibility of
the system in the fight against terrorism.

We note with appreciation the Committee's
efforts to increase understanding of its activities, in
particular by enhancing its website and by organizing
open briefings for the entire United Nations
membership. The disclosure of as much information as
possible and timely decision-making by the Committee
will facilitate Member States' continued
implementation of the resolution.

(spoke in French)

Canada supports the efforts of the 1540
Committee to ensure full compliance with the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). Indeed, together
with the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs, the Committee has helped very much to raise
awareness about those provisions through sustained
regional activities to promote them. Canada is also
pleased to note that those activities are moving away
from simple information and now include more
concrete measures to facilitate compliance with the
provisions at both the regional and national levels.

The Committee has a particularly important role
to play in facilitating the assistance provided by
donors. In that regard, we emphasize the Committee's
efforts related to the establishment of a template for
assistance requests under resolution 1540 (2004). We
look forward to working with the Committee to refine
the template and to ensure that donors receive clear
requests that can be followed up on. Canada also notes
that it is important that donors provide the Committee
with accurate information about their assistance
programmes relevant to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Next month, we will be
pleased to provide the Committee with up-to-date
information on Canadian assistance programmes in this
area when we submit our report on measures that
Canada has taken, or plans to take, to facilitate the
implementation of the resolution.
Finally, Canada is very pleased to participate in
this important meeting today. We have listened
attentively to the statements made by the
representatives of other States. Canada intends to work
constructively with the Committees and all partners in
this area.

