Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Egypt's
presidency of the Council for the month of August,
and on starting it off in a very good way, especially
for your negotiations on something that draw attention
to an important issue such as this one, for which we
thank you.

We know that terrorists have many ways to get their
hands on dangerous weapons. They divert legal arms
transfers, take advantage of poorly secured stockpiles,
seize weapons on the battlefield and get them through
criminal networks. The Council's adoption today
of resolution 2370 (2017) is meant to address the
many ways in which terrorists acquire arms. It calls
on Member States to do more to strengthen export
controls and assist other countries in destroying excess
weapons. It highlights the importance of enhancing
the physical security of weapons and stockpiles and
of establishing tracing programmes for them. It trains
a spotlight on the murderous potential of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs). It encourages cooperation
between the public and private sectors in preventing the
transfer of IEDs, drones and light weapons to terrorist
organizations. Most importantly, it calls attention to
the obligation of all nations, particularly those that
profess concerns about weapons falling into terrorists'
hands, to enforce United Nations arms embargoes. The
Security Council has been clear in prohibiting arms
transfers to Yemen, Somalia and other places. And yet
we know that weapons continue to flow across borders
in open violation of the Council's resolutions. For some
Member States, this is an issue of extreme hypocrisy.
For all ofus, it is an unacceptable stain on the Council's
authority that must be removed.

It is true that in recent months we have made great
progress against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and Al-Qaida. We are pleased that regional
partners have taken steps to improve their ability to
cut ISIS off from financial and material support. But
it is not merely some members' failure to take action
that is enabling weapons to find their way to terrorists.
One country stands out for its deliberate and systematic
contributions of arms, training and funding to terrorist
groups. One country uses its support to terrorist proxies
as a way to conduct its foreign policy and compensate
for its own weakness. That country is Iran. The United
States first designated Iran a State sponsor of terrorism
in 1984. Its training, funding and arming of terrorists
has continued unabated to this day. Terrorist proxies
are doing the Iranian regime's will in Iraq and Syria.
Iran also supports Hamas and Bahraini terrorist groups.
Through its partner Hizbullah, Iran is engaged in
preparing for war in Lebanon. It is building an arsenal
of weapons and battle-hardened troops.

We applaud the message at the heart of today's
resolution that says that the international community
must work together and do more to prevent weapons
from falling into the hands of terrorists. But I encourage
the Council to be aware that weapons do not always just
"fall" into the hands of terrorists. Too often, they are
pushed. That is the threat that we face today in Iran and
it is a threat that no amount of technical cooperation or
security upgrades will diminish. As long as we allow
the Iranian regime to violate the Council's prohibitions
with impunity, Iran will be a source of weapons to
terrorist groups that will only grow in volume and
destructive capability. The United States will continue
to raise the issue of Iraninan non-compliance with
international obligations at every opportunity.

