Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
as you preside over today's important meeting. At the
same time, we pay tribute to Sweden as it carries out
its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as for its efforts aimed
at reaching consensus on the resolution that we just
adopted (resolution 2427 (2018)). I would also like to
thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF, and Ms. Yenny Londofio, for their briefings
this morning. I would like as well to express our
appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations system
to address this topic, which represents a great challenge
for the international community, namely, children and
armed conflict.

The crises and unrest in our world serve to highlight
an appalling increase in the suffering of children,
especially in armed conflict. We are concerned about
the almost 35 per cent increase in the number of
violations perpetrated against children as compared
to the reporting period in 2016. Armed conflicts have
negative consequences on children, and include their
recruitment and use, exploitation, mass abduction,
sexual violence, killing and maiming. The international
community should effectively respond to all those
issues, which threaten peace and security, while fully
complying with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The best way to protect
children and end Violations against them is to forestall
armed conflicts and create sustainable peace.

Since the Graca Machel report on the impact of
armed conflict on children (see A/51/306), which was
published more than 20 years ago, the United Nations
has recognized that the best way to protect children is
to prevent conflicts. All United Nations reports and
resolutions, including today's resolution 2427 (2018),
acknowledge that truth. We believe that protecting
children in armed conflicts should be an integral
part of any inclusive conflict-settlement strategy and
all procedures to be undertaken by United Nations
entities, especially within the framework of Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism, which supports and
complements the efforts of national Governments. That
should be done in close cooperation with the United
Nations and the Office of the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict in order to bolster
national plans and all other forms of cooperation for
the protection of children in armed conflict, with
the support of the relevant regional and sub-egional
organizations, each within its mandate.

We call upon all States Members to sign and
ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Optional Protocol thereto in order to enhance the
protection of children in armed conflict. The Paris
Principles and the Paris Commitments were issued 11
years ago to end the recruitment and use of children by
armed forces or groups. The State of Kuwait would like
to welcome anew the voluntary commitment to those
principles, which call for ending inhumane practices
against children, and to reiterate the importance of using
and optimizing all the tools and mechanisms adopted
by the Security Council so as to enhance the procedures
that aim to address violations against children.

With respect to children and armed conflict and
the importance of transparency, we are compelled to
highlight the suffering of the unarmed Palestinian
people and their children under the heavy yoke of
occupation for more than five decades. We would also
like to highlight the suffering, including maiming,
killing and rape and other forms of sexual violence,
of the children of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar.
It is incumbent upon us as a Council to shoulder our
responsibility and take all the necessary measures to
ensure compliance with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, so as to
safeguard safety and freedom of movement without
any ethnic or religious discrimination, and enhance
mechanisms designed to make all perpetrators of such
violations accountable.

We reiterate the central role of national Governments
in achieving effective and sustainable protection for
children, in accordance with resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009). The work of the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism on grave violations against
children is also important, in line with resolution 1612
(2005). All that should take place while bein able to
rely on impartial, reliable and credible sources and
independent United Nations observers. Member States
should also be informed about the facts of the situation
being monitored.

Expressing our anger repeatedly about these
atrocities is not enough. It is time to put an end to the
violence against children and make the perpetrators
of these crimes accountable. Now more than ever,
our joint efforts and international unity are needed to
provide children with effective protection and ensure
their legitimate rights.

It is very important to realize that ending conflicts
does not mean ending the suffering of children.
Sustainable peace requires the development and
implementation of mechanisms for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of children affected by conflicts into
their communities, by way of including the protection
of children in all peace processes. There is no peace
while children continue to suffer from psychological,
physical, social and health effects. In that regard,
we welcome the release and reintegration of 10,000
children into their communities in 2017, a development
that will eventually enhance sustainable peace. We
also welcome the establishment of an international
fund, upon the initiative of the United Nations and in
partnership with the World Bank, for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of children affected by conflicts.

We would like to draw the Council's attention to
the fact that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and all related international conventions and resolutions
do not differentiate between children and adults. In that
context, the second preambular paragraph of the Charter
of the United Nations reiterates our determination

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small".

