Mr. Guterres: I do not remember any field visit
in my eight-year tenure as High Commissioner that
caused me such anguish as my recent trip to the Central
African Republic. I was deeply shocked by the brutality
and inhumanity that have characterized the violence
happening in the country and its consequences on the
suffering of the people. The evolution of the Central
African refugee situation in the region clearly illustrates
that while it is clearly not a new crisis ~ the country has
been in some sort of trouble since the beginning - its
current phase is in no way more of the same.

By the end of 2012 there were already 165,000
refugees registered in the neighbouring countries of
Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Congo. That number has by
now grown to more than 290,000. Some 65,000 refugees
fled last year, largely in the aftermath of the Seleka
coup. Another 60,000 have sought refuge abroad since
December 2013, when the violence grew to a horrific
scale, including with the emergence of the anti-Balaka
militias. In addition, more than 80,000 foreign nationals
have left the country, many with the help of their own
States and the International Organization for Migration.

Cameroon hosts the largest Central African refugee
population, with more than 34,000 new arrivals since
December and some 130,000 in total. The situation is
dramatic, with refugees arriving scared, malnourished
and extremely vulnerable after having walked and
hidden in the forests for days and weeks. Many convoys
to the border are attacked, and international forces
are too thinly spread to be able to provide effective
protection.
Once refugees cross the border, living conditions
are extremely difficult. Local communities in all
neighbouring countries have responded with enormous
generosity, with faith leaders mobilizing the donations
from the local population and some families hosting up
to 100 refugees in their compounds. In some locations,
like Kentzou in eastern Cameroon, the number of
refugees and repatriated nationals of other countries
hosted there now exceeds the local population,
creating enormous pressure on scarce resources and
infrastructure in what is a remote area of the country.
Humanitarian actors are scrambling to relocate refugees
from scattered and difficult to reach locations along
the border to sites with better assistance possibilities
before they become cut off with the beginning of the
rainy season.

But we are far from being able to deliver what
is needed, given the very precarious situation of
the people we care for. The resources we have are
entirely insufficient compared with the rapidly
growing challenges we face. In Cameroon, as in other
neighbouring countries, robust international financial
support is required to respond to the enormous needs
of the new arrivals and support those communities that
have so generously taken them in. I can say without
exaggeration that we are dramatically underfunded
and have only been able to respond by using our own
limited resources.

The Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is also working within the interagency
response inside the Central African Republic,
leading the protection cluster and coordinating camp
management and shelter programmes for the internally
displaced. But those are areas about which we have
always been thoroughly briefed by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

In addition, we are concerned for the safety of the
more than 17,000 refugees from other countries still in
the Central African Republic, 70 per cent of whom are
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
been supporting the repatriation of those who wish to
return from Bangui and Batalimo and are assisting
others in Bambari and Zemio, where they are not
immediately under threat.

Allow me to convey some of my impressions
from my recent visit to the Central African Republic,
although they go beyond the scope of my immediate
responsibilities as High Commissioner, because they
clearly show, from a humanitarian perspective, the
importance of approving the Secretary-General's
proposals.
Since its independence, the country has witnessed
a succession of coups d'etat, with only one democratic
transition - in the 1990s. The State had already been
progressively disappearing long before events took a
new dramatic turn with the emergence of the Seleka
in late 2012. However, this new phase of the conflict
differs starkly from the earlier crises, largely due to the
way it is tearing apart the social fabric of the country.

Until last year, the Central African Republic was
largely a stranger to religious conflict, which is why
it would be wrong to analyse current events that way.
While religiously motivated conflicts usually start out
as faith being instrumentalized for political purposes,
the real danger is that religious tensions then gain a
dynamic of their own - a demon that, once unleashed,
becomes exceedingly difficult to stop and threatens to
completely destroy society.

That is what could happen in the Central African
Republic. The Seleka alliance was formed from Central
African rebel groups and various foreign elements and
was indeed predominantly Muslim, although its political
agenda had nothing to do with aspirations to create an
Islamic State. The interreligious and intercommunal
dimension of the conflict emerged after the looting and
atrocities against civilians committed by Seleka and ex-

Se'le'ka members, which were at the origin of the first
refugee outflow of last year and which in turn led to the
emergence of the anti-Balaka militias.

In the beginning, the international community and
actors on the ground were slow to understand that the
process of disarming the Seleka changed the balance
of forces on the ground and that the anti-Balaka was
quickly growing into a new monster, with a different
nature from the initial, more or less spontaneous self-
defence groups. Although it is mainly made up of
frustrated youth, criminal elements, ex-soldiers and
militias supporting the former President, and although
its main motivations have become revenge and looting,
it was quickly mislabelled as Christian, which fuelled
the interreligious dimension of the violence.

Since early December, we have effectively witnessed
a cleansing ofthe majority of the Muslim population in
the western part of the Central African Republic. Tens
of thousands of them have left the country, the second
refugee outflow of the current crisis I mentioned, and
most of those remaining are under permanent threat.

Just last week, there were approximately 15,000
people trapped in 18 locations in the western part of the
Central African Republic, surrounded by anti-Balaka
elements and at very high risk of attack. International
forces are present in some of those sites, but if more
security is not made available immediately, many of
those civilians could be killed right before our eyes.

There is a glimmer of hope in the fact that, in a few
places, communities and courageous religious leaders
are starting to take mediation into their own hands.
The strengthening of the civilian capacity of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic to support mediation efforts- which
was mentioned, with the Secretary-General insisting on
its importance - is an urgent and decisive need. The
demon of religious cleansing must be stopped and must
be stopped now.

To do that the most important protection and
humanitarian objective inside the Central African
Republic is the re-establishment of security and law and
order. That is a key focus of the Secretary-General's
six-point initiative. The immediate reinforcement
of international forces, in particular with police
contingents to ensure security in the neighbourhoods, is
the biggest imperative. Another is immediate financial
support to the Government, to re-establish its capacity
to function and put in place at least a basic police and
justice system, able to arrest, try and jail criminals. I
must say I was very impressed by the new President, but
the thing that made more of an impression on me was
when she confessed that she did not have a cent. Long
after she was elected, she was still not able to pay any of
the salaries in arrears. She has appealed for the option
to pay two months of the many that are due, and as of
now, she has not been given those resources, which are
absolutely essential to establishing her credibility and
to enabling her to put in place the minimal requirements
of a functioning State.

The current events in the Central African Republic
could also potentially destabilize the whole region.
Continued brutality against Muslim communities could
create a pretext for extremist terrorist forces, which are
already present in other parts of the continent, to spread
to its centre.

While the violence has been concentrated in the
west, we must also not forget the long-neglected east.
I was there four years ago when the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic ended its mission, and we had a camp of 5,000
refugees from the Sudan. There was no presence of the
State in that region and no security at all, and we had to
remove the refugees from the north-eastern part of the
country to the centre, close to Bambari, as an absolute
requirement for protecting them, because it was
impossible to do so in that part of the country. There,
in the north-eastern part of the country, the current
leadership could easily be challenged, explaining
some of the concerns that have been expressed over a
possible fragmentation of the country, which can and
must be avoided. National and international efforts
to respond to the current crisis therefore need to take
into account all of the Central African Republic. They
must also acknowledge that the reconstruction of a
disappeared State is, as has been stated, an intensive
and time-consuming process, which must go far beyond
calm being restored and elections taking place.

