Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (Spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to express our sincere thanks to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting of
the Security Council in order to bring us up to speed on
the fast-developing events in Yemen that have followed
the aggression on Thursday against the city of Aden
and the presidential compound of Al-Maasheeq, in the
context ofthe ongoing coup that began on 21 September
2014 with the Houthis' occupation of the capital, Sana'a.
The entire population of Yemen deplores and rejects the
coup, which is helping to fuel civil war and sectarian
infighting. This violent scenario has continued with the
insane acts of terrorism committed by unseen hands
in Sana'a on Friday at the Al-Badr and Al-Hashoosh
mosques, in which dozens died, leaving a deep scar on
Yemen.

In the gradual Yemeni political transition - which
is a model for such transitions and for peaceful change,
under the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) and its Implementation Mechanism, for which
we thank our brothers in the GCC, particularly the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and which are designed to
enable Yemen to emerge from its problems and build
a modern federal State - all that there remained to do
was to adopt the Constitution and convene presidential
and parliamentary elections in a specific time frame
so that our people could overcome their suffering and
build a State based on the rule of law, justice, equal
citizenship and good governance. The Peace and
National Partnership Agreement permits no one to act
selfishly, unilaterally or autocratically, or to use force
to achieve political gains at the expense of the people's
aspirations and interests.

The only way for our country to emerge from the
current crisis is to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding the situation in my
country, most recently resolution 2201 (2015), which
calls on Ansar Allah to abandon its coup of the
constitutional legislature. As the President of Yemen
said yesterday, that would involve withdrawing all
the committees that have been imposed on ministries
and Government institutions, as well as all the armed
elements in Sana'a and other cities of Yemen; returning
to the official military all the light, medium and
heavy weaponry that has been plundered and seized
from the armed forces units and security camps;
working to comply with all relevant Security Council
resolutions and abandoning any measures adopted
since 21 September; and beginning to immediately
implement the main points of the road map for the
political process, particularly the Gulf Initiative and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference agreed
to by the United Nations and the 10 States sponsoring
the Initiative, and establishing a specific timetable for
that implementation.

I appeal to the Council, and to every representative
of States that enjoy ties of friendship to our people, to
fulfil their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations to take urgent measures to halt the progression
of aggression and violence that is undermining
the legitimate authorities, partitioning Yemen and
attacking its security and its political settlement, since
the criminal acts of the Houthi militias and their allies

threaten peace and security not only in Yemen but also
regionally and internationally.

The Council's ongoing support for the constitutional
legitimacy embodied in President Hadi Mansour and
the unity and security of Yemen is reflected in the
many resolutions it has adopted on this issue, including
resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012), 2140 (2014),
2201 (2015) and 2204 (2015), as well as the relevant
presidential statements. I would therefore urge the
Council to silence the drums of war being beaten by
the promoters of the coup, as well as the sedition they
seek to fuel in my country, which is incited by Iran's
ambition there.

I stress the President's call on all Yemeni political
elements, which has been welcomed by our brothers in
the GCC, to grasp the gravity of the current situation
and to participate effectively in the GCC dialogue being
held in Riyadh in order to find a solution that would
avert Yemen's descent into civil strife, partition and
violence. We support the Secretary-General's efforts
with respect to Yemen, and hope that the Council will
support them in the presidential statement it is to adopt
momentarily.

In conclusion, I extend my thanks and appreciation
to all our brothers in the GCC States, in particular the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for their political, financial
and security-related support for our people at all stages
of the crisis. I wish also to thank all State sponsors
of the Gulf initiatives, as well as the members of the
Security Council, the international community, the
United Nations, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
League of Arab States and all brotherly Arab States,
particularly Egypt and Jordan, for their unwavering
support for our people. The Yemeni people will never
forget the resolve and support that have been offered
to us, and we urge all involved to continue supporting
the peaceful political transition in my country and not
to abandon Yemen in these difficult humanitarian,
economic and political circumstances.

