Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I congratulate you,
Madam President, and the delegation of Lithuania on
your leadership of the Security Council this month. I
also thank you for organizing and presiding over this
debate on this very crucial topic. We thank Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Herve
Ladsous, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Navi Pillay and Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross Yves
Daccord for their insightful briefings.

In contemporary armed conflicts, innocent
civilians often constitute an overwhelming majority of
victims and have at times been deliberately targeted.
The most vulnerable populations at risk include women
and children, who are often killed, raped and sexually
abused or forced to become soldiers. Survivors are often
displaced, taking refuge in camps where they are often
defenceless against armed attacks and harassment.

My delegation would like to underscore the
importance ofprotecting civilians in armed conflict. We
would like therefore to commend the Security Council
for its continuous prioritization of its engagement on
this role. I wish to emphasize the following fundamental
points in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

First, it is essential to ensure a quick, effective and
concerted response, especially in situations of armed
conflict, in order to protect civilians, prevent atrocities,
restore law and order and provide humanitarian
assistance. Today's armed conflicts often take place in
densely populated areas, with extensive civilian losses
and damage to civilian buildings and infrastructure as
a result. That means there is an urgent need to consider
whether the interpretation of the basic international
humanitarian law rules of distinction between military
targets and civilians and proportionality need to be
further strengthened.

We have unfortunately witnessed many instances
on the African continent where delayed action by State
authorities, the region or the Security Council have
resulted in a devastating loss of life and untold suffering
to populations. The African Union is working towards
the operationalization of African standby brigades to
be able to respond quickly and robustly in situations
of violent conflict. In that regard, we look forward to
support from the international community.

Secondly, there is a need to emphasize the
importance of mediation as a recourse in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, even after the outbreak of
conflict. As we know, protection broadly encompasses
activities aimed at obtaining full respect for the rights
of all individuals in accordance with international
law, a task that is difficult in armed conflicts. We
underscore the need for the parties to a conflict to
seek political solutions through dialogue, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement or the use of regional and
international arrangements in accordance with Article
33 of the Charter of the United Nations.

We call upon the Security Council to give top
priority to conflict prevention and mediation under
Chapter VI of the Charter. For example, Uganda's role
as mediator of the dialogue between the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Mouvement du 23 mars under the auspices of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
de-escalated the conflict in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and saved lives. My
delegation is convinced that exerting greater efforts
to peacefully resolve disputes will reduce threats to
peace and security. From that perspective, greater use
of mediation should be a part of the Council's overall
response to the increased magnitude and complexity of
peacekeeping as conflicts become more multi-layered.

Thirdly, there is a need to enhance early-warning
and response mechanisms in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The United Nations has improved
its operational innovations in civilian protection,
which include practical steps and guidance on civilian
protection as well as highlighting best practices.
However, there is still more work to be done to ensure
the protection of civilians on the ground, with a focus
on preventive mechanisms to deter damage, destruction
and loss of life as a result of armed conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for regular
interaction, coordination and consultation among the
SecurityCouncil,regionalandsubregionalorganizations
and host States, with a view to devising more effective
strategies for protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Since regional organizations have a comparative
advantage through increased complementarities to
undertake efforts to ensure protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the benefits of such coordination are
enormous.

