Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for their comprehensive
survey of the military, political and humanitarian
situations in Yemen. We welcome the progress that
the parties made during the fourth joint meeting of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee under the
leadership of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. We would
also like to note the efforts to deploy the United Nations
Mission in support of the Hudaydah Agreement, aimed
at helping to strengthen the intra-Yemeni agreements
reached in Stockholm and to speed up the process of
disengaging and redeploying the warring parties. That
will unquestionably make a significant contribution to
reducing the violence, not just in Al-Hudaydah but also
outside the city.

We realize that we should not expect or demand
instant results. But while we have to be patient and
persistent, we want to believe that we are now entering
a new phase in the resolution of the Yemeni conflict. In
that regard, we very much appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations to advance the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, especially the mediation work of
Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. We
hope that they will help the parties realize the futility
and uselessness of attempts to resolve the conflict
militarily. From the very beginning of the conflict
in Yemen, Russia has advocated for an exclusively
political and diplomatic solution through a dialogue
that includes all the Yemeni parties. We have continued
to provide assistance, including through our contacts
with all of the country's political forces and the parties
concerned, encouraging them to take a constructive
approach and refrain from violence.

Regrettably, however, we have been forced to
acknowledge that despite the fact that the fragile
de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah has been maintained,
with every passing day the conflict in Yemen is
increasingly taking on the appearance of a full-
on humanitarian disaster. Millions of Yemenis are
starving, with no way of getting essential medicines
and services, and are in need of one kind of assistance
or another. The country's civilian infrastructure is in
ruins and the cost of restoring its shattered economy is
increasing exponentially.

We call on Council members to continue their
collective efforts to shift the conflict onto a political
track, achieve a nationwide ceasefire and provide
the people of Yemen with the assistance they need.
Emergency humanitarian assistance for Yemenis is a
top priority. Like many other Member States, including
Yemen's immediate neighbours, Russia will continue to
contribute to assisting the country's inhabitants. In our
view, foreign humanitarian aid should be provided to
all Yemeni citizens, regardless of who controls the area
where they live. We believe in ensuring strict adherence
to the provisions of international humanitarian law
and unhindered humanitarian access to all areas of
the country. It will also be important to finally allow
humanitarian and commercial goods traffic along the
main Al-Hudaydah-Sana'a route linking the coast to the
north of the country, where most of the population lives.

In conclusion, we want to stress once again that
establishing a political process in Yemen would
contribute significantly to stabilizing the situation in
the entire region. We would like to remind the Council
of our proposal to launch a process to develop a
package of security- and confidence-building measures
in the Persian Gulf and ultimately the entire Middle
East. That architecture, in which all the key countries
of the region should participate, including the Gulf
States and Iran, would not only help to strengthen a
comprehensive and indivisible system of security in
that part of the world but also to resolve its old and
new crisis situations, including the conflict in Yemen.
Threats and clashes must give way to dialogue and
interaction. We must get to work together immediately
to improve the overall atmosphere, which, incidentally,
will be a primary factor contributing to the success of
Mr. Griffiths' efforts.

