The Secretary-General: Let me start,
Mr. President, by thanking you for giving me the
opportunity to present my report on the Middle East
(S/2006/956). We are happy to see you here,
Mr. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs.

As I told the General Assembly in September, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not just one regional
conflict among many. No other conflict carries such a
powerful symbolic and emotional charge, even for
people far away. Yet, while the quest for peace has
registered some important achievements over the years,
a final settlement has defied the best efforts of several
generations of world leaders. I, too, will leave office
without an end to the prolonged agony.

The Middle East today faces grim prospects. The
region is in profound crisis. The situation is more
complex, more fragile and more dangerous than it has
been for a very long time.

It was with this in mind that I took the initiative
of preparing the report that is now in the Council's
hands. My aim is to help us get out of the present
morass and back to a viable peace process that will
respond to the region's yearning for peace.

Mistrust between Israelis and Palestinians has
reached new heights. The Gaza Strip has become a
cauldron of deepening poverty and frustration, despite
the withdrawal of Israeli troops and settlements last
year. In the West Bank, too, the situation is dire.
Settlement activity and construction of the barrier
continue. Israeli obstacles impede Palestinian
movement throughout the area. The Palestinian
Authority, paralysed by a debilitating political and
financial crisis, is no longer able to provide security or
basic services.

Israelis, for their part, continue to live in fear of
terrorism. They are dismayed by the inadequacy of
Palestinian efforts to halt rocket attacks into southern
06-65360
Israel. And they are alarmed by a Hamas-led
Government which is, at best, ambivalent about the
two-State solution and, at worst, refuses to renounce
violence and rejects the basic tenets of the approach to
the conflict consistently favoured by a majority of
Palestinians and enshrined in the Oslo Accords.

In Lebanon, the country's political transformation
is incomplete, and its leaders face a campaign of
intimidation and destabilization. As last summer's
fighting between Israel and Hizbollah showed,
Lebanon remains a hostage to its own difficult history
and captive of forces from within and from beyond its
borders that wish to exploit its vulnerability.

Casting our glance to other parts of the region,
we see the Syrian Golan Heights still under Israeli
control and concerns about Syria's relations with
militant groups beyond its borders. Iraq is mired in
unrelenting Violence. Iran's nuclear activities and
possible ambitions have emerged as a source of deep
concern to many in the region, and beyond it as well.
All of this feeds, and is fed by, an alarming rise in
extremism.

Each of these conflicts has its own dynamics and
causes. Each will require its own specific solution and
its own process to produce a solution that will endure.
In each case, it is the parties involved who bear the
primary responsibility for peace. No one can make
peace for them; no peace can be imposed on them. No
one should want peace more than they do.

At the same time, the international community
cannot escape its own responsibility to use its
influence. The various conflicts and crises in the region
have become ever more intertwined. Though deeply
separate and distinct, the various arenas affect and
shape each other, making conflict resolution and crisis
management more difficult. The international
community must develop a new understanding of the
uncertainty engulfing the Middle East and then
shoulder its full responsibility in resolving it and
stabilizing the region.

I would therefore like to offer a few thoughts on
what the parties themselves and outsiders - from the
Quartet to this Council and other United Nations
bodies - might do differently in search for peace, in
particular peace between Israelis and Palestinians,
which, while no panacea, will go a long way toward
defusing tensions throughout the region.
06-65360
One of the most frustrating aspects of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is the apparent inability of many
people on both sides to understand the position of the
other and the unwillingness of some even to try. As a
true friend and supporter of both sides, I would like to
address frank messages to each.

It is completely right and understandable that
Israel and its supporters should seek to ensure its
security by persuading Palestinians, and Arabs and
Muslims more broadly, to alter their attitude and
behaviour toward Israel. But they are not likely to
succeed unless they themselves grasp and acknowledge
the fundamental Palestinian grievance, namely, that the
establishment of the State of Israel involved the
dispossession of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
families, turning them into refugees, and was followed
19 years later by a military occupation that brought
hundreds of thousands more Palestinians under Israeli
rule.

Israel is justifiably proud of its democracy and its
efforts to build a society based on respect for the rule
of law. But Israel's democracy can thrive only if the
occupation over another people ends. Former Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon acknowledged as much. Israel
has undergone a major cultural shift since the days of
Oslo - all of Israel's major political parties now
acknowledge that Israel needs to end the occupation,
for its own sake and for the sake of its own security.

Yet thousands of Israelis still live in territories
occupied in 1967, and over a thousand more are added
every month. As Palestinians watch this activity, they
also see a barrier being built through their land, in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, as well as more than 500
checkpoints to control their movement, and the heavy
presence of the Israel Defense Forces. Their despair at
the occupation only grows, as does their determination
to resist it. As a result, some tend to invest much of
their trust in those who pursue the armed struggle
rather than a peace process that does not seem to yield
the coveted goal of an independent State.

I agree with Israel and its supporters that there is
a difference - moral as well as legal - between
terrorists who deliberately target civilians, and regular
soldiers who, in the course of military operations,
unintentionally kill or wound civilians despite efforts
to avoid such casualties. But the larger the number of
civilian casualties during these operations, and the
3
more perfunctory the precautions taken to avoid such
losses, the more this difference is diminished. The use
of military force in densely populated civilian areas is
a blunt instrument that only produces more death,
destruction, recrimination and vengeance. And, as we
have seen, it does little to achieve the desired goal of
stopping terrorist attacks.

Israelis may reply that they are merely protecting
themselves from terrorism, which they have every right
to do. But that argument will carry less weight so long
as the occupation in the West Bank becomes more
burdensome and the settlement expansion continues.
Israel would receive more understanding if its actions
were clearly designed to help end an occupation, rather
than to entrench it.

We should all work with Israel to move beyond
the unhappy status quo and reach a negotiated end to
the occupation based on the principle of land for peace.

It is completely right and understandable to
support the Palestinian people, who have suffered so
much. But Palestinians and their supporters will never
be truly effective if they focus solely on Israel's
transgressions, without conceding any justice or
legitimacy to Israel's own concerns, and without being
willing to admit that Israel's opponents have
themselves committed appalling and inexcusable
crimes. No resistance to occupation can justify
terrorism. We should all be united in our unequivocal
rejection of terror as a political instrument.

I also believe that the actions of some United
Nations bodies may themselves be counterproductive.
The Human Rights Council, for example, has already
held three special sessions focused on the Arab-Israeli
conflict. I hope that the Council will take care to
handle the issue in an impartial way, and not allow it to
monopolize attention at the expense of other situations
where there are no less grave Violations, or even worse
ones.

In the same vein, those who complain that the
Security Council is guilty of a double standard -
applying sanctions to Arab and Muslim Governments,
but not to Israel - should take care that they
themselves do not apply double standards in the other
direction, by holding Israel to a standard of behaviour
that they are unwilling to apply to other States, to
Israel's adversaries or, indeed, to themselves.
Some may feel satisfaction at repeatedly passing
General Assembly resolutions or holding conferences
that condemn Israel's behaviour. But one should also
ask whether such steps bring any tangible relief or
benefit to the Palestinians. There have been decades of
resolutions. There has been a proliferation of special
committees, sessions and Secretariat divisions and
units. Has any of that had an effect on Israel's policies,
other than to strengthen the belief in Israel and among
many of its supporters that this great Organization is
too one-sided to be allowed a significant role in the
Middle East peace process?

Even worse, some of the rhetoric used in
connection with the issue implies a refusal to concede
the very legitimacy of Israel's existence, let alone the
validity of its security concerns. We must never forget
that Jews have very good historical reasons for taking
seriously any threat to Israel's existence. What was
done to Jews and others by the Nazis remains an
undeniable tragedy, unique in human history. Today,
Israelis are often confronted with words and actions
that seem to confirm their fear that the goal of their
adversaries is to extinguish their existence as a State
and as a people.

Therefore, those who want to be heard on
Palestine should not deny or minimize that history or
the connection that many Jews feel with their historic
homeland. Rather, they should acknowledge Israel's
security concerns and make clear that their criticism is
rooted not in hatred or intolerance, but in a desire for
justice, self-determination and peaceful coexistence.

Perhaps the greatest irony in this sad story is that
there is no serious question about the broad outline of a
final settlement. The parties themselves, at various
times and through various diplomatic channels, have
come close to bridging almost all of the gaps between
them. There is every reason for the parties to try again,
with principled, concerted help from the international
community. We need a new and urgent push for peace.

The road will be long, and much trust will have to
be rebuilt along the way. But let us remember where
this effort needs to take us: two States, Israel and
Palestine, within secure, recognized and negotiated
boundaries based on those of 4 June 1967; a broader
peace encompassing Israel's other neighbours, namely,
Lebanon and Syria; normal diplomatic and economic
relations; arrangements that would allow both Israel
and Palestine to establish their internationally
recognized capitals in Jerusalem and would ensure
access for people of all faiths to their holy places; a
solution that respects the rights of Palestinian refugees
and is consistent with the two-State solution and with
the character of the States in the region.

Reaching that destination is not as impossible as
some might imagine. Most Israelis genuinely believe in
peace with the Palestinians - perhaps not quite as the
Palestinians envision it, but genuine nevertheless. Most
Palestinians do not seek the destruction of Israel, only
the end of occupation and their own State - perhaps in
a slightly larger territory than Israelis would wish to
concede, but a limited territory nevertheless.

Our challenge is to convince the people on each
side that these majorities exist on the other side, while
showing that spoilers and rejectionists are a distinct
minority.

I believe that the fundamental aspirations of both
peoples can be reconciled. I believe in the right of
Israel to exist, and to exist in full and permanent
security - free from terrorism, free from attack, free
from even the threat of attack. I believe in the right of
the Palestinians to exercise their self-determination.
They have been miserably abused and exploited, by
Israel, by the Arab world, sometimes by their own
leaders and perhaps even, at times, by the international
community. They deserve to see fulfilled their simple
ambition to live in freedom and dignity.

The Road Map, endorsed by the Council in its
resolution 1515 (2003), is still the reference point
around which any effort to re-energize a political effort
should be concentrated. Its sponsor, the Quartet, retains
its validity because of its singular combination of
legitimacy, political strength and financial and
economic clout. But the Quartet needs to do more to
restore faith not only in its own seriousness and
effectiveness, but also in the Road Map's practicability,
and to create the conditions for resuming a Viable
peace process. It needs to find a way to institutionalize
its consultations with the relevant regional partners. It
needs to engage the parties directly in its deliberations.
The time has come for the Quartet to be clearer at the
outset on the parameters of an endgame deal. And it
will have to be open to new ideas and initiatives.

Tensions in the region are near the breaking
point, I need not tell you, Mr. President. Extremism
and populism are leaving less political space for
moderates, including those States that have reached

peace agreements with Israel. Welcome moves towards
democracy, such as elections, have simultaneously
posed a quandary in bringing to power parties,
individuals and movements that oppose the basis of
current peacemaking approaches. The opportunity for
negotiating a two-State solution will last for only so
long. Should we fail to seize it, the people who most
directly bear the brunt of this calamity will be
consigned to new depths of suffering and grief. Other
conflicts and problems will become that much harder
to resolve, and extremists the world over will enjoy a
boost to their recruiting efforts.

The period ahead could well prove crucial. Every
day brings defeats in the struggle for peace and reasons
to give up. But we must not succumb to frustration.
The principles on which peace must be based are
known to all of us. Even the contours of what a
solution would look like on the ground are well
mapped out. I believe that we can break the current
stalemate and make new strides towards peace.

The United Nations and the Middle East are
closely intertwined. The region has shaped this
Organization like no other. The situation, the people
and the thirst for peace are all very close to my heart. I
know that they are close to yours as well. As a matter
of urgency, let us match that concern with concerted
action.

