Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway appreciates the
opportunity to participate in this debate and we thank
the Chairmen of the three Committees for their
informative and interesting briefings here today. While
we are fully aware that today's topic is the work of
those Committees, I believe it could be useful to also
briefly touch upon the important work of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF).

Terrorism continues to pose a threat around the
world. The attacks that have been carried out serve as
reminders of the need for more effective counter-
terrorism measures. The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is an important tool, in
particular because of its global backing and its
comprehensive approach. The shared will of all
countries to work together towards a common goal is
of great value and something we need to safeguard and
harness. In order for us to succeed, we need
coordinated, strategic and sustained engagement by
different parts of the United Nations system.

In that respect, let me point to the important role
of the CTITF, both in coordinating within the United
Nations system and in mobilizing support among
Member States. We note with satisfaction that the
counter-terrorism bodies established under the Security
Council are well integrated into the Task Force. We are
also pleased that the Task Force has received more
resources. Norway will continue to work with the
United Nations to promote and support the integrated
implementation of all four pillars of the Global
Strategy.

In responding to the threat of terrorism, short-
term efforts must not undermine long-term goals. Our
ability to resist shortcuts and laxity in the observance
of human rights is a value that we need to defend at all
times because, if we stray from those values, we
undermine the rule of law, energize those who wish our
societies ill and strengthen the hand of terrorists and
their networks. There is no contradiction between
security, on the one hand, and compliance with human
rights and the rule of law, on the other. The measures
we take must always comply with our obligations
under international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and humanitarian law.

Norway fully supports the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We
have followed with great interest the efforts undertaken
by the Committee to implement resolution 1822
(2008), in particular the review of the consolidated list
of individuals or entities associated with Al-Qaida,
Osama bin Laden and/or the Taliban. All States
concerned, and not only Committee members, have an
obligation to provide accurate information related to
the review of the entries on the list. We welcome the
publication of the first narrative summaries describing
the reasons for listings, and look forward to subsequent
narrative summaries as the Committee's work in this
area progresses.

The Council has taken measures to better ensure
respect for procedural rights and due process in
relation to sanctions. While those measures are
important steps in the right direction, we believe that
efforts must continue until the Council has established
an effective and independent mechanism to review
listing and de-listing decisions. Norway therefore
supports the proposal that has been made to establish a
review panel of independent experts mandated to issue
non-binding recommendations on de-listing. That
proposal preserves the prerogatives of the Council and
strengthens the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime. We take this opportunity to
encourage the Council to consider adopting such a
mechanism.

Norway is a strong supporter of global efforts to
promote disarmament and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We continue to stress the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in that regard. We have taken due note of
the Committee's eighth programme of work. We are
encouraged to see that the Committee will continue its
outreach activities and promote dialogue with a view to
ensuring strengthened implementation of the
resolution. Regional seminars, as organized by the
Committee, contribute to capacity-building and
information-sharing. Norway has contributed
financially to those seminars.

Norway submitted its sixth report on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) earlier this
year. We look forward to continued cooperation and
interaction in that regard. Norway stands ready to
consider any request for technical assistance to
enhance the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

We appreciate the initiatives to enhance

coordination between the three Committees. At the

same time, we encourage them to further explore the

possibility of strengthened interaction in pursuit of

synergies, without jeopardizing the efficiency of the
Committees' work.

Terrorism is a concern for all States, and all
States have a clear interest in following the work of the
United Nations on these issues. We commend the
Committees' efforts to increase transparency and we
encourage them to continue to consider ways of
improving information-sharing with the broader United
Nations membership.

