Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having convened this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The protection
of civilians is essentially the raison d'etre of the
Organization and of its efforts to preserve international
peace and security. I should also like to thank Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
valuable briefing at the beginning of this debate.

Each and every one of us is being targeted. In
2001 alone, more than 16 billion units of ammunition
were manufactured - that is more than 2 bullets for
each person on the planet. Every minute of every day, a
person is killed. To massacres and extrajudicial
killings, we must add sexual slavery, forced
disappearances, recruitment of minors, deportation or
transfer of populations, torture, rape and mutilation.

Frequently, those crimes are part of a policy of
genocide or a campaign of systematic violation of
fundamental rights. Military operations frequently
produce excessive collateral damage, including the
bombing of defenceless towns, cities, hospitals and
schools. We cannot forget the pictures of mutilated
children in Liberia and Sierra Leone, the bombed
towns in the Sudan and the extermination in Rwanda
and Burundi. Nor can we forget the refugee camps in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo or the
destruction in Haiti. In those cases, it was the civilians
who paid. And they continue to pay the price of armed
conflict with their blood. In all those cases, the action
of the international community was weak, tardy and
insufficient.

The Security Council must take more decisive
action to prevent armed conflicts and resolve conflicts
rapidly and peacefully. The Council must seriously
consider how to set up the machinery for rapid action,
and the Secretariat must set up an effective early-
warning system. Today's humanitarian crises could
have been averted if the Council had been warned in
time and if it had had the necessary political will.
Likewise, it is indispensable for the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole, to
implement the 10-point platform of action to protect
civilians as presented by Mr. Egeland a year ago. In
particular, it is indispensable to guarantee continuous
humanitarian access to the most needy and vulnerable
civilians. It is scandalous that, in this day and age,
humanitarian personnel do not have access to more
than 10 million people who urgently need basic
foodstuffs, water, housing and vital medical care. It is
also worrisome that in some 20 armed conflicts
humanitarian access is denied or hampered to the
neediest civilians. In that context, the United Nations
and influential countries must urge parties to conflicts
to permit humanitarian access. The Security Council
should, if necessary, adopt compulsory measures
within its powers to facilitate the distribution of such
assistance.

We think it is necessary to create a mechanism to
keep forgotten crises on the political agenda of the
international community, donor countries and the
Security Council: crises that fail to attract the attention
of Governments or of the international press. The
Security Council should request that the Secretariat
provide monthly reports on the humanitarian needs of
populations that are victims of armed conflict. Such
reports must be specific, identifying real needs and
flagging priorities; they must be comprehensive,
covering all armed conflicts afflicting the world, even
when they have not formally appeared on the agenda of
the Security Council.

Moreover, the international community must
respond more effectively to the needs of refugees and
internally displaced persons. It is not enough to meet
the basic physical needs of refugees. Their safety and
security must also be guaranteed. It is vital to ensure
that refugee camps are not infiltrated by armed groups
trying to recruit, politicize or militarize refugees. The
presence of such groups not only diverts assistance
intended for legitimate refugees, but also increases the
risk of refugee camps becoming targets of armed
attack.

We believe that it is necessary to pay particular
attention to child victims of armed conflicts,
particularly child soldiers and children who have been
victims of sexual violence. The reintegration,
rehabilitation and education of minors is, in the long
term, the best way to break the cycle of violence.
Similarly, greater emphasis should be put on the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration of combatants.
At the same time, we must respect the
impartiality and independence of humanitarian
personnel with a view to guaranteeing their safety and
security. In fact, once the parties, rightly or wrongly,
perceive humanitarian workers, or the Organization as
a whole, as having taken sides, the safety of those
workers is imperiled. In that connection, we believe
that all humanitarian staff should follow the wise
example of the International Committee of the Red
Cross.

Internationally, it is necessary to do away with
impunity. Any attack against or clash with civilians
constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and is a war crime under customary
international law and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Such criminal acts must
be investigated and punished by the competent
authorities. In that connection, we should emphasize
the constructive role that the International Criminal
Court can play. Similarly, it is necessary for parties to
conflicts to strictly observe the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions, their Additional Protocols and
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
Even more important, it is necessary to do away with
trafficking in small arms and light weapons to groups
or States in conflict. Such weapons and ammunition
fuel armed conflict. We therefore think it is necessary
to adopt a binding international instrument prohibiting
the transfer of weapons to any non-State armed group
or to any State which is violating human rights or
international humanitarian law.

United Nations personnel must take the lead in
providing humanitarian assistance. We must recognize
the heroic work of the many Blue Helmets and civilian
staff who are making extraordinary efforts to help
civilian populations. However, we must express our
serious concern about the worrisome accusations of
sexual exploitation and abuse of women and children
by staff affiliated with the United Nations.
Unfortunately, if we are to believe the press reports,
such criminal acts are occurring with increasing
frequency in various peacekeeping operations, involve
a large number of staff and military personnel and are
truly becoming a systemic problem. If the accusations
are true, the United Nations is losing its ability to serve
and protect societies destroyed by war. Such grotesque
acts, which are true crimes against humanity, fly in the
face of the basic principals of our Organization and call
for immediate action by Member States.

We urge the Secretary-General to pursue and
expand the investigations under way on sexual abuses
in the field. We believe that the Organization must set
an example in combating impunity, and that it is
imperative that the Secretary-General make public the
results of the investigations. Unfortunately, the rules of
confidentiality currently included in the Secretary-
General's 9 October 2003 bulletin on sexual
exploitation (ST/SGB/2003/l3) create an atmosphere
of impunity.

If there is evidence of criminal conduct, the staff
involved must immediately be separated from service
and all evidence must be made available to the
competent authorities so that they can begin
appropriate criminal proceedings with a view to
facilitating criminal investigations. So far as possible,
the individuals involved should be subject to the
jurisdiction of the territory in which the events
occurred, or to that of the victim's home country. In no
case should accused be permitted to use their official
status in order to avoid justice, and the Organization
should strip them of any immunity they may enjoy
because of their status.

When the accused have been transferred to their
country of origin, the evidence should be provided to
all States that have jurisdiction so that they may
commence procedures to extradite. Troop-contributing
countries must comply in prosecuting or extraditing
any of their military staff who are accused of such
criminal activity. The Security Council can assist in
this connection by including the norm of ant dedere aat
jadicare in all of its resolutions that establish
peacekeeping operations. When the International
Criminal Court has jurisdiction, the evidence should be
transmitted to its Prosecutor.

All of this must be carried out with the greatest
amount of transparency possible with a View to
preserving the good reputation of the Organization and
avoiding impunity. In short, we believe that it is
indispensable for the Secretary-General to give a
thorough revision of the norms that currently are
governing the investigation of cases of sexual
exploitation perpetrated by staff of the United Nations
and associated staff.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict is the
most important activity that the United Nations can
carry out. Unfortunately, as has been indicated by the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change,
this Security Council has not shown itself to be willing
or able to protect civilians effectively. This is why we
join in the appeal that the High-level Panel addressed
to the Council to commit itself to protecting civilians.
