Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2304
(2016) today. It is a vitally important decision that
needed to be taken now. Through this resolution, we
have created a protection force under the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), a protection force
called for by both the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU), a
protection force that the Government of South Sudan
agreed to in principle.

This resolution should strengthen the United
Nations ability to protect people and to save lives. It
should mean a safer and more secure Juba. It should
mean that food, supplies and support can reach people
who are so desperately in need. It should mean the road
back to the political process.

But the key word is "should". All those things
can happen only if the Government of South Sudan
makes good on its promises. The Government bears
the primary responsibility to help its people. That
means the Government supporting, not obstructing, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the United Nations troops. It means the Government
engaging quickly in addressing the practicalities of a
protection force. And it means the Government holding
to account anyone responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
abuses, including rape. We welcome the continued
support of IGAD and the AU to help the Government
fulfil those important commitments.

Many outside the Chamber today will ask whether
we have done enough, when hundreds of people have
been killed in Juba in the past month, when hundreds of
women and girls have been raped or gang-raped, when
tens of thousands have been forced to flee their homes.
Behind each and every one of these unspeakable acts
lies unspeakable violence, violence perpetrated by
those with guns against those without. Therefore,
yes, today we have agreed to strengthen the United
Nations Mission, which should save lives if the text is
implemented fully.

But today we also had a chance to stop the violence
by implementing an immediate arms embargo on South
Sudan. On that, we failed. We must and we will return
to this issue.

