Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame for his briefing on recent developments
in Libya.

I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for
his briefing on the ongoing work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.

We are deeply saddened by the tragic news of a
shipwreck off the coast of Libya last week, where 150
people may have lost their lives. Together with the attack
on the Tajoura detention centre on 2 and 3 July, which
resulted in the killing of 53 refugees and migrants, those
events have again exposed the weaknesses of Libya's
system of managing irregular migration. Therefore,
we call on the international community to support the
Libyan authorities in developing solutions to create
safe and dignified alternatives to detention, in full
compliance with international humanitarian standards
and with respect for human rights.

The delivery of humanitarian services to people
in need in Libya remains a significant challenge in
the current complex political and security situation.
Security restrictions and the denial of humanitarian
access by parties to the conflict to people in need are
major challenges. In that regard, we call on all parties to
the conflict to allow safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to people in need in Libya, including to prisons
and detention centres, for the delivery of basic services.
Attacks on schools and hospitals have a significant
impact on children, hampering their chances to
continue their education, as well as their access to
life-saving health care. Therefore, we urge all parties
to the conflict to protect schools and hospitals from
attacks during hostilities, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

We are gravely concerned about the continued
violation of the arms embargo. In that regard, the strict
implementation of the embargo should be maintained.

In conclusion, let me confirm Poland's position that
the conflict in Libya should be resolved by peaceful
means. I would also like to fully support all efforts
taken by Special Representative Ghassan Salame
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
under challenging circumstances, aimed at finding a
comprehensive political solution to the current crisis.
We are also looking forward to our discussion during
consultations concerning Mr. Salame's suggestion.

