Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Many of those who have spoken before me
today mentioned the role of the Security Council. We
see today's meeting as an opportunity to review the
results of the Council's action over the past two years
in implementing its own decisions in its quest to find a
political and diplomatic solution to the knotty problems
of the Korean peninsula. Unfortunately, there is almost
nothing to discuss, since for the past two years the
Council has been able to agree on any specific steps.
Ever since a glimmer of progress emerged in the
dialogue between the United States and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and in the inter-Korean
reconciliation efforts, Russia, China and other Security
Council members have often tried to initiate some
kind of positive response on the part of the Security
Council to the events that have occurred. I want to
remind members that only last year we were talking
about the prospects for concluding the long-awaited
peace agreement and about rapprochement between
South and North Korea. However, for reasons that are
difficult to understand, any kind of response on the part
of the Council in support of that positive momentum
towards a settlement has been blocked.

Meanwhile, the inter-Korean dialogue has come to
nothing, and the dialogue between the United States
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
stagnating. Sanctions cannot replace diplomacy, and a
negotiation process is a two-way street. It is impossible
to get an agreement without offering anything in return.
No one is questioning the fact that the existence of a
nuclear-missile programme in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea is unacceptable. However, how can
we expect progress when Pyongyang is called on to
meet all the proposed requirements unconditionally in
return for only a promise of future benefits?

We have often said that the path to

denuclearization f and not only for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, incidentally, but for
the entire Korean peninsula - should begin with

strengthened confidence-building measures. The
institutions and mechanisms of the United Nations
and its Security Council should act in support of the
processes for a settlement and for inter-Korean dialogue
rather than becoming an obstacle to them. Only then
will it be possible to talk about an effective solution
to the accumulated problems in the region, including
the nuclear issue, on a basis of dialogue and mutually
acceptable arrangements. It is impossible to achieve
that through sanctions and pressure alone. It is also
essential to have a road map for the gradual lifting of
restrictions. The Council's excessive use of sanctions
is already one of the reasons why Member States and
international organizations, including the United
Nations itself, have frequently been unable to maintain
normal humanitarian, diplomatic and sporting ties
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that
have nothing to do with its development of nuclear and
missile programmes.

The so-called autonomous or secondary sanctions
that go around or over Security Council sanctions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and other States
do their own share of damage. Unilateral restrictions
not only undermine the sovereignty and lawful interests
of Member States and are in breach of the norms and
rules of international trade, but also undermine the
integrity of sanctions agreed through the Security
Council. We once again call on the United States and
other States to stop using unilateral restrictions. The
example of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is very revealing in that regard. Even things that are not
prohibited under the Security Council sanctions regime
are extremely difficult to implement thanks to these
illegal practices and enterprises' fears of ending up on
banned lists. Attempts to whitewash such restrictions
by invoking the authority of the Security Council and
its Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) are unacceptable.

We would also like to point out that every Security
Council resolution on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea contains provisions on measures
for arriving at a political and diplomatic settlement
of the situation on the Korean peninsula as well as a
sanctions component. That is a joint decision of the
Council. Ignoring those provisions is equivalent to
non-compliance with the consensus agreements arrived
at in the Security Council. We have often said that the
Council and its 1718 Committee should contribute as
much as possible to finding political and diplomatic
solutions to the problems of the Korean peninsula
and establishing a multilateral security mechanism in
North-East Asia. Furthermore, the Security Council's
own resolutions oblige it to regularly assess the
advisability of reviewing any of the restrictions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as it makes
progress towards renouncing its nuclear weapons.

To sum up, the positive momentum that emerged
in 2018 in inter-Korean relations did not elicit any
response from the Council. The expectations for positive
movement in the efforts for a settlement on the Korean
peninsula were disappointed. With the aim of emerging
from the stalemate, Russia and China have proposed
a viable road map towards denuclearization and the
normalization of relations that takes into consideration
the existing security guarantees for States throughout

North-East Asia and phased efforts to achieve those
aims based on action in exchange for action. All that is
needed to accomplish it is political will. It is important
that we encourage the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to cooperate by responding to what it has already
done in the expectation of a positive reaction on our
part.

We call on all the parties to act with restraint
and resume the dialogue between Washington and
Pyongyang. We want to emphasize once again that the
quest for mutually acceptable political and diplomatic
solutions is the only possible path to a peaceful
resolution of the problems of the Korean peninsula and
the creation of enduring security mechanisms in North-
East Asia, which is in the interests of all the countries of
the region and the international community as a whole.
To that end, we believe that the time has come for the
Council to adopt a political resolution on the situation
on the Korean peninsula. Russia has always been ready
to cooperate closely with all the parties involved in
order to ensure peace and stability in the region and to
achieve a comprehensive solution to the problems of the
Korean peninsula.
