Mr. Lamamra: First of all, I would like to express
to you, Mr. President, and through you to all members
of the Security Council, my sincere thanks for your
welcome and the kind words you addressed to me.

As the Council members well to know, I was called
recently by the President of the Republic of Algeria,
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, to work in his office as
Senior Minister and Diplomatic Adviser. I am therefore
glad that I could be with Council members today to
contribute to what appears to be a very significant
achievement in Africa's endeavour to promote silencing
the guns, that being one of the flagship programmes
of our continental organization. President Bouteflika
has particularly asked me to convey to the members of
the Security Council his greetings as well as his high
appreciation for their efforts to promote the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
in contemporary international relations. He assures
the Council of Algeria's support for the emblematic
and ambitious project of Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020.

The Chairperson ofthe African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, who has entrusted me with
the mission of High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa, sincerely regrets not being able to
participate personally in today's meeting. He asked me
to share with the Council our vision for intensifiedjoint
efforts by our two organizations in the implementation
of their strategic partnership in peace and security.
Together with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
the Chairperson Faki Mahamat intends to contribute to
raising this great partnership to the highest level.

I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and His Excellency
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo on your successful
presidency of the Security Council during a very
busy month of February, with many achievements. In
particular, I would like to express our deep appreciation
to you for convening today's important debate and for
your delegation's exemplary efforts in drafting and
conducting the negotiations on resolution 2457 (2019),
which the Council just unanimously adopted. I also
take this opportunity to thank and congratulate all the
delegations that so graciously sponsored the resolution.
May I also thank all Council members for their support
for the resolution, which testifies to their continued
commitment to the Africanist agenda for freeing the
continent from violent conflicts.

Since its adoption, the African Union (AU)
flagship project to achieve a conflict-free Africa and
make peace a reality for all our people has not remained
a mere slogan. Instead, it has been pursued as one of
the top priorities in the realization of African Union's
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.

In line with the 2013 fiftieth anniversary solemn
declaration, in which the African leaders pledged,
among other things, to not pass along the burden
of conflicts to the next generation of Africans and
undertook to end all wars in Africa by 2020, the AU
Assembly of Heads of State and Government adopted,
in January 2017, the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020.

To fulfil that objective, the African Union, in
close partnership with the United Nations and the
international community as a whole, has invested
tremendous efforts to make peace a viable and lasting
reality across the continent. As a result, notable progress
has been made in preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts throughout Africa. Many of the long-standing
conflicts that have ravaged the continent are now seeing
intensified collective efforts that will hopefully lead
to their complete resolution. The recently concluded
peace agreements in South Sudan and in the Central
African Republic, the successful democratic elections
in Madagascar and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as the historic positive developments in

the Horn of Africa, are all generating optimism about
a continent emerging from the shadows and moving
steadily to restore peace, stability and security, and make
a decisive move towards integration and prosperity.

The African Union and its regional mechanisms
have also enhanced their capacity to deal with conflict
and crisis situations on the continent. In doing so,
the African Union has developed the comprehensive
African Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Architecture, which include a powerful set
of instruments and practices. That has indeed helped
the African Union and the international community
enhance their collaboration and partnership, to the
extent that today consultation and coordination among
the AU, the regional economic communities, regional
mechanisms, the United Nations and other partners to
harmonize strategies and interventions have become
the rule, rather than the exception.

In that context, I would be remiss if I did not
recognize the impressive progress made in consolidating
the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, which was given new impetus
by the signing, in April 2017, of the Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.

As the December 2020 deadline to end wars in
Africa approaches, it is essential to bear in mind that
there are still major challenges and constraints that
need to be overcome in order to place the continent in a
better position to be able to secure real gains and enjoy
the dividends of peace.

Although the number of violent conflicts has
significantly decreased in the past few years, a number
of African countries still remain trapped in a vicious
cycle of violent conflict and its deadly consequences
as a result of, among other things, transnational crime,
terrorism and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. The effect ofthose challenges has been further
exacerbated by the existence of ungoverned spaces
that leave room for illegal activities, the persistence
of corruption and illicit financial flows that facilitate
funding for illicit weapons and conflicts, and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources that contributes to
funding insurgencies and rebellions, to mention a few.

Issues of governance and leadership also
continue to be a major source of instability and
conflict in Africa. Many experiences have shown the
critical role of national governance institutions and
democratic practices in conflict prevention, especially
election-related violence and disputes.

Those challenges serve to underline the urgent need
to build a robust culture of conflict prevention, and
in particular structural conflict prevention, that goes
beyond the current trend of militarization of conflict
resolution - as necessary as it may be in certain cases.
They also serve to highlight the importance of all of us
redoubling efforts to accelerate the search for peaceful
and political solutions and maintain strong engagement
in support of the implementation of peace agreements
in Member States emerging from conflict.

To that end, our efforts will amount to too little if
we do not endeavour to reduce the gap between strategic
political and military efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts, on one hand, and to invest in economic and
social development, on the other hand. At the African
Union we remain convinced that peace cannot be
achieved without development, and vice-versa, and
that both peace and development cannot thrive without
human rights and good governance.

Equally important is the need for the Security
Council to respond positively to the African Union's
long-standing and legitimate calls concerning access to
United Nations assessed contributions to fund African
Union peace support operations. By responding to
multiple threats to peace and security, the African
Union-led operations are indeed doing so on behalf
of the United Nations and, in particular, the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This issue deserves renewed attention by the Security
Council, in view of the ongoing efforts by the African
Union, including the recent operationalization of its
Peace Fund.

Last but not least, we also need to build and
promote a culture of peace and tolerance. In that vein,
my Office recently launched a media campaign to reach
out to African citizens in member States, especially the
youth, but also to the African diaspora. Furthermore,
the decision taken by the African Union to annually
declare September, until 2020, as Africa Amnesty
Month for the surrender and collection of illicit arms
and light weapons is one of many steps in the right
direction that will contribute to peace and security on
the continent. In that context, my role has been geared
towards coordinating the various stakeholders and
galvanizing the support necessary for deploying the
relevant conflict-resolution interventions and efforts.
A plan of action supporting the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative in Africa is being developed with a view
towards translating it into concrete deliverables.

In conclusion, let me thank members ofthe Security
Council once again for giving us this opportunity
to share the views of the African Union on such an
important issue. I sincerely believe that today's open
debate will significantly contribute to maintaining and
further enhancing the positive momentum generated
around the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. I
look forward to hearing members' views on how that
can be done within the strategic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations. Despite the
huge challenges ahead, I remain confident that ourjoint
and genuine engagement will eventually pave the way
towards a conflict-free and prosperous Africa. Our
beloved African and world icon Nelson Mandela once
said, "It always seems impossible until it is done." Let
us therefore do it together.

