Mr. Ashibayev (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Minister Wallstrom, and Sweden
on assuming the Council's presidency for the month
of July. I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Ms. Amina Mohammed, Minister of Water
Resources of Iraq Mr. Hassan Janabi, and civil society
briefer Ms. Hindou Ibrahim for warning us about the
need for urgent national, regional and global action.

The problem of climate change is becoming a
central theme throughout the world community, which
has significant economic, environmental and social
consequences. Climate change is a threat multiplier
as it can result in poverty, food insecurity, illegal
migration, internal displacement, social instability
and bitter conflicts because high-risk areas are
essentially agricultural. The fight over scarce natural
resources, such as land and water, have also resulted
in long and brutal hostilities. The refugee problem
and mass movements of people across the world
due to climate-related causes are today resulting in
animosity, xenophobia and exclusion and ending in
unintended political upheavals. We have also seen
violent insurgencies and terrorist organizations gaining
a foothold when a vacuum is created.

With regard to today's topic of discussion,
I would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.

Climate-related security threats must be seen
through the need for climate diplomacy and should
be a part of overall United Nations efforts in conflict
prevention. Combating climate-related security threats
should also be an underpinning concept of sustaining
peace, which should not be an end process, but rather
incorporated and running parallel to prevention,
resolution, recovery and rehabilitation.
Better climate-related security risk assessments
and management strategies are required. Preventive
action needs to be taken, such as foreseeing and
mitigating timely action for building resilience through
early action aimed at investigating and mitigating risk
disasters. We need international cooperation and joint
projects to build the capacity of developing countries to
invest in new and diversified economies, live stock and
other forms of livelihood. We also need to support low-
income countries, adapt to new technologies and invest
in renewable sources of energy.

The issue of climate change is one of the priorities
of my country, considering the increased number of
emergency situations, their scale and the growing
number of affected people. Kazakhstan and the entire
central Asian region has had its own tragic experience
with the dying Aral Sea. That environmental disaster
has brought many challenges and problems for the
population and nature in neighbouring States, and has
affected almost 60 million people.

Timely action taken by Kazakhstan in cooperation
with the World Bank in putting a dam separating a
small part of the Aral Sea helped to almost restore the
water bed and restart the commercial fishery industry
in the Kazakh part of the Aral Sea. However, the Aral
Sea could definitely be seen as a threat multiplier in
central Asia, as it aggravates existing problems, such as
access to fresh water, desertification, food insecurity
and many more. Concerned with that situation, central
Asian nations established the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea, which will have its next meeting
of heads of State on 24 August under the chairmanship
of Turkmenistan.

Kazakhstan for its part has taken voluntary action to

cut the use of fossil fuels by 2030 and replace them with
renewable energy by 2050. Kazakhstan is committed
to upholding the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and will continue to fulfil its obligations. From June
to September 2017, we hosted the Astana Expo 2017
devoted to the theme of future energy to showcase and
promote best practices in the field of sustainable energy
and to provide support for developing countries in that
sphere. The Expo site has been transformed into the
International Centre for Green Technology to advance
our efforts to curb climate change.

Kazakhstan stands ready to unite with others for
global security. That is why the focus of our Security
Council election campaign has been on food, water,
energy and nuclear security. Those are enduring values
even beyond our term in the Council.
