Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Vice-President
Oscar Naranjo Trujillo to the Council. He has been
key in this process, and through him I would like to
congratulate President Juan Manuel Santos and his
entire Government on their commitment to the peace
process in Colombia. We also congratulate Ambassador
Maria Emma Mejia Velez, who has also made decisive
contributions to the process. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing. We reiterate our
support for the important tasks he and his team
carry out.

On 20 July, Colombia celebrated 208 years as a
Republic. It was an opportune moment to acknowledge
the country's recent developments, crowned by the most
peaceful and inclusive electoral process in decades. We
wish to highlight the legacy of peace of the outgoing
Administration and the democratic aspiration of the
Colombian people. We would like to focus on three
aspects of the endeavour that we consider critical and
are obviously interconnected - security, reintegration
and reconciliation.
Security requires a redoubling of efforts to combat
organized crime. We are concerned about its spread
due to the limited State presence in remote rural
areas previously controlled by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). Peru knows well the challenge that drug
trafficking poses to security, State institutions and
democratic governance, just as it understands the
effectiveness of combating the scourge by addressing
its root causes with the help of the concerned civilian
population. We can thereby promote alternative,
comprehensive and sustainable development.

We believe that such development is also important
to the process of reintegration, which requires the
weaving ofa new social fabric. In that process, we must
take into account the social and economic dynamics
of each region, along with its opportunity. It is also
important to promote the participation of the private
sector and international cooperation.

Upholding the rule of law is critical to promoting
the trust and legitimacy that all society-building
requires. In that connection, we welcome the launching
of the hearings of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace - a
commitment not only to all of the victims, but to all
Colombians. In that regard, we welcome the important
Pact of repudiation of violence against social leaders,
signed by all Colombian political parties, as well
as the massive mobilization of Colombian citizens
against such violence. The assassination of leaders,
activists and ex-combatants must cease and be subject
to the investigations and criminal prosecution that the
Colombian institutions have the power to carry out. That
is also important in order to promote reconciliation. On
that point, we note the importance of the participation of
women and youth, and welcome the increasingly active
role of the working group on gender of the National
Reintegration Council.

The visit of youth leaders to an ecotourism
project of ex-combatants in Miravalle, organized by
the Mission, is a good practice that we encourage to
be replicated in other locations in Colombia and other
conflict situations worldwide, in line with resolution
2419 (2018) on youth, peace and security, adopted by
the Council in June.

The benefits of peace are numerous and concrete.
Recently, in the Lindosa mountain range in the
department of Guaviare, on land previously affected by
the conflict, a group of investigators discovered what
is considered to be one of the most important samples
of cave art in the world, resulting in the establishment
of eight protected zones. Like that finding, the peace
process seeks to rediscover and showcase a rich past
in order to build a more prosperous future. It is a task
that faces the natural challenges of a project that is as
complex as it is ambitious. Colombia has launched an
exemplary national project of maintaining peace and
sustaining development.

I conclude by reaffirming Peru's commitment to
and support for the Colombian peace process and the
Mission deployed by the Council's mandate, at the
request of the parties. We have followed the large and
complex peace process since its inception and are now
a guarantor of the peace agreement and its commitment
to all Colombians.

We are convinced that the Security Council will
continue to work constructively with the new authorities
in the interest of peace and security in Colombia.

