The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

At the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Nikolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive but
unfortunately profoundly alarming briefing.

We express our great concern about the tragic loss
of human life in the Gaza Strip. During protests near
the Gaza fence, a large number of people have been
killed and injured, unfortunately including children.
As we might face more tension in the coming days, we
call on everyone to show the utmost restraint to avoid
any further escalation of violence leading to the loss
of life. We condemn all acts of terrorism, as well as
incitement to Violence, and we expect all to ensure
that civilians, particularly children, are not put in any
danger. We call for an independent and transparent
investigation into those incidents and furthermore
call for respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including with regard
to the protection of civilians.

Although we recognize Israel's right to protect its
borders, we strongly underline that the use of force
must be proportionate. In that context, let me stress that
Israel must exercise maximum restraint in the use oflive
fire. With regard to demonstrations, we emphasize that
Israel must respect the right to peaceful protests, while

Hamas and those who are leading the demonstrations
in Gaza must ensure that they remain peaceful, strictly
non-violent and without any provocations.

We call upon all parties to strictly comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Given the number of casualties
among civilians in the recent escalation in the Gaza
Strip, it is our imperative to protect them at all levels.
Therefore, we encourage all efforts to enhance the
protection of civilians and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law by the parties
to the conflict.

The current situation in Gaza could have significant
consequences for regional and international peace and
security. The last three conflicts in Gaza over the past
decade were a clear example of that. Therefore, the
Security Council should contribute to de-escalation
efforts, including through appropriate public expression.
While talking more broaldly about the latest
developments, we would like once again to reiterate
our firm commitment to the two-State solution and,
in that context, underline our position on Jerusalem,
which remains unchanged. We strongly believe that the
aspirations of both parties concerning Jerusalem must
be fulfilled, and a way to resolve the status ofJerusalem
as the future capital of both States must be found
through negotiations. The status of Jerusalem should
also assume mutual recognition of historical relations
and national rights of both parties to the city. We will
continue to respect the international consensus on
Jerusalem embodied in, inter alia, resolution 478 (1980),
including the location of diplomatic representations
until the final status of Jerusalem is resolved.

Let me once again underline that reaching a peace
agreement will be possible only through peace talks
based on international law and the principles governing
peaceful relations among States. A key element in that
context would also be a meaningful dialogue among the
three main monotheistic religions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.

