Mr. Grexa (Slovakia) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate the French presidency
for having chosen this important and difficult subject.
We know that France does not hesitate to tackle
complex subjects and that it faces difficulties head-on.
I think that this "French approach" is not only positive
and praiseworthy in and of itself, but also very
encouraging for the other partners and players
involved.

The ideas put forward by France and its
perseverance, if I may put it that way, have made a
great contribution to ensuring that the issue of children
and armed conflict has become a major and ongoing
concern of the Security Council.

But we know that expressions of gratitude, well-
deserved though they may be, are not the most
important thing, so allow me to move on to more
substantial issues.

I do not really think that we need to show why it
is so important that we continue to work on this issue.
Children are victims of all kinds of atrocities resulting
from armed conflicts: child soldiers, child refugees,
displaced children, excluded children, unhappy
children in unhappy families - the list is long. Even if
this were strictly a humanitarian issue, resolute efforts
would still be imperative. Nevertheless, as Minister
Douste-Blazy clearly emphasized to his colleagues in a
letter addressed to his counterparts before this meeting,
this is not just about a humanitarian issue, it is also
about a danger for development and stability in the
world.

Slovakia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Finland a few
moments ago on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore stress just a few brief points in my national
capacity.

Slovakia very much appreciates the work done by
Working Group established pursuant to resolution 1612
(2005). While it is of course too soon to carry out an
assessment, we know that the Group has made a good
start and that it is going to be a very useful tool.

In principle, we are happy with the initial results
regarding the examination of the report on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/2006/497, annex). That is of course due in large part to the quality
of the report itself, for which I would like to thank its
authors. Slovakia also appreciates the constructive
participation of the permanent representative of the
country concerned in the meeting of the Group,
especially the affirmation of his Government's
willingness to continue to cooperate. That is a good
sign both as regards the subject itself and for the future
of the Group in general.
Slovakia supports all the recommendations
contained in the report on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also believe that the Working Group
should carefully examine the recommendations made
by non-governmental organizations working in the
field, as contained in the report entitled "Struggling to
survive".

More generally, we believe the Working Group
should have the widest possible geographic terms of
reference. Slovakia also believes that the Group should
be permitted to address the issue of violations of the
rights of children in armed conflicts in countries
monitored by the European Union. We would generally
favour amending the Group's mandate to expand the
scope of its work. The wider the scope of its mandate,
the more extensive the breadth of its work.

With regard to the proposal for a toolkit, we
believe that we should have at our disposal tools that
can enable us to act in a flexible way, which is very
often required for success. The choice of tools will
depend upon the specific approach in a given case. We
hope for progress on the toolkit before the Group's
next meeting.

Slovakia supports the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted today. It represents the best result
possible, a succinct and very specific text that
emphasizes, among other things, the importance of
synergy, of action and of partnership between Member
States of the United Nations and of other governmental
bodies, and also with civil society organizations. That
is very, very important.

Allow me to say a few words about the European
Union and Slovakia. Obviously, since my country
joined the European Union, nationwide awareness has
grown as regards protecting children armed conflict,
and the national capacities to commit to this issue have
been strengthened. However, we must acknowledge
that we need to further improve our methods of
cooperation with our partners on various levels. We
must also be more systematic in exploiting the
experience of the European Union and its members.
Results cannot always be achieved right away, but they
are in principle guaranteed.

Before I conclude, I would in particular like to
express my Government's gratitude to Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Ms. Veneman, Mr. Melkert and Mr. Bannon, as well as to
you, Mr. President, for your remarkable efforts to protect
the rights of children in armed conflict. I also wish to thank
you, Sir, for organizing and presiding over this meeting.

Allow me to end with the words of French writer
Georges Bernanos: "The world will be judged by
children." We will be all judged by our children. That
is plain, clear and true.

