Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
There is no doubt that today's meeting of the Council
to follow up on the ministerial meeting of 20 January
on combating terrorism is an affirmation of the
increased importance the Council gives to international
efforts to combat international terrorism. It is a
question that imposes itself forcefully on the
international agenda. We are convinced that stepping
up and coordinating these efforts within the framework
of the United Nations is the only guarantee of their
success. Terrorism cannot be eradicated nor can
terrorists be controlled except through coordinated
efforts by all countries of the world to achieve effective
and concrete results.

Given that, we were keen to participate in today's
meeting to enrich the dialogue on this very important
question. This meeting also affirms our belief in the
importance and centrality of the role of the United
Nations in the war against terrorism. We are convinced
that the greater the international participation in this
war, the closer we will be to achieving its objectives.

This war must be viewed as a process that would
unify the countries of the world and preserve the
security and safety of their citizens - not the opposite.
It must be collective, coordinated and balanced. It
should avoid taking unilateral measures or
antagonizing cultures, civilizations or religions merely
because they are different. We should not be lacking in
our enthusiasm to recall that the objective of all
terrorism is to sow panic, terrorize people, destabilize
countries and spread enmity. It is imperative that we
not fall into the trap laid by terrorist elements by
creating tension and disagreement in the international
community. Therefore, we have to pay close attention
soon to the importance of solidarity at this very
delicate juncture. It is very important not to confuse
terrorism with other political questions.
Terrorism, as with all diseases faced by
humankind throughout history, requires of us the
following for its defeat: to define terrorism,
distinguishing it from other phenomenon; to identify its
causes and how to deal with them; and to choose the
best means to combat terrorism. The best guarantee of
that outcome is to carry out those tasks within a
framework that affirms the primacy of international
law and our commitment to the provisions of
international law and international legality, foremost
among which are the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights - and, at the
national level, to show commitment to national laws,
legislation and the decisions of national courts.

Allow me to comment briefly on some of the
proposals contained in the report of the Secretary-
General of 18 February (S/2003/191). Let me start with
one proposal of special importance, which, if we agree
to it, will have a positive impact on the international
war against terrorism: the international community
must develop interaction and dialogue among
civilizations and religions. The United Nations must
take an effective, leading role in such a dialogue, as it
is the mother organization with the greatest ways and
means to achieve concrete results in that respect.

Among the proposals from the international
community, we note that more than one member
proposed that an international conference be convened
under the auspices of the United Nations to define
terrorism and to determine the common response of the
international community to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Another member proposed the
convening of a special session of the General Assembly
to adopt new measures in the fight against terrorism.

Perhaps we should recall here that Egypt was the
one that years ago called for the convening of an
international conference, under the auspices of the
United Nations, to discuss terrorism-related issues. In
this context, we would like to renew this call, and we
hope that we can make progress and convene such a
conference as soon as possible.

Egypt also proposed that an international
conference be convened to declare the Middle East a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction. Egypt
deems this extremely important and believes that it
must be achieved as soon as possible, as a key element
of international peace and security and a factor in
promoting the stability of the region.

The CTC proves daily and undoubtedly that it is a
vital and effective mechanism in the war against
terrorism. It affirms the role of the United Nations as a
successful instrument for the coordination of
international efforts in this respect.

Egypt maintains close and continuous
cooperation and coordination with the Committee. To
date Egypt has submitted three full reports to the
Committee. The most recent one was submitted on 20
January and contained clarifications relating to
Egyptian anti-terrorism legislation.

On this occasion, we would like to express our
heartfelt thanks and appreciation for the invaluable
efforts made by Sir Jeremy Greenstock, who is working
tirelessly, objectively and in a balanced manner. We
have full confidence in him and in his work as the head
of the Committee.

Egypt is confident that this international
Organization, as an effective mechanism representing
international will and legitimacy, can assume a leading
role in the combat against terrorism. Hence we look
forward to the assumption by the United Nations of its
responsibilities in this regard.

Egypt will continue to support the efforts of the
Organization and to cooperate with it, with a view to
successfully combating international terrorism and
eradicating its evils.

