Mr. Logar (Slovenia): First, I would like to
thank the delegation of Bolivia for convening today's
important debate and for preparing the concept note on
reinforcing the preventive system to avoid the different
kinds of catastrophes that could result from the use of
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons by non-State
actors, particularly terrorists.

Slovenia fully subscribes to the statement made by
the observer of the European Union and to the statement
made on behalf of the Group of Friends of resolution
1540 (2004). I would like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

Slovenia has been supporting the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to strengthen global capacity to prevent, detect
and respond to the use of weapons of mass destruction
for terrorist purposes by, first, joining the Group of
Friends of resolution 1540 (2004) to help contribute to
better transparency and the resolution's implementation;
secondly, submitting four national reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004); and, thirdly,
expanding the Slovenia-led Western Balkan counter-
terrorism initiative, which links up individual initiatives
in that area into a joint comprehensive effort - the
integrative internal security governance concept - that
includes the prevention of violent extremism, fights
terrorism and takes measures to combat organized
crime and enhance border security.

Fourthly, Slovenia also contributes by attaching
great importance to nuclear security through the
involvement of several ministries in nuclear security
matters in order to fight the illicit trafficking of
radioactive and nuclear materials and, lastly, by playing
an active role in the work of the Board of Governors of
the International Atomic Energy Agency for the third
time since our independence.

Slovenia had informed the Council about the
practical measures it adopted to prevent non-State
actors from accessing weapons of mass destruction
technology in the open debate on resolution 1540 (2004)
in December 2016 (see S/PV.7837). Let me just briefly
mention the most recent ones.

In March, we joined the Nuclear Security Contact
Group, through which we will contribute to global
efforts in that area to achieve and enhance nuclear
security. We also took over the co-rapporteur role
to Montenegro as it aspires to become a member
of the Wassenaar Arrangement, which deals with
promoting transparency and greater responsibility in
the transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods
and technologies, as well as with the prevention of
the acquisition of those items by terrorists. This year
Slovenia also chairs the General Working Group of the
Wassenaar Arrangement to help contribute to that goal.
In conclusion, there is a growing link between
terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and
cyberthreats. Cyberterrorism is perhaps the most
prominent emerging threat in the nuclear realm, based
on rapid advances in science and technology. That is
why Slovenia is reviewing our national legislation and
measures in that area of endeavour and we will report
on the review when it has been concluded.

Let me reassure you, Sir, that Slovenia will continue
to implement resolution 1540 (2004), as well as the
recommendations of the comprehensive review, and we
call upon all States to do the same.

