The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Togo.

I would like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq for her
clear introduction of the report (S/2012/43) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I also welcome the
presence in the Security Council of His Excellency
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, who has honoured our debate
today with his presence in spite of the loss of a member
of his family.

In accordance with its mandate, UNMIT is to
support the Government and the country's institutions
with a view to consolidate stability, promote a culture
of democratic governance and facilitate political
dialogue among Timorese stakeholders in their efforts
to begin a process of national reconciliation and to
promote social cohesion.

To that end, on 1 December 2006, UNMIT
concluded an agreement with the Government on the
restoration and maintenance of security in Timor-Lest
and on assistance for the reform, restructuring and
strengthening of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and the Ministry of the Interior. Similarly, in
resolution 1969 (2011), of 24 February 2011, the
Security Council tasked UNMIT with supporting,
within the scope of its mandate, the organization of
legislative and presidential elections scheduled for this
year. Togo welcomes the fact that the United Nations is
effectively helping the Government of Timor-Leste in
both the electoral process and in bolstering the
participation of women and young people in political
life. It is our hope that, with the assistance of UNMIT,
the parliamentary democracy that is developing in the
country will be strengthened following the upcoming
elections. In that regard, the dialogue among national
leaders co-hosted by President Ramos-Horta and the
Bishop of Baucau should be pursued.

With regard to democratic governance, we duly
appreciate the campaign that has been launched to
combat corruption and clean up public finances in
Timor-Leste. In that regard, my country commends
Parliament's adoption of the law aimed at combating
and preventing money laundering and the financing of
terrorism.

On the security front, the UNMIT police
contingent has continued to provide the PNTL with
operational support in various areas, as well as support
for security agencies, institutional capacity-building
and mentoring for border guard units, including
carrying out joint patrols.

At the same time, UNMIT is working to promote
human rights and the administration of justice, in
particular through a national awareness-raising
campaign with regard to protecting children. UNMIT
also supports the national priorities programme,
socio-economic development and humanitarian
assistance.

Lastly, UNMIT, the Government and other
stakeholders have been working to implement the
transition process, in line with the Transition Plan
signed on 19 December 2011 by the President, the
Prime Minister and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

We welcome all those efforts, which are perfectly
in line with the goals of promoting peace and security
in Timor-Leste. Nevertheless, while the overall current
situation in Timor-Leste may be calm, we must not lose
sight of local tensions, especially between individuals
and martial arts groups. We hope that the decision of
the Timorese Government to suspend the activities of
those groups for a year will contribute to the
organization of legislative and presidential elections
without violence in the country.

On the legal front, we saw that despite the
development of a legal framework and a national plan
of action against gender-based violence, there has been
no progress in the situation with regard to the legal
prosecution of the perpetrators of serious crimes and
grave violations of human rights committed during the
2006 crisis.

We are also of the view that additional efforts
should be devoted to promoting fair and lasting
socio-economic improvement. Togo calls on Timor-
Leste's development partners to continue to support the
country in that regard.

The efforts of the United Nations system as a
whole are significant. However, major challenges
remain. For that reason, it is important for UNMIT to
pursue its efforts in the priority areas of its mandate,
such as institutional development, capacity-building
for the national police and electoral assistance. It is
also essential to ensure the efficient implementation of
the Joint Development Plan of the national police and
the United Nations police. The extension of UNMIT's
mandate is therefore appropriate and I call on the
Security Council to consider the essential stakes in
making a decision on this issue.

In closing, I would like to congratulate the troop-
and police-contributing countries to UNMIT on their
efforts to ensure peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole are always ready to do what is necessary to
achieve this objective, which my country is very
pleased to note.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Angola.

