Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Thank you, Madam President, for your leadership in
convening this meeting on a very important topic. I am
very grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General, to the
Special Representative and to the Executive Director
for their important briefings this morning and also for
their unremitting work on behalf of children.

The representative of France will later be making
a detailed statement on behalf of the European Union,
which I fully endorse. In the interests of time, but also
to underline that the suffering of children in conflict is
a key concern to the United Kingdom, I will just make
a few key points.

The Council has to get to grips with the
protection of children in practice. The Secretary-
General's report gives us a good basis for moving
forward. The international community has a moral
responsibility to prevent the suffering of children,
whether as the innocent victims of fighting or through
deliberate targeting.

Conflict prevention is the vitally important wider
context. We had a welcome opportunity to discuss this
last week, and I hope that we will be taking steps to
translate that debate into concrete action. Similarly, it
is important to establish systems which protect children
before conflicts break out. Practical measures can make
a real difference. As the Secretary-General points out,
children are particularly vulnerable to recruitment as
soldiers if they have had little or no access to
education. The United Nations system needs to ensure
that access. Adequate national birth registration
systems would also help to prevent underage soldiers
from being recruited. The media can play an important
role in their reporting before and during conflicts.

If these practical measures are to work, there is a
vital need for improved coordination among the
agencies of the United Nations system. The Secretary-
General's call in his report for greater cooperation with
non-governmental organizations and civil society is
welcome. Such non-governmental organizations as
Save the Children have unparalleled experience on
which the international community should draw.

Our Arria-format meeting yesterday with a group
of concerned non-governmental organizations was an
excellent example of this. Non-governmental
organizations have a vital role to play in bringing to the
attention of the Council information that can serve as
an early warning of impending crisis. We also have our
own responsibility to act on that information when the
situation merits. We need collectively to work on
improving information flow throughout the United
Nations system and beyond if we are to have durable
success in this area. I also entirely endorse the
emphasis which Special Representative Otunnu has
placed on local actors in specific situations.

There are plenty of very detailed
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report,
which we will need to consider closely. My delegation
is keen to hear the views of non-members of the
Council today before we get into that debate. In
considering the report, it will be important for the
Council to build on, rather than duplicate, the work that
we have already done. We should be wary of straying
into sensitive areas that are being comprehensively
dealt with elsewhere, such as in the working group on
sanctions.

But the Council has a vital role to play above all
in insisting that all States Members of the United
Nations implement existing international humanitarian
law and conventions in respect of children and armed
conflict.

There is a good deal of hard work ahead of us if
we are to fulfil our responsibilities in this key area. I
would like to assure Special Representative Otunnu
and Ms. Bellamy that they can rely on the strong
support of the United Kingdom delegation in pushing
this important agenda forward and in turning words
into action.

