Mr. Ja Song Nam (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): At the outset, I condemn Japan, in the strongest
possible terms, which has assumed the presidency
of the Security Council for December and is, at the
instigation ofthe United States, evilly taking advantage
of this opportunity to convene a ministerial Security
Council briefing on the issue of non-proliferation
concerning the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
I feel compelled to say that today's meeting is nothing
other than a desperate move on the part of the United
States, which is terrified of the incredible might of our
Republic, now that we have successfully achieved the
great historic goal of completing our State nuclear force
and building a missile arsenal, as demonstrated by the
great event of November.

I believe that, if the issue of non-proliferation is to
be discussed, the first country to be brought to account
should be the United States, which is the kingpin
of vertical and horizontal proliferation, as it pours
astronomical amounts of funding into modernizing
nuclear weapons and hinders in every way the
denuclearization of the Middle East, as well as Japan,
which maintains a greater-than-necessary stockpile of
plutonium and is seeking every opportunity to produce
nuclear weapons. Our possession of nuclear weapons
was inevitable as a self-defensive measure intended
to defend our sovereignty and our right to exist and
develop from the United States nuclear threat and
blackmail. If anyone is to blame it is the United States,
and it must be held accountable.

There are several nuclear-weapon States throughout
the world today, but there is no other country like the
United States, which continues to threaten and blackmail
other countries openly with its nuclear weapons. That
conclusion is quite evident if we merely consider the
amount of money that the United States spends for the
maintenance and modernization of its nuclear weapons.
It is well known that the United States has stockpiled
more than 4,000 nuclear warheads in its nuclear arsenals
and has deployed more than 150 tactical nuclear bombs
throughout the territory of its NATO allies and is now
planning to earmark approximately $1 trillion for the

maintenance and modernization of its nuclear weapons
over the next 30 years.

All of the statistics that I have just mentioned clearly
demonstrate that the United States is the ring leader of
nuclear proliferation. It is also disturbing to witness the
Security Council acting as a tool ofthe United States and
doing its bidding instead of maintaining impartiality,
which is vital to its activities, and instead of keeping
true to its mission to maintain international peace and
security. While the Security Council has ignored our
repeated requests to raise the issue of the provocative
and aggressive joint military exercises - the most
obvious manifestation of the United States nuclear
threats and blackmail - in this forum, it busies itself
with kowtowing to the United States, which advocates
for sanctions and pressure against us by condemning
our self-defensive measures.

Every time that United States-South Korea joint
military exercises - which seriously threaten the peace
and security of the Korean peninsula, the region and the
world - have been conducted, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has submitted letters to the Security
Council, 11 times since 2014, requesting that the issue be
raised and discussed urgently in the Council. However,
while turning its back on every one of our requests
to address those aggressive joint military exercises,
the Security Council has, on the contrary, adopted 11
sanctions resolutions directed against my country and
has condemned our self-defensive measures as a threat
to international peace and security. Merely by citing
the facts just mentioned, we can easily demonstrate the
unfairness, double standards and petty prejudice of the
Security Council.

As we have clarified on behalf of our Government,
the development and advancement of the strategic
weapons of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
are entirely intended to defend the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country from the United
States policy of nuclear blackmail and nuclear threat,
and ensure a peaceful life for our people. We therefore
do not pose any threat to any country or region, as long
as the interests of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea are not infringed upon. I reiterate once again
that our nuclear force is devoted solely to its mission
as a self-defensive deterrent, and it is fully in line with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
stipulates the right of the exercise of self-defensive
measures to be taken by an individual United Nations
State Member.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, in
accordance with the decree of the Supreme People's
Assembly adopted on 1 April 2013, has established an
absolutely perfect system and order of stockpiling and
maintaining its technology and weapon-grade nuclear
materials in order to fully guarantee that no kind of
illegal transfer of nuclear weapons will take place.

As a result, not a single case has been raised
about our nuclear proliferation to date. All the data
on impunity that has been scattered around by hostile
forces in relation to my country's proliferation is atotally
groundless plot intending to defame the dignity of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the powerful
nuclear State. Taking up the issue of our strengthening
of national defensive measures is nothing but violent
behaviour of inteference.

The possession of nuclear weapons by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea cannot not
constitute a violation of international law or regulations
in any case, as the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
withdrew from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons in a most justified way. At the
same time, it is clear to everybody that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is not infringing upon any
of the interests of other countries and that the purpose
of possessing nuclear deterrents is only for self-defence
and to safeguard peace in the region.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, no
matter what anyone says, will march forward and
Victoriously make great advancements as the world's
most powerful nuclear and military State, upholding
the line on simultaneous development of the two fronts.

In conclusion, I hereby reaffirm once again that the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea, as a responsible
nuclear Power and a peace-loving State, will sincerely
fulfil its non-proliferation obligations assumed before
the international community and make every effort to
achieve the noble cause of safeguarding world peace
and security.

