Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay thanks Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for
his briefing. My Government appreciates the work
carried out by the Committee, as well as its assessment
of recent developments, based on the reports of the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea. Somalia is
at a decisive and historic moment on the path towards
the consolidation of a democratic, inclusive, stable
State with full powers.

According to the information provided by the
Monitoring Group, the terrorist group Al-Shabaab
constitutes the main threat to peace and security in
Somalia and the region. That is why strengthening the
security sector in Somalia is both vital and urgent; it
would allow the country to fight effectively against
that threat. The Government of Somalia and the
international community should work more closely and
in a more coordinated manner, prioritizing capacity-
building for Government consolidation and creating the
basic conditions of governance, security and services
for local populations. In addition, the Government
should seek to maintain a closer work relationship with
the Monitoring Group. The intention of the Group is to
maximize efforts to investigate violations of the arms
embargo and to expand its capacity to report on the
structure, strength and financing of armed groups in
the region.

Another urgent issue is responding to the worsening
humanitarian crisis and the famine in Somalia, which
could roll back recent political achievements. Uruguay
therefore welcomes the Somalia Operational Plan for
pre-Famine Scale-up of Humanitarian Assistance,
promoted by the Secretary-General, to mitigate
the effects of the extreme drought that is ravaging
the country.

At the same time, Uruguay urges President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmajo to fulfil his promise to remove
obstacles to the provision of assistance, the import
and export of food and vital critical supplies, and the
sending of remittances, and to suspend new bureaucratic
requirements at the sub-federal level imposed on aid
providers. The Federal Government must make this
effort in a sustained way in order to preserve stability
and security in Somalia.

The plight of women and children is a source of
deep concern to us, given their extreme vulnerability
to the humanitarian crisis affecting the country. The
Government bears the chief responsibility for ending
impunity for crimes of sexual and gender-based
violence. According to UNICEF and the World Health
Organization, 98 per cent of women and girls in
Somalia have suffered female genital mutilation, which
is the highest rate in the world, despite the fact that the
practice is prohibited by the Constitution of Somalia
and is defined as torture. We also draw the attention
to the issue of child marriage, which is still a common
practice in Somalia. The Government should promote
the investigation of complaints and the reintegration of
victims into their communities.

With regard to Eritrea, Uruguay notes that the
complete report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea will be submitted in the next few days,
with a focus on investigations in Eritrea. We hope that
the report will enlighten the Council members and
provide key elements for assessing the relevance of the
sanctions imposed on that country.

