Mr. De Vengoechea (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we would like to thank
you and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and leader of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), Ian Martin for his report. The
delegation of Panama is deeply grateful to Mr. Martin
and to all the UNMIN staff for the laudable work that
they have accomplished over the last 18 months of the
Mission's mandate.

The holding of elections and the establishment of
a Constituent Assembly are nothing less than historic
acts for Nepal and we believe that UNMIN played an
essential role in these events.

We note that the delegation of Nepal will be
taking the floor in this debate after Council members
have spoken. As we have said on earlier occasions, by
way of principle, we believe that the States that are
directly involved in the issues being addressed by the
Security Council should always, when possible, be able
to make their statements before Council members take
the floor.

As is indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
the majority of UNMIN's mandate has already been
implemented. Those provisions of 1740 (2007) that
remain to be fulfilled, particularly the monitoring of
arms and armed personnel, in support of the peace
agreement between the parties, should underpin
UNMIN's new mandate, as was expressed by the
Government of Nepal.

For that reason, in the resolution to be adopted by
the Council, it is crucial that we maintain the character
of this mission as a mission with specific, time-bound
aims. The chief responsibility for successfully
concluding the peace and democratization process will
then fall to the Nepalese, with the United Nations
playing a support role, which, although on a smaller
scale, remains an important one.

The responsibility to be shouldered by the new
elected leaders in Nepal is immense and the obstacles
to be overcome are enormous. Reforming the security
sector, for example, is a critical undertaking. The
existence of two armies is inherently destabilizing and
the past refusal of the parties to the conflict to discuss
their future has exacerbated the situation.

As we did in our own country at the start of the
1990s, Panama encourages both the Maoist army and
the Nepal army to also voluntarily disarm. Once this
has been achieved, Panama would support the
establishment of a civilian police force that would
include, when viable, members of both groups.

Additionally, the establishment of a civilian
police force should be part of a package of
rehabilitation and compensation for those who leave
the army once and for all. The integration of the Maoist
combatants into a more democratic Nepalese army
would only further increase the size of the military
structure in a country with scarce resources and facing
minimal external threats.

The protection of human rights would be well-
served by the implementation of the rule of law, and
the ending the culture of impunity in Nepal is also an
issue that deserves the immediate attention of the new
Government.

In View of all these challenges, we are concerned
that the Nepalese parties, facing a new political
landscape have been unable - or unwilling - to
maintain the party unity to which they committed
before the elections. This reticence appears to be part
of a short-term partisan strategy of political jockeying
for the post-electoral period, to the detriment of the
peace process and the long-term future of the country.

Building lasting peace in Nepal will require all
parties to accept the electoral results and the political
landscape that emerges, and for the parties to work
together in a spirit of cooperation and responsibility
within a new majority-led government. Lack of
cooperation will jeopardize the major national
achievements that now lie within reach of the people,
causing disillusionment among the Nepalese people
and distrust of their leaders.

