Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
start by joining others in thanking you, Mr. President,
for having scheduled today's debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would like also to very warmly welcome
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, to the Security Council and thank him for
his statement. We thank also the Secretary-General for
his latest report (S/2012/703) and are appreciative ofthe
briefing by Mr. Jan Kubis, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is in the midst of a critical phase of
transition where it assumes responsibility for security
and governance with the drawdown of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by the end of
2014. The sustained commitment of the international
community to Afghanistan is therefore essential if it is
to stand on its own feet.

During the past year, the international community
has renewed its commitment to Afghanistan at
conferences held in Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo, and at
the regional level in Istanbul and Kabul. The Delhi
Investment Summit on Afghanistan, held on 28 June and
hosted by India, was also an endeavour to contribute to
that effort by calling attention to the role and potential
of foreign investment and domestic private-sector
development in providing a narrative of opportunity
and employment to counter the anxiety related to the
ISAF drawdown.

As we assist Afghanistan in attaining its long-
cherished goal of self-reliance, we also need to bear
in mind the fact that the infrastructure of terror is
still intact in the region. The Secretary-General's
report rightly notes that "little has changed in the
underlying dynamics to mitigate a deep-seated cycle of
conflict" (S/2012/703, para. 62). Further, a diminished
international presence will have a large financial
impact in many areas, which, at least in the short term,
may even exacerbate predatory behaviour.

Afghanistan continues to face an existential threat
from terrorism, drawing upon ideological, financial and
logistical support from beyond its borders. The security
situation remains fragile and has been compounded over
the past two months by a sharp increase in the variety,
spread and intensity of attacks by the Taliban and their
backers. Moreover, cross-border shellings have caused
large-scale disruptions to normal life and have sparked
public outrage.

The Afghan National Security Forces are ill-
equipped to repel the challenge without substantial
assistance from the international community. We need
concerted action to isolate and root out the syndicate
of terrorism, which includes elements of Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba, and other terrorist and
extremist groups.

We welcome the pledges made at the Tokyo
Conference of $16 billion of financial aid through 2015
and to sustain support through 2017 at or near the levels
of the past decade. At the same time, we are conscious
that these figures represent a baseline, or minimum
requirement, for Afghanistan to sustain itself.

The Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is a
noble effort that we fully support. However, we must
not forget that true mutuality can be achieved only at
equal levels of capacity. Good governance requires
a strong State that has full control over its territory,
which is not yet the case in Afghanistan. While
good governance must be a necessary component
of international assistance to Afghanistan, it is not
enough. It must be complemented by strong leadership,
the strengthening of the Afghan National Security
Forces and the development of an investment regime
in Afghanistan that protects the national interest while
promoting investment.

India visualizes its partnership with Afghanistan
as needs-based and long-term, not conditions-based or
transitory. We remain unwavering in our commitment
to assisting the people ofAfghanistan in their endeavour
to build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation.

During the past decade, India has pledged up to
$2 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
We have managed to carry out some of the most
economical and cost-effective projects in Afghanistan.
The $500 million assistance announced by our Prime
Minister in May 2011 is being spent from 2012 to
2015. The projects under consideration will be in line
with the projects suggested under the national priority
programmes of the Government of Afghanistan. The
pace and nature of the utilization of the present and
future Indian assistance will be determined by the
preference, comfort level and absorptive capacity of the
Afghan Government.

As Afghanistan takes forward the task of national
reconciliation even as it assumes full responsibility
for security, we fully support efforts aimed at regional
confidence-building as a critical component of
international efforts to support the country. Enhanced
development assistance and foreign investments in
Afghanistan and the building of regional linkages will
be critical to ensuring an irreversible transition in the
country.

The Istanbul "Heart ofAsia" process is an important
step in that direction. India has also partnered in this
regional consensus towards the stability and prosperity
of Afghanistan by leading the two commercial
confidence-building measures, that is, the measures
related to chambers of commerce and commercial
opportunities initially agreed upon for implementation
in the Istanbul process.

In our view, regional cooperation on projects of
multilateral scope and benefit could give an impetus
to this scenario. We are fully cognizant of the fact that
the economic viability of Afghanistan depends on its
fuller integration into its neighbourhood, so that it can
regain its historical role as a land bridge between South
Asia, Central Asia, the Middle East and Eurasia. The
development of transport infrastructure and transit
arrangements linking Afghanistan to the north, south,
east and west, including through the Chabahar port,
would benefit not only Afghanistan but the entire
Central Asian region by creating trade, transit and
investment linkages.

Moving forward, we need a sustained international
commitment to strengthen the Afghan Government's
capacity for security, governance and economic
development. We need to create an enabling environment
where the Afghan people can live in peace and security

and decide their future themselves, without outside
interference, coercion or intimidation.

We support the good work done by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
It is important that amid the cutback in the United
Nations footprint in Afghanistan and the reconfiguration
of UNAMA due to budgetary constraints, all efforts be
made to avoid any adverse impact on its operational
capacity and mandate implementation.

