Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for his
specific and very detailed briefing on the progress made
in the political process and on its upcoming stages.

France welcomes the announcement made by
the Secretary-General as regards the Constitutional
Committee, which is a first positive step in the
framework of the political process provided for under
resolution 2254 (2015). The agreement reached under
the auspices of the Special Envoy represents an initial
and decisive move forward that took about two years
to take shape. We fully support the efforts made by
Geir Pedersen aimed at ensuring that the Constitutional
Committee can soon meet in Geneva and at facilitating
its work.

It is vital that the Committee be in a position to
make a useful contribution to restoring a political
horizon in Syria. Determined action and a resolute
commitment by all parties will be vital to ensuring that
credible negotiations begin without delay and enabling
the Constitutional Committee to discharge its mandate
by providing Syria with a new constitution, in line with
the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). It is vital in
particular to ensure that the security and integrity of
the members of the future Constitutional Committee
are fully respected. For this process to be a useful one, it
is also necessary for the Syrian regime to at last engage
in it in good faith. The work of the Committee must be
a starting point for the elaboration of a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution to which all Syrians,
including women, will contribute.

This political process, in order to be credible,
requires that security be ensured throughout Syrian
territory, as noted by the Special Envoy. In that regard,
France expresses its deep concern as regards the
situation in Idlib, where the regime and its allies are
pursuing an indiscriminate military operation whose
primary victims are civilians. More than 1,000 civilians
have already died in bomb attacks, and the population,
with winter coming, will suffer even more from the
consequences of this offensive, which could also lead
to a dispersal of the terrorist elements currently present
in the north-west. This relentless military action has to
stop; we call for an immediate freeze of positions in
Idlib and throughout Syria, which would be a first step
towards a national ceasefire, in line with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015). Only a lasting cessation of
hostilities will allow for the creation of conditions
conducive to discussions within the Constitutional
Committee and for the lifting of impediments to
humanitarian access. The combat against Da'esh
and Al-Qaida, which continue to pose a threat to our
security, must be our priority but must not serve as a
pretext for indiscriminate strikes.

It is urgent now to progress in parallel on all of
the elements contained in resolution 2254 (2015) so
as to devise an inclusive political solution and open
up genuine prospects for peace and reconciliation.
The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
is but one stage of the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), which represents a road map for the
international community in proposing a lasting,
inclusive political solution for the future of all Syrians,
definitely eradicating terrorism and ensuring the safe
and dignified return of refugees under the auspices of
the United Nations.

All of these elements must be implemented,
which means that confidence-building measures must
also be taken in order to ensure a safe and neutral
environment. This includes the freeing of all detained
or abducted persons and exchanges of information on
missing persons. This also includes efforts to create the
conditions necessary for the holding of free and regular
elections, under United Nations supervision, in which
all Syrians would participate, including refugees and
displaced persons, as well as those living outside the
country. Only in this way will Syrians will be able to
take control of their future.

France will continue working in this regard along
with its partners. That is the message that France and
its partners from the small group conveyed during the
ministerial meeting held on 26 September. We reiterate
our support for the efforts of the Special Envoy to
bring the small group and the Astana guarantors closer
together within a single international forum in order to
support the political process between the Syrian parties,
under the auspices of the United Nations. France would
recall that there can be no peace without justice and
that the perpetrators of the atrocities committed in
Syria each and every day must answer for their crimes.

Lastly, France reiterates its consistent position on
reconstruction, which is the same as that of the European
Union: we will not participate in reconstruction unless
a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition is implemented * not just initiated f on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). Our position on
sanctions and normalization also remains unchanged,
as is our determination to contribute to helping Syria
emerge from the war. There can be no purely military
solution, and that is why it is more urgent than ever to
move forward in a swift, resolute manner towards an
inclusive political solution.

