Mr. Arancibia Fernandez (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Tomislav
Nikolie, President of Serbia, for his statement. I also
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing on the current situation in Kosovo.

Bolivia calls for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), including full respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. We think that the
resolution is the international legal basis for resolving
the situation in Kosovo.

In relation to the security situation in Kosovo, we
would like to express our concern about the region,
in particular the political instability that endangers
the lives of minorities. With that in mind, we believe
that the parties must be open to ongoing dialogue to
reach solutions that promote progress and stability.
We therefore welcome attempts by the parties to make
progress in the dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union in order to arrive at a lasting solution
that will put an end to the disputes that affect the
region. However, we are concerned that in practice the
parties do not seem able to implement the agreements
that are the outcomes of those meetings. We urge the
parties to maintain the dialogue through political
determination, without it being hindered by the lack of
a real commitment to a peaceful settlement.

Bolivia welcomes the agreement on telecommunications
that confirms the assignment of a local area code
for Kosovo.

We also call on the parties to join forces to help
internally displaced persons return to their homes.
We also wish to call attention to the growing
number of extremists in the region who support the
Islamic State, which is a clear threat. We commend the
efforts made to apprehend people associated with those
activities. However, since this is an underlying and
ongoing problem, we call for regional organizations
and all the parties involved to focus on containing this
evil, which is afflicting all humankind and is showing
itself to be a clear threat to peace and stability of the
region. Bolivia condemns terrorism in all its forms, and
we believe that it is a duty for all States to combat it and
seek its eradication.

The parties are called on to prevent the commission
of acts of aggression that undermine the Charter of the
United Nations and its embedded principles, in order
to work towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Every effort should be made to achieve lasting peace,
which in the long run will be beneficial to the region,
with the parties primarily resolving their differences
through dialogue and negotiation and with the assistance
of regional organizations.

Finally, Bolivia takes note of the work of UNMIK.

