Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): India is
seriously concerned at the situation that has prevailed
in Cote d'Ivoire since the presidential elections last
year. We have consistently held that both parties in
cote d'Ivoire should exercise maximum restraint and
respect the outcome of the elections. We have urged the
parties to ensure that there is no violence, because it
harms the well-being of the Ivorian people and
distracts from the main task of economic development,
social cohesion and national reconciliation.

During the last three months, we have supported
all efforts to resolve the current problem peacefully
and through dialogue. To that end, we have supported
the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union to
find a political solution leading to the restoration of
11-28400
democracy and the will of the Ivorian people at the
earliest. With that objective in mind, we voted in
favour of the resolution adopted today.

We want to put on record that United Nations
peacekeepers should draw their mandate from the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. They
cannot be made instruments of regime change.
Accordingly, the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) should not become a party to the
Ivorian political stalemate. UNOCI should also not get
involved in a civil war, but carry out its mandate with
impartiality and while ensuring the safety and security
of peacekeepers and civilians. In this context, we have
noted that a UNOCI helicopter was fired upon by the
Forces republicaines de C6te d'Ivoire yesterday,
29 March. We call on all parties to respect UNOCI's
military impartiality.

The Council has heard various allegations of
serious crimes committed against civilians in
C6te d'Ivoire. There should be no a priori presumption
about the nature of these alleged crimes. Each
allegation has to be investigated on a case-by-case
basis by the competent national bodies, and further
action taken pursuant to relevant laws.

We also want to place on record our growing
concern at the tendency to hurry the process of
adopting resolutions. We think that there should be
enough time for deliberations and consultations with
all countries concerned. In situations such as those
envisaged in the present resolution, it is imperative that
troop-contributing countries be first consulted on the
mandate of United Nations peacekeepers. Such
consultations are necessary not only to making well-
considered decisions, but also to the effective
implementation of the mandate.

We want to reiterate that India is not a member of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). Of the 192
Members of the United Nations, only 114 are members
of the ICC. Five of the 15 members of the Security
Council, including three permanent members, are not
parties to the Rome Statute. It is also important to note
that there are clear legal provisions concerning States
parties to the Rome Statute. There are also guidelines
for States that are not parties to the Rome Statute to
accept the exercise of jurisdiction by the ICC. These
provisions and guidelines should be followed without
exception. It merits underlining that there is no
mandate in resolution 1975 (2011) for the Security
3
Council to refer the situation in cote d'Ivoire to the
ICC.

