Mr. Marker (Pakistan): On behalf of the Pakistan
delegation, I should like to convey our warm
congratulations to you, Sir, on having so successfully
carried out the responsibilities entrusted to you as
President of the Security Council for the month of
February.

I should also like to convey our profound
appreciation to Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina for the
excellent manner in which he guided the deliberations of
the Council last month. His personal involvement in
providing frequent briefings to the General Assembly
membership was an extremely useful step in furthering
the transparency of the work of the Council.

It is with a sense of deep concern that the Pakistan
delegation addresses the important item under
consideration by the Council. As has been pointed out in
Vivid and graphic detail in two letters from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, the situation in the occupied
territories of Palestine is most disturbing. The continued

 

practice of the Israeli authorities of building settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories - in particular, in and
around Jerusalem - and their permission to the new wave
of Israeli settlers to occupy those settlements, not only are
a grave Violation of article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention but also put the Middle East peace process in
serious jeopardy.

The massive expansion and consolidation of
settlements creates a situation on the ground that is
inconsistent with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
which the current peace process seeks to implement.
Furthermore, it seriously compromises the recent
agreements reached between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

The international community viewed the historic
Declaration of Principles reached in Oslo between the
Palestinian and Israeli leadership as paving the way for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The signing of that Declaration in Washington in September
1993 was a further step in consolidating the process of
peace. The recent Israeli moves, therefore, are in direct
contradiction of the spirit of the Declaration, which was to
form the basis for an overall durable peace in the Middle
East.

It is imperative to maintain the present momentum that
has been attained in the negotiating process. We share the
expectation of the international community that there should
be no delay in the implementation of the agreements
reached so far, and that the provisions of those agreements
should be fully complied with by all parties, both in letter
and in spirit. A sincere and concerted effort needs to be
made to achieve peace and stability in Palestine. We urge
all the parties concerned to demonstrate the requisite
flexibility and accommodation as well as a sincere
commitment to the vision of lasting peace in the Middle
East. To achieve this noble objective, which has for so long
defied a solution, it is essential that all new settlements
should be stopped forthwith. It is only by taking such an
obvious and imperative measure that true peace in the
Middle East can be achieved.

