Mr. Kiiriisi (Hungary): My country fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. Let me thank the President of the
Council for proposing this open debate and also
emphasize our full support for what President Marcus
Stephen of Nauru said this morning about the
magnitude of the challenges we all face as a result of
ongoing climate change.

I would like to voice some additional thoughts
about the security implications of climate change,
particularly concerning the direct threats represented
by rising water levels. For certain countries, as some
speakers have indicated today, their potential loss of
territory could be fatal, leading to the total relocation
of some nations; others can expect the extraordinarily
heavy burden of having to move 4 where that is
possible 4 infrastructure and economic assets.

In Europe alone, some 20 to 30 million people
may be forced to leave their homes over the next
70 years. The overall loss of assets there could be more
than the total gross domestic product (GDP) of the
European Union today. On a global scale, the
population that would have to be relocated could be
more than 300 million, and the potential loss of assets
is incalculable. Degradation and the flight of capital
and populations from endangered areas could happen

 

well before such areas were submerged. Vulnerable
societies, as many have indicated today, could be
overwhelmed by such events.

Some potential indirect threats from these factors
are that fishing and mining rights could become
uncertain or even challenged if territorial waters and
exclusive economic zones were to change significantly.
Traditional donors will have to spend much more on
their own mitigation projects and be able to contribute
less to assisting stability and development in other
regions.

Some possible inland security consequences
include an increase in the volatility of rivers, resulting
in uncontrollable floods, and more powerful storms
with greater destructive capability. An increasing part
of countries' GDP may have to be spent on constant
recovery efforts. Such factors are already taking a
greater toll than ongoing wars, in both human and
economic terms.

Among the security issues that should be
reconsidered, food security, which has already been
discussed today, has never been as fragile in the past
60 years as it is today. The implications are felt
everywhere, but in the most vulnerable countries,
rapidly growing social tensions could quickly topple
local or regional security arrangements. In fact, in all
the countries affected by the Arab Spring, food prices
played an important role in security issues. New
analysis and guidance concerning the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities overseen by the Security
Council and other bodies might be desirable in order to
prevent States and communities from lapsing into
violent conflict situations.

Six decades ago, when the United Nations system
was first developed, security was viewed primarily in
military terms. Today, the dimensions of security and
the imminence of risk factors have significantly
changed. The focus of the principal body responsible
for addressing security challenges should follow or
even anticipate those changes. The Republic of
Hungary strongly supports the work of the Security
Council and further encourages the Council to maintain
its vigilance over and preparedness for the security
implications of climate change.

