Argentina thanks Estonia for convening this open debate on a topic that has always been of particular interest to us. We also thank Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of the Security Council Report, for their valuable presentations. Argentina believes that presidential note S/2017/507 was a valuable tool for increasing the transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency of the Council, and is a balanced text that can serve as a useful guide to agreed measures or best practices regarding its working methods. In that regard, Argentina would like to congratulate the delegation of Kuwait for its excellent work during its chairmanship of the Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions and appreciates the adoption of the eight presidential notes, namely, S/2019/990 to S/2019/997, which contribute to greater efficiency and transparency in the Council's work. Argentina has historically advocated the need for ongoing efforts to increase transparency, inclusiveness, openness, democratization, effectiveness and efficiency in the Council's work. In that regard, we are guided by the conviction that, without affecting the effectiveness of decision-making, the Council can and must be more transparent and democratic in its relationship with the wider membership. There is no doubt about the improvements in recent years to the working methods of this organ. That has obviously been the result of the efforts of the elected members, who, through their patience and commitment, continue to be the architects of those achievements. It is worth recalling that the most recent Argentine presidency of the Informal Working Group, a position it held in the 2013-2014 biennium, also saw the adoption of numerous notes by the President on topics including consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries, dialogue with non-Council members and other bodies, the participation of Council members in the drafting of Council instruments and their broader drafting responsibilities, as well as the continuity of the work of the Council's subsidiary bodies. Argentina appreciates the regular evaluation of the implementation of note 507 and other relevant notes, the identification of successful practices and possible shortcomings, as well as the contemplation of necessary adjustments. In that regard, Argentina calls on the Informal Working Group to continue working towards a single comprehensive document in order to consolidate and streamline all decisions on working methods. The culture of the Security Council as it relates to decision-making and its effectiveness hinges on our ability to improve its working methods. We know that a more effective and efficient Council can be achieved only through an election-based system in which accountability is ensured and in which there can be no selective action in response to international crises. The use of the veto, or even its threat of use, has been extremely harmful to the work of the Organization. Argentina is convinced that the veto limits the Council's action, and therefore favours its abolition. As long as that is not possible, Argentina subscribes to its regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes, as well as the French-Mexican initiative. The use of the veto or its threat of use has a considerable impact on the agility of the Council's work - both in normal times and in these extraordinary and unprecedented circumstances - which we are called to reflect upon in this debate. The Security Council's delay or inaction does not deprive the General Assembly of its rights under the Charter of the United Nations, nor does it relieve it of its responsibility to maintain international peace and security. In that regard, we recall the validity of resolution 377 (V), better known as "Uniting for peace", adopted in November 1950, pursuant to which it the General Assembly may take action if the Council fails to do so due to the negative vote of a permanent member in in any case where there appears to be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression. In such cases, the Assembly may immediately consider the matter with a view to recommending collective action to the United Nations membership in order to maintain or restore international peace and security. In that regard, Argentina supports greater coordination and communication among the various organs of the Organization in order to join efforts to achieve common objectives, in accordance with the Charter. There is no doubt that the United Nations, and multilateralism in general, is facing one of the worst crises since 1945. The Council has not yet taken a stand, but it is never too late for it to show unity in the face of such a crisis, which affects all Member States. Argentina is convinced that the Security Council must be more accountable and respect the authority of the General Assembly - the Organization's most representative, democratic and transparent organ. We commend the work of the Dominican Republic during its Council presidency in April. It has enabled greater transparency and openness in the Council's work in these unprecedented circumstances. We trust that Estonia, having been given the opportunity to lead the Council as an elected member, will also serve the interests of the entire international community.
