Mr. Lovald (Norway): Norway fully associates
itself with the content of the statement delivered by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union. That statement raises a number of issues that
are of vital concern if the Afghan Government and
international community are to succeed in their joint
efforts towards peace, stability and reconstruction in
Afghanistan.

We have asked for the floor because we believe
that the need for Afghan ownership in the development
and reconstruction process, and the need for the United
Nations to be strengthened, with a particular view to
coordinating efforts towards that goal, ought to be
emphasized even more. We cannot succeed in

Afghanistan unless the Afghan people perceive the
path that they have taken ever since late 2001 as the
path towards substantive and sustainable improvement
of their lives. We cannot succeed unless the Afghan
governmental institutions, nationally as well as locally,
enjoy increased legitimacy in the eyes of the Afghan
people.

Therefore, an overarching concern in all of our
efforts towards development and reconstruction must
be to ensure that they are coherent with Afghan
priorities and plans, again, nationally as well as locally.
We must all be willing to coordinate and to allow
ourselves to be coordinated with that concern in mind.

I must underline the urgency of this issue. Some
of us raised the need for better coordination here in
New York a year ago, and it is indeed worrying that we
are still concerned about inadequate coordination. That
means that we still risk wasting our resources and are
still losing time, time that we will not be able to make
up for later. That is serious, because it undermines our
efficiency, our credibility and our ability to reach our
objectives. Coordination takes leadership, and we must
bestow the mandate of such leadership upon the United
Nations.

The United Nations must assume the role of
leader and coordinator in making sure that we all
contribute to the maximum extent towards
strengthening Afghan legitimacy and ownership of the
country's own development process. That must be
accompanied by a continued endeavour towards
Afghan capacity-building, so that the Afghan
authorities enhance their expertise in formulating
goals, plans and priorities. That must apply on the
national, province and district levels alike. The Afghan
people must be able to see the measures taken by their
Government at various levels as unified, coherent and
aimed at consistent goals.

If the United Nations should take on the task of
strengthening its leadership role and coordination, it
must be given the wherewithal to do so. The dedicated
men and women who work for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan under the excellent
leadership of Mr. Tom Koenigs must be given the
authority and additional resources that they need. Our
preference would be both to strengthen the Mission and
to appoint a special envoy to ensure coordination in
Kabul and between our capitals. Differing views on the
question of a special envoy should not block our efforts
to provide the Mission with increased funding and
manpower, both in Kabul and in the provinces
throughout Afghanistan.

