Mr. Mitri: When I last briefed the Council six
weeks ago (see S/PV.7194), I referred to the growing
fear among Libyans about the prospect of a protracted
conflict. The quick pace with which developments have
unfolded in Tripoli over the past couple of weeks are a
reflection of the deeply fractured political scene that
continues to hang heavily over the country, undermining
the fledgling political process.

In fact, we are in the middle of an all-out
confrontation between two major rival groups in the
Libyan capital. That confrontation, born out of the deep
political polarization, is playing itselfout at the country's
international airport. What initially started as a minor
incident on 5 July between elements from rival brigades
at a checkpoint in the Janzour area of Tripoli, where
the compound of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) is located, rapidly escalated into
a series of major clashes across a number of areas in
the capital. Much of the fighting within the past week
has focused on attempts by different armed groups to
assert control over Tripoli's international airport. The
battles have caused disruption to air traffic and all air
travel through the airport has since been suspended.
A call from the country's interim Government for an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire has so far gone
unheeded. The Government is also calling for the
international community to take a strong stance. I will
leave it to Minister Abdulaziz to elaborate further on
the Government's call.

As the number of military actors mobilizing and
consolidating their presence within the capital continues
to grow, there is a mounting sense of a probable
imminent and significant escalation in the conflict. The
stakes are high for all sides. In eastern Libya, there has
been a marked escalation of confrontation in the past
couple of days. Benghazi's international airport has
been repeatedly shelled and is not operational. Against
the backdrop of the continued military operations
between the forces under the command of retired army
general Khalifa Haftar and those groups that he has
labelled as terrorists, the campaign of assassinations
and abductions targeting civic and political activists,
as well as security and judicial personnel, has been
unforgiving. On the day of the elections, a prominent
human rights and political activist, Salwa Bughaigis,
was stabbed and shot dead in her Benghazi residence.
Her husband, who was with her, has gone missing and
their guard was subsequently killed in custody. The
assassination was very shocking, even for a country
that has been witnessing daily violence.

The recent fighting in Tripoli and around the
international airport has brought the war closer to the
UNSMIL compound, which has taken direct hits from
medium- and high-calibre machine guns. We have
been at grave risk of being caught up in a military
showdown amid indications and warnings that the
fighting around our compound would intensify. In
view of the deteriorating situation in the capital and the
closure of Tripoli's international airport, the increased
security risk faced by UNSMIL and the implications
for the ability of its staff to carry out their work, a
decision was taken first to reduce and later to withdraw
the international staff in the country. It was not an
easy decision. We made it clear that it would not be
possible for UNSMIL to carry out its work while, at
the same time, ensuring the safety and security of
our 160 international staff present in Tripoli. The risk
was such that staff was ordered to move between their
accommodation and offices wearing body armour
and helmets, which is an unprecedented measure for
us in Tripoli. As a result, staff were confined to the
compound for days.

On 13 and 14 July, two large groups of international
staff were evacuated by road to Tunisia in convoys of
armoured vehicles, leaving a small group of staff in
Tripoli. That is a temporary move and will be reviewed
as soon as there is an improvement in security. The
Libyan authorities were informed and expressed their
full understanding of the move. The unfolding military
developments in Tripoli over the past couple of weeks
have cast a shadow over the election on 25 June of the
200-member council of representatives that will replace
the General National Congress. Unlike the previous
legislative elections in 2012, the electoral law did not
have any provision for proportional representation of
political parties. Candidates had to run on individual
basis. Thirty-two of the Council seats were reserved for
women.

A little more than 40 per cent of the 1.5 million
registered Libyans went to the polls on election day
to elect from among the 1,714 candidates. Ninety-
seven per cent of polling centres opened their doors
for voting; there was no polling, however, in the
eastern city of Derna; some of the components
constituencies - "components" is the word we use
to designate ethnic or cultural minorities - in areas
to the west of Tripoli, as well as in Kufra, boycotted
the elections. Polling in some 24 centres across the
country was impacted by acts of Violence, notably in
Benghazi, Sabha, Al-Zawiya, Sirte and Awbari. One
candidate was killed. Due to disruption in polling, a
total of 12 seats representing six sub-constituencies will
remain vacant until polling takes place in those areas.
Following the announcement of preliminary results on
6 July, 41 candidates were disqualified in accordance
with the Law on Political and Administrative Isolation.
Final results are expected on 20 July.

In my briefing to the Council last month, I spoke
of my intention to convene a meeting that would bring
together representatives of the major Libyan actors with
the aim of forging an agreement on a number of issues
central to the transition process. These would have
included principles of political interaction, national
priorities for the remainder of the transitional period,
and ways of addressing inunediate security and other
divisive issues.

In preparing for this meeting, which we had
hoped would be in the form of a political dialogue to
take place a week ahead of the legislative elections on
18 and 19 June, UNSMIL consulted closely with all
the major Libyan parties and groups, in addition to the

Government and with the special envoys for Libya,
on arrangements and possible results. Preliminary
drafts of preparatory documents were leaked, distorted
and misinterpreted by some media outlets. More
importantly, some major participants, who had initially
given a positive response, expressed their reluctance to
engage in what they thought was an untimely dialogue
that would benefit their political opponents.

The media controversy - some had turned to
defamation against me - reduced further the possibility
of convening a dialogue ahead of the parliamentary
elections. Following consultations, including with the
international special envoys, I decided to postpone the
convening ofa political dialogue meeting. Regrettably,
an opportunity was missed and, with the present armed
confrontation continuing it may become more difficult
to bring conflicting forces to the dialogue table. The
United Nations, and other international or regional
actors, have called for a cessation ofviolence. UNSMIL
continues to have contacts with various parties and
groups in an attempt at de-escalation.

Since my last briefing, UNSMIL has resumed
attending the trial sessions in Tripoli of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi and 35 other persons
associated with the former regime. The trial so far
has dealt primarily with procedural issues relating to
access to defence counsel. I take this opportunity to
underscore the need for proper legal representation for
all defendants, as well as for complete access by the
defence counsel to clients and case files.

In this regard, I would like to point out that both Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi have
been unable to access the legal counsel representing
them before the International Criminal Court. This is
of particular concern given the 31 May decision of the
Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Court,
which upheld the admissibility of the case against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. The Court has confirmed
that Libya must hand over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
while also noting that it is considering the case of
Mr. Al-Senussi. Libya remains under an obligation to
cooperate with the Court.

I would like, finally, to take this opportunity today
to highlight the ongoing plight of an ever increasing
number of migrants, asylum-seekers and refugees who
continue to undertake the perilous sea journey in their
quest to reach Europe from Libya. Moreover, thousands
of migrants in Libya continue to face widespread
and prolonged detention, usually with no means to
challenge their detention. They are held in extremely
poor conditions, characterized by chronic overcrowding
and a lack of basic sanitary conditions. There is also ill-
treatment and work exploitation.

In the absence of a proper protection framework
in Libya, this detention practice tends to fuel human
trafficking towards Europe. It has become clear that
border control measures are not sufficient to address
this issue and that urgent action is needed to reduce the
use of detention and to improve conditions in detention
centres. Furthermore, the role of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees would need to be
formalized, and a registration and status-determination
process for refugees should be introduced without
delay.

