Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to begin by
warmly welcoming the Deputy Secretary-General,
with whom Italy has already worked very intensively,
both as a mission and through me personally during the
organization of Expo Milano 2015, and to say that we
are ready to continue that collaboration. I got the feeling
during our meeting in Nigeria that Ms. Mohammed's
country was already missing her, while we are doing
our best to keep her here.

I congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency. This is
our first open meeting under your presidency, which
has begun with the successful organization of this visit.
I would like to express my appreciation to you, to the
French and the Senegalese Ambassadors for having set
up the visit, and to the whole United Nations family
and the Governments of each country for their crucial
assistance at every stage of the mission. We were in
favour of the idea ofthe mission from the start, since we
knew it would offer an opportunity to deliver a strong
message of support and commitment to the countries of
the region and to the international community e and we
have not been disappointed. The goals were achieved.

What have we learned from the visit? First of all,
we directly observed the magnitude of the crisis in the
field, and all of its dimensions - humanitarian, social
and security - show it to be even more alarming than
expected. I think the best illustration is when we were
in Maroua last week, once a tourist destination on the
border of Cameroon's main national park. Today, we
were not even allowed to leave the airport; we were
surrounded by military and they explained the situation.
We saw the deep impact of the humanitarian crisis on
the region. The Oslo Conference demonstrated growing
international attention to Lake Chad. Many States,
including Italy, committed to supporting the region. We
must continue to stress the importance of timely and
coordinated assistance to the region.

Turning to the issue of security, during our visit we
observed the firm commitment of local Governments
to the fight against Boko Haram and against terrorist
activity in the regio - efforts that are shared by civil
society. It is crucial for us to support those efforts and to
promote the participation of civil society, in particular
women's organizations, in mediation and the fight
against radicalization. We continue to be concerned
about the many trafficking networks operating in the
region. There is no underestimating the ties between
Boko Haram and transnational organized crime. In
particular, we must resolutely tackle any instance of
smuggling, especially human trafficking connected to
that phenomenon. In that regard, I note the lucid analysis
made by the President of the Niger and its Minister of
the Interior of the effects of that criminal network on
the crisis in the region. We are convinced that those
issues ought to be addressed with a broader regional
perspective that encompasses the Sahel, in line with the
United Nations initiative already in place, particularly
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

But that alone is not enough to improve the
security situation. The region is suffering from the
socioeconomic effects of desertification. It is essential
to accompany security mission with a long-term
development plan in order to foster sustainability
for the people of the area - in particular, internally
displaced persons - and, once the security situation
is stabilized, to prevent them from being exploited by
traffickers and smugglers.
In closing, we need to analyse the root causes
of instability in the region and how they impact
the crisis. I would mention, in particular, the effect
of climate change. Addressing the root causes of
instability, we are convinced, is a key priority if we
are to overcome the related security and humanitarian
crises and ensure the long-lasting development of the
region. In that regard, we feel that the region would
benefit from the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development by fostering sustainable
peace and development. During our meeting last week,
Mr. President, you used the very apt expression "the
neglected crisis" several times. At least the crisis is no
longer neglected by the Security Council.

