Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ambassadors Negroponte
and Jones Parry for their briefings and for the text that
has been circulated.

With reference to the Iraqi situation, let me
underscore at the outset that it is in the interests of all
parties to achieve a rapid and lasting settlement that
ensures implementation of the tasks that have been set
out by the Security Council, namely, the need to
quickly restore Iraqi sovereignty and to ensure the
rights of the Iraqi people to manage their own political
future and to be the master of their own natural
resources. That is the main goal to which we all aspire,
and we all want to assist as much as we can in
achieving it. That is also the focus of the efforts of the
Iraqis themselves and of the international community,
as well as the purpose of the latest steps that have been
and are being taken by the United Nations.

We welcome the recent fact-finding mission sent
to Iraq at the request of the Iraqi Governing Council,
led by Mr. Brahimi. The developments with respect to
this mission, its work in Iraq and its report have
compellingly demonstrated to us - although there was
never any doubt of this - that without the United
Nations it is difficult to envisage achieving a lasting
settlement or to anticipate agreeing on any political
process that would be both viable and acceptable to all
Iraqis.

We welcome the fact that involving the United
Nations and the mission led by Mr. Brahimi have led to
a broadening of participation of the Iraqi political
process. Contacts have been made with a wide range of
Iraqi political forces, including ones not represented in
the provisional Governing Council.

We are studying the report of the Brahimi
mission. Our initial assessment has been positive;
clearly, this is a first attempt at a comprehensive,
independent, in-depth analysis of the situation in Iraq
that seeks to encompass the shifting forces involved. It
sets out important conclusions on the breakdown of
political forces in Iraq and on existing risks and threats
in Iraq, which have their roots in the distant past.
Clearly, we must take account of these timely
recommendations and analyses as we identify the best
approaches to attaining a lasting post-war settlement.

On the report's recommendations, clearly we look
forward above all to the reactions of the Iraqis
themselves. Here, we fully support the position of the
Secretary-General and of Mr. Brahimi that only the
Iraqis can truly define specific ways to pursue the
political process. This includes agreement on a
mechanism by which to restore Iraq's sovereignty and
on the means to put it into effect. This restored
sovereignty would lead to the holding of general
elections.

We would be prepared to consider any
communications from the Iraqis addressed to the
Security Council, but I must stress that, as the report
notes, the matter is urgent: the Secretary-General and
Lakhdar Brahimi both underscore the fact that if the
elections that the Iraqi people want so badly are to be
held by late 2004 or early 2005, it is time to prepare for
them now. But we await the response of the Iraqis
themselves.

We consider the Secretary-General's approach to
be correct: that the United Nations and the international
community at large can assist the Iraqis to reach
consensus, but certainly cannot impose anything upon
them. We agree also the Secretary-General's view of
the overall role of the United Nations in the process, in
particular with respect to the Organization's readiness
to assist, given the necessary conditions. These broadly
relate to security issues. Mindful of the increasing
violence in Iraq, we shall rely completely on the
Secretary-General with respect to when and in what
form the United Nations will become directly involved
within Iraq in the various processes. This is important
also because United Nations staff are most likely to be
working in cities, where the violence continues to
escalate.

Let me note that the Iraqis will now be discussing
what specific mechanism they can accept with a view
to restoring their sovereignty. Clearly, that will be a
provisional mechanism, which will most likely possess
limited authority. As we consider various options, it
would be useful for us to continue to bear in mind the
convening at some point of an international conference
on Iraq with the participation of Iraqis and Iraq's
neighbours - whose views on the precise shape of a
settlement must be taken into full account.

Let me reaffirm in conclusion that we consider it
important that resolution 1483 (2003) be fully
implemented. We take note of Ambassador
Negroponte's information on the Coalition's efforts to
find traces of Iraqi programmes to develop weapons of
mass destruction. It is our position that the mandates of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq
remain on the Council's agenda. The sooner we can
return to them, the more useful it would be for
resolving this issue.

We look forward to receiving information about
those missing in action from the first Gulf war. This is
a humanitarian issue, and we are aware that the
Coalition is involved in a wide range of such issues and
matters related to violations of human rights,
humanitarian law and other rights in Iraq - as mentioned
in the material circulated by Ambassador Jones Parry.
We understand the scope of the problem, but we must
not forget that several hundred Kuwaiti and other
nationals whose fate still requires clarification.

For the present, I shall limit my statement to what
I have just said.

