Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me too start, on
behalf of South Africa, by extending our condolences to
the Government and the people of Afghanistan on the
recent terrorist attacks in Kabul. We also wish to extend
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Tunisia on the passing of President Be'ji Ca'id Essebsi.

My delegation wishes to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed for her very insightful
briefing on her recent visit to Afghanistan. The visit by
such a high-powered delegation, including the Under-
Secretaries-General of UN-Women, the United Nations
Population Fund and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, epitomizes mostly the solidarity
with and support of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, for Afghanistan. We
therefore also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Jamila Afghani for their
briefings earlier.

South Africa looks forward to the presidential
elections that will take place in September in
Afghanistan, and we encourage all parties to work
together to ensure that the elections commence as
planned and mandated by the Afghan Constitution.
Additionally, it is equally important that the upcoming
elections be credible, inclusive, free, fair, safe and
transparent. We wish to welcome the progress made by
Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve meaningful and
inclusive participation in the peace process.

The convening at the beginning of this year of the
national conference of Afghan women for peace, which
was organized by the Office of the First Lady, with
support from the High Peace Council, the Ministry of
Women's Affairs, the Afghan Women's Network and
other civil society organizations, was a noteworthy
initiative in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda.

Such activities by Afghan women across all levels
and sectors of society create a conducive environment
for women to continue to play an instrumental role in
the peace process and beyond. A 15-point declaration
on the role of women was developed by the conference
and submitted to President Ashraf Ghani. We welcome
the undertaking by President Ashraf Ghani to have its
provisions considered at the consultative loya jirga and
peace talks. Those are positive steps towards ensuring
the full and inclusive participation of women in the
peace process in Afghanistan.

We also Wish to commend the Afghan Government
for the development of a second phase of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan and
encourage its comprehensive implementation. It is
commendable that Afghanistan has made significant
strides to implement the aspirations of resolution 1325
(2000) by ensuring the meaningful role of women in the
peace process.

Sustainable peace in Afghanistan is dependent
upon broad consensus whereby women, as well as
young people, fully participate in the peace process.
That should include their participation at all levels of
local and national Government. South Africa therefore
encourages the further incorporation of gender
perspectives and the concerns of women in enhancing
the sustainability of peace and security in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we remain convinced that the only
long-term solution to the situation in Afghanistan is a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-
ownedpoliticalprocessleadingtothepeaceful resolution
of conflict and an inclusive political settlement.

