Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like first to thank our colleague,
Ambassador Sardenberg, for his briefing and to
congratulate him also on having taken the initiative of
leading this important Security Council mission, which
I believe was very useful. Personally, I gained a wealth
of knowledge about the situation in Haiti. I was able to
appreciate the work being done by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose
task, at the beginning, was somewhat difficult.
However, we have seen today that the mission has in
fact been doing outstanding work. We also appreciated
all of the work being done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, our former
colleague, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdez, who, I
would reiterate, is doing an outstanding job in Haiti.

We were also able, I believe, thanks to the
excellent guidance provided by our President, to
clearly convey the message we wished to send to Haiti,
and we made recommendations that I believe will be
useful for the work of the Security Council. I will not
go into all of the recommendations made by the
mission, because I think that they are clear and well
adapted to the situation there; indeed, we support them
fully.

I should like, however, to stress one point, that is,
the efforts that now need to be made with regard to the
local, legislative and presidential elections to take
place this fall. Those elections - and this was stressed
by the mission rather frequently during the visit -
have to be held according to schedule. They have to be
free and fair and open to all political parties that have
renounced violence, and they should permit the
participation of as many people as possible. That is the

immediate challenge for Haitians and indeed for the
international community.

In order properly to meet that challenge, I believe
that we need to take action in three main areas. The
first step that needs to be taken is to strengthen
security, so that the elections can take place in the best
possible conditions. In a few days' time, we will be
considering Secretariat proposals on that subject. In
addition to a possible increase in personnel, we need to
ensure that the personnel already present there, in
particular civilian police personnel, is properly used.

Secondly, we believe that we should as soon as
possible implement quick-impact development
projects. We discussed this repeatedly during the
mission, and it is the subject of one of the
recommendations: that tangible improvements should
be made to the living conditions of the people, and that
they need to be given hope.

In that regard, we welcome Canada's holding in
mid-June of a follow-up meeting to the Cayenne
conference held at the initiative of Foreign Minister
Barnier of France. We believe that all donors should
immediately resume their full cooperation with Haiti.

Thirdly and finally, we need to closely follow the
preparations for the elections, in particular voter
registration and civic education efforts for the
population.

Elections are a necessary step for ensuring
stability in Haiti but in themselves are not sufficient. In
parallel, we must pursue with the Haitian authorities
the rebuilding of institutions, in particular the judicial
system, and promote the sustainable development of
the country.

