We thank the briefers and congratulate Prime Minister Gonsalves on his country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. Today's debate is timely, as threats to international peace and security are more complex, involving cross-border elements and global in nature. The Charter of the United Nations underscores the central role of prevention as a responsibility of the entire United Nations system. The Dominican Republic interprets Chapter VIII in that sense. We therefore endorse multilateralism as an effective method of addressing conflicts. This principle is particularly effective today, as the only way to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its effects is through joint efforts. An unconventional threat to international peace and security, with profound implications for everyone without exception, including future generations, is climate change. It has been described as the most important challenge facing humankind. Rising sea levels, natural disasters and disrupted livelihoods are just a few of the effects that many of our countries must face daily. The relationship between climate and security is undeniable and so too are the links among climate, development and security. That is why the Council, and the United Nations as a whole, must seek ambitious, innovative and joint solutions to prevent climate change from becoming the primary and most complex risk factor for conflict. It requires greater ambition, greater action and greater results. That said, we recognize that the root causes of conflict are multiple and interconnected. Political, social and economic factors can affect stability. Equitable access to water has emerged as a destabilizing element, contributing to the outbreak of violent conflict and instability within and between societies. Organized crime and arms trafficking, while not contemporary threats, are executed with such sophistication that they are beyond the capacity of States to address. People are at the heart of the issues highlighted today. These threats must be depoliticized for them to be viewed as opportunities that improve the quality of life of people and strengthen humankind. To this end, it is crucial that the Council acknowledge intercommunal violence, for example, as one of the main causes of human suffering and the current proliferation of human rights violations, including sexual violence in conflict. Sustaining peace begins and ends with protecting people from human rights violations. The violation of these rights, in any context, is the antithesis of peace and a denial of our shared humanity. There is no peace in a society where human rights are not protected. Pandemics, such as COVID-19, bring to the surface the underlying factors that result in violence, such as systemic inequality, discrimination and marginalization. In many conflict zones, contracting COVID-19 is a death sentence. More than 60 million people live in areas outside of Government control. Who will come to their rescue? We must work with humanitarian organizations with access to these populations to help them survive the crisis, including providing them with the vaccine. No one is safe until everyone is safe. All these factors, individually or in combination, have serious consequences for civilian populations and become breeding grounds for the proliferation of armed groups that incite and increase violence. Local actors, such as women and young people, must be involved to help develop and lead efforts to raise awareness and respond to all these threats, mitigate conflict, prevent violence, achieve peace and reduce the impact of insecurity on sustainable development. The United Nations, each one of us and regional organizations have a shared responsibility to respond to those threats and to walk shoulder to shoulder in defending the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is only with a sense of prevention, multilateralism, early attention and concerted action among the pillars of peace, human rights, development and humanitarian action that we can deliver as one to the most vulnerable and avoid the recurrence of conflict and insecurity.
