Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having accepted the proposal to hold
an open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. We would also like to congratulate the
Member States that promoted this initiative. This
decision is an important contribution to the efficiency
and transparency of the Council's work, but above all it
is crucial step towards establishing authentic
interaction and a genuine dialogue between the Council
and all of the States Members of the Organization.
Since the last time that the Council held an open debate
on this matter, 14 years ago, we have seen some
progress. However, we must point out that the
implementation of the measures that are set out in
document S/2006/507 has been insufficient and lacking
in regularity and firmness.

In failing to apply those methods and thus failing
to improve its working methods, the Council has
overlooked the fundamental premise that its actions are
carried out on behalf of and in representation of all
Member States. Likewise, it is important to point out
that, even though the Council's agenda focuses on
specific issues, the decisions that are adopted have a
direct impact on all Member States. In recent years, we
have witnessed various conflict situations that are
unpredictable or have remained unaddressed, and
which today pose a challenge to the Council and the
United Nations in terms of adopting the right decisions.
In many cases, those decisions go beyond discussions
on the political or security issues, and lead us to reflect
on the legal implications, within the context of
international law.

New threats and emerging situations have
permanently changed the nature of the Council's work.
That is why it is crucial to improve its working
methods and to provide it with the necessary efficiency
to respond appropriately to conflict. In that respect,
Ecuador believes that it is crucial that the Council hold
open debates on a regular basis, in an interactive
format and with enough time so that non-member
States can contribute effectively to the decision-making
process.

Likewise, my delegation would like to recall the
commitment of the Council to hold more public
meetings. Although private consultations are one of the
instruments that facilitate the adoption of decisions,
they were first designed as an exception, and cannot
continue to be applied as a rule. It is crucial that all
Member States be able to express their opinion on
specific situations, especially those countries that are
directly involved or especially affected by them, as
should regional organizations, to which the United
Nations Charter has given an important role in dispute
settlement. My delegation believes that combining
more informal public meetings with briefings by
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
special envoys or Secretariat officials, and establishing
specific objectives for every meeting would help to
prevent excessively lengthy sessions and the
unnecessary repetition of items.

It is also important to step up interaction with
troop-contributing countries when the Council has
decided to implement, extend or adjust the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. My delegation is convinced
that those countries have the necessary experience and
information to conduct a more objective assessment of
the situation on the ground, which would undoubtedly
lead to improving the decision-making process.

Those formats, however, should not turn into yet
another ritual in which the Council simply goes
through the motions. To effect real change, the
opinions of non-Council-member States, stakeholders
and regional organizations must be properly taken into
account in adopting resolutions or presidential
statements.

Improving the Council's working methods is a
decision that cannot wait any longer, largely because
the Council's legitimacy depends on it. Even though
Security Council reform requires a comprehensive
approach, the effectiveness of the working methods of
the Council cannot and should not be made dependent
on enlargement criteria. My delegation hopes that the
ideas expressed in this debate will receive the
appropriate follow-up and lead to concrete actions,
along with a continuous process of discussion and
review.

