Mr. Benitez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): For
Cuba, Haiti is more than just our closest neighbour,
barely 45 miles from our shores. The Haitian
revolution, which sheltered and encouraged several
revolutionary groups from our continent during crucial
times of the Latin American struggle against colonial
domination, has also had a special influence on the fate
and formation of the Cuban nation. This is why Cuba
particularly welcomes the presence among us today of
the distinguished Prime Minister of Haiti, Her
Excellency Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis.

Unfortunately, Haiti, cradle of the liberation
struggles against colonialism in the American continent
and the first independent republic in Latin America and
the Caribbean, has been for many years, and continues
to be, a country neglected by the international
community. Haiti is one of the clearest examples of the
disastrous consequences of colonialism and
neocolonialism, of the unjust and exclusionary
international order, and of the continued
interventionism characterizing its turbulent history.

When the situation in Haiti in addressed in the
framework of the United Nations, the focus is almost
always on the so-called security issues, while, despite
all the rhetoric, the necessary urgent attention to the
serious structural, economic and social problems that
the country suffers from is minimized for all practical
purposes. Lasting peace, security and stability in this
nation demand, first of all, that we eliminate poverty
and underdevelopment. There can be no peace and
stability without development. There can be no peace
and lasting stability when over 70 per cent of the
population lives in poverty. Half of the labour force is
unemployed. Life expectancy is under 52 years old.
Illiteracy affects 48 of every 100 inhabitants, and
almost half the population is malnourished and has no
access to drinking water.

Last year, Haiti suffered a new, devastating
setback caused by four successive hurricanes and
tropical storms that lashed the country. The death toll
was immense, and the damage to the infrastructure and
economy is the most serious that Haiti has faced since
the beginning of the twenty-first century. To all this,
we must add the negative impact of the current global,
economic and financial crisis.

Haiti can only move forward towards a future of
prosperity if it has the sustained and firm support of
the international community. There can be no doubt
that since the establishment of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in 2004,
security on the ground has improved. However, the
actions of the international community cannot be
limited to the presence of MINUSTAH. There has not
been, and there cannot be, a military solution to the
situation in Haiti.

Being a small country under blockade with very
limited resources, Cuba maintains and increases its
cooperation with its Caribbean sister nation mainly in the
health sector, but in other areas as well, such as energy,
education and sports. Cuban cooperation teams are
working throughout Haiti in the most remote places. Of
the 400 such workers, 336 of them in the area of health,
working in 134 different communities around the
country. Since Cuban cooperation with Haiti began, in
1998, Cuban doctors have provided almost 14.5 million

consultations; they have saved the lives of 232,000
patients and have performed more than 110,400
deliveries and 250,000 surgical operations.

Cuba has trained 544 Haitian doctors, and 670
Haitian scholarship holders are studying health
specialties in Cuba today, totally free of charge. More
than 800 Haitian youths have graduated from Cuban
schools as professionals. In the framework of
Operation Miracle, the cooperative programme
developed by Cuba and Venezuela to provide free care
to patients in various countries suffering from eye
problems, more than 42,000 Haitian patients have
undergone surgery, many of them in two
ophthalmology centres and three surgery clinics
donated by Cuba. The implementation of the Cuban
literacy programme "Yes, I Can", has to date provided
4,500 illiterate Haitians with the opportunity to learn to
read and write.

What Cuba is doing today for Haiti is only a
modest example of how much more could be achieved
through international cooperation and assistance,
especially by those States with greater economic and
financial resources than ours. The resources that Haiti
can marshal to face these multiple challenges are very
limited. The massive contribution of the international
community, as well as an increase in its assistance and
fulfilment of its financial and human commitments to
Haiti, is an unavoidable duty.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti
can always count on the assistance of and on bonds of
solidarity with the people and Government of Cuba. In
this, we are simply fulfilling our duty and honouring
our debt of gratitude to a sister nation that has always
proved its firm and unvarying friendship and solidarity
with Cuba.
