President Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to congratulate you, President Nicolas Sarkozy
of France, on the initiative to hold this Security
Council meeting as a way to emphasize how urgent it
is that we address the problems besieging Africa today.

Africa is a continent of contrasts, where mineral
abundance, ecological wealth and cultural diversity
share space with the most abject poverty. There,
arbitrary lines are drawn without respect for physical
or cultural borders. The gradual collapse of the colonial
legacy defined the modern history of the continent, and
there was an increase in discord. But we firmly believe
in Africans' capacity to overcome the effects of
colonization through their own collective efforts, in the
same way as they have acted as regional intermediaries
in their own conflicts.

The way in which the situation in Chad, the
Central African Republic and the region as a whole has
been addressed is an example of how the Organization
is taking a regional approach to conflict settlement.
Nevertheless, we express our concern at the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Zimbabwe and the armed conflict in Somalia, which is
straying ever further from the path of peace.

We note with optimism the international
community's many efforts to strengthen continental
initiatives to solidify economic and political
integration on the continent. These include the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and
the efforts of regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Southern African Development Community, which are
pillars of the African Economic Community.

Those initiatives demonstrate the interest of
African countries in healing the wounds left by
colonization. But it will be essential that the States of
the continent respect human rights and make progress
on measurable social and economic indicators. It will
also be necessary for the international community to
refrain from promoting policies that pursue interests
left over from the past and without considering what is
truly important: the rights and the dignity of the
peoples ofAfrica.

Africa's future depends essentially on Africans,
but the international community must always be
present so that it can help to build a continent of peace
where justice and human rights prevail - a continent
whose inhabitants can once again dream of a future of
well-being and hope.

