Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation joins previous speakers in
acknowledging your dedication and commendable
work in presiding over the Council. You and the rest of
the Council members have our cooperation and
commitment of support on the issue of climate change,
which is being addressed in the Council today. We
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the President of
Nauru, Mr. Marcus Stephen; and Mr. Richard Marles,
Australia's Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island
Affairs, for their statements today. We concur with
delegations that have today affirmed that climate
change is a threat that affects peace and security.

If the blows of nature in its cruelty can
significantly affect countries with greater capacities for
response reaction and relief in the face of such
disasters, imagine how severe their impact is on the
weakest and most vulnerable societies. How can we
expect many of our meagre economies to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals while they may be
dealing with one of these tremendous setbacks, which
can destroy achievements that took decades to attain?

As Mr. Achim Steiner, Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme, said today, I

 

come from one of those nations battered by the fury of
a deadly hurricane of biblical proportions. In a split
second, the hurricane took away 50 years of
determined effort and so many dreams, just when we
thought we could finally see the light at the end of the
tunnel. Thanks to international solidarity and the aid of
providence, we marshalled the internal strength we
needed to overcome this harsh test and move on, but
not without having to retrace our steps along the same
path. That required time, resources and efforts that
could have gone into dealing with our setbacks in order
so as not to exacerbate our underdevelopment. For
these reasons, we believe that limiting this debate to
issues related to the impact of rising sea levels, food
security and risks of scarcity on international peace and
security would be far too simplistic. Whenever nature
rebels against humans, the ensuing destruction affects
the natural equilibrium, provoking chain reactions,
threatening fundamental aspects of our lives and
destroying opportunities for future generations.

Even though no one can ever be fully prepared to
face such a natural upheaval, a certain degree of
preparedness, in the form of identifying and devising
solutions to vulnerabilities, has proved helpful in
mitigating the consequences and repairing the damage.
In designing mitigation and international cooperation
policies and programmes aimed at dealing with the
impact of such phenomena, it is imperative to take
account of the geographical, political, economic,
cultural and religious differences between our national
societies.

We in Honduras are working on a national
climate change mitigation strategy aimed at elaborating
public policies and community practices that will
contribute to decreasing our vulnerabilities. We plan to
increase national awareness of the fact that we will be
able to move forward only by improving and
safeguarding our natural riches, our water basins and
water resources, and focusing on water preservation
and the creation of sustainable agroforestry systems,
through ecosystem preservation in both protected and
unprotected areas of the country.

However, merely reciting a litany of needs does
little good when the minimum resources required to
significantly mitigate such weaknesses are
non-existent, as many of those weaknesses are not
related merely to the country's geographical position. It
is unfortunate that we are located right in the path of
hurricanes that cause destruction in the form of

 

landslides and floods; that we are close to dangerous
geological faults that cause earthquakes and
cataclysms; that our country is bathed by waters that
could rise up as tsunamis; and that we are at the mercy
of inclement climatic variations that hinder the sowing
of and destroy our crops.

Our vulnerabilities are also related to our internal
situation, our economic underdevelopment and the
limited possibilities faced by a large percentage of the
population in terms of finding a decent job and safe
housing without being forced to relocate their families
to high-risk areas that lack basic services. Our society's
vulnerabilities are therefore multifaceted and, given
our limited economic assets, addressing them would
cost more than we can afford.

Please forgive me for digressing, but this is our
reality - a reality that cannot be viewed only in the
light of contingency-driven risks, without accepting the
fact that it will always be burdened by the system's
intrinsic shortfalls. It is a very different reality from
other, more privileged ones - one that requires its
own specific diagnosis and understanding so that we
will not innocently and mistakenly adopt solutions that
may be suitable for others but unsuitable for us.

In conclusion, I would like to share the following
concept, taken from the most recent annual report of
the United Nations Development Programme, entitled
People-centred Development: Empowered Lives,
Resilient Nations. Countries cannot on their own deal
with climate change and the loss of biodiversity. This
is without a doubt a shared responsibility that should
be addressed in the context of the natural differences
between countries and peoples. It is a responsibility
centred on people, with a full understanding of the
requirements involved and complemented by broad-
based measures aimed at fulfilling their strong wish to
overcome their adverse circumstances.

