Prince Al-Faisal (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
We meet today as the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip continue to suffer hugely from a savage
aggression that is unrelenting and unforgiving at the
hand of the Israeli war machine. It has led to the deaths
of hundreds and wounded thousands, including
children, women and the elderly. It has caused terrific
destruction to property and infrastructure.

It is a wide human catastrophe that has beset
Gaza: overall death and destruction. Israel has turned
its munitions falling from the sky into an unbearable
hell on the ground, using every conceivable weapon of
destruction invented by the human mind to scourge by
fire an unarmed people besieged from the air, the land
and the sea. The destruction and killing during the
aerial bombardment seem insufficient to slake the
Israelis' thirst or indeed to convince the Security
Council to move swiftly and immediately to prevent
the further escalation expected in such grave
circumstances.

The call for the convening of this meeting
proceeds from our appreciation of what is expected
from the Security Council in such circumstances, as
provided by the Charter of the United Nations. The
Security Council is the body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Although the provisions of the Charter state that when
a certain conflict leads to fighting as soon as possible,
it seems that the Security Council has set that role
aside this time. The Israeli aggression against Gaza has
continued for more than 11 days now. This places a big
question mark over the credibility of the Security
Council and the entire system of international peace
and security.

What we find astonishing and surprising is the
deafening silence in the face of the attack on Gaza.
Indeed, some claim that the operation is nothing more
than Israel exercising its right to self-defence. While
following, for example, the armed conflict in Georgia,
we saw the international community move most
urgently and effectively and mobilize all measures
necessary to contain the situation, end the conflict and
ensure a withdrawal of forces. Palestinian blood
continues to be shed. Destruction is spreading in a way
that cannot be justified in any way whatsoever.

War no longer evokes glory and pride, only rage
and condemnation on the part of the international
community. What is happening in Gaza now can only
be described as a horrendous humanitarian crime that
will only lead to more Violence and extremism and put
the goal of peace and security, which Israel uses to
justify its acts of aggression, further out of reach.

Israel's security can be achieved only by the
establishment of a just peace that responds to the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Those rights
have been recognized in instruments of international
legitimacy, including Security Council resolutions.
They have also been affirmed by the Geneva
Conventions and enshrined in every agreement and
initiative put forth to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, including the Arab Peace Initiative.

Israel bears full responsibility for the grave
situation and the ferocious siege on the Palestinian
people and the closure of crossing points. Israel
violated the truce agreed by the two parties in June
2008, in return for a ceasefire and an understanding

that the crossing points would be opened and the siege
lifted. The Palestinian side fulfilled its obligations
under the agreement, whereas Israel maintained its
stranglehold on 1.5 million Palestinians in Gaza - an
immoral act and humanitarian tragedy to which the
international community failed to respond.

In referring to that painful reality, our goal is not
to engage in unproductive arguments; rather, it is to
describe the situation as it is and to prompt us to work
seriously towards a ceasefire that will end the armed
conflict that is causing death and destruction in Gaza
as we speak. There is no way out of this crisis but
through a clear and explicit resolution calling for an
immediate ceasefire and the lifting of the siege.

The members of the League of Arab States have
today presented the Security Council with the
resolution adopted by the extraordinary meeting of the
League's foreign ministers held in Cairo on
31 December 2008. That document formulates a vision
for a resolution to the crisis on the basis of an
immediate halt to all military action in Gaza, the lifting
of the siege, the opening of the crossing points and an
end to the policy of collective punishment imposed on
Palestinians that led to this serious deterioration. The
Arab proposal aims both at putting an end to the
military operation and at addressing the causes that led
to it. Lifting the siege, calming the situation and
establishing the necessary monitoring mechanism will
ensure a lasting solution. That will serve to meet
Israel's security concerns and pave the way for a
resumption of the peace process and the revitalization
of negotiations to end the occupation and establish an
independent, viable Palestinian State. That is the only
way to ensure the security of Israel and Palestine, as
well as the security and stability of the region.

Arab countries are committed to international
law, the principles of international legitimacy and the
resolutions of the Security Council. Unfortunately, we
are confronted by delays, procrastination and attempts
to undermine the peace efforts of Arab countries.
Either the Security Council must address our legitimate
issues responsibly and seriously on the basis of those
principles or we shall be forced to turn our backs and
consider other options.
Palestinians are dying at this very moment.
Children are being orphaned. Parents are losing loved
ones for no reason save for the fact of where they find
themselves. Is the Council going to allow that to
continue for even another hour?

