I would like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his informative, yet disturbing briefing on the situation in Palestine, particularly with regard to continuing settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. South Africa's position on Palestine is well known so I will not repeat it here today, but will focus my remarks on the reason we have all met today; the continuing illegal settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. Settlements/annexation South Africa is particularly concerned at the continuous settlement and annexation rhetoric by the Israeli government. These negative gestures and Israel's pronouncements about the annexation of a large part of the West Bank and Jordan Valley do nothing to move the peace process forward but only moves positions and people further apart My delegation, must once again, reiterate that the continued expansion of settlements violates international law, contravenes decisions of this Council and undermines the prospects for peace. South Africa is particularly concerned at the announcement for plans for the construction of 3,500 units in the El area (between the Ma'ale Adumim colony and Jerusalem), which would severely compromise the possibility of a two-State solution. These announcements and all settlement must stop. We call on all Council members and States Members of the United Nations to fully implement all provisions of resolution 2334 (2016), in line with their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and decisions of the Security Council. This includes written reports from the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We look forward to receiving a written report, on which the Special Coordinator based his briefing today in keeping with recent Council practice. All resolutions adopted by the Council, be they unanimous or not, must be uniformly implemented. We cannot pick and choose which Security Council resolutions should be implemented. In a similar vein, overt violations of Council resolutions, as is the case with the continued settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, usually evoke stricter measures on the party responsible for the infringement. South Africa continues to be concerned at the continued human rights violations in the Occupied Territory, and emphasize that such violations only contribute to the festering hatred between Palestine and Israel, causing further divisions. The killing and injuring of Palestinians, who are protesting illegal Israeli action must be condemned. We are appalled at the death once again ofa Palestinian youth earlier this month, whose only crime was to demonstrate against the unjust occupation. COVID-19 During this time of the COVID-19 pandemic and with many nations under lock down, self-isolation or quarantine, we must pay particular attention to how this health crises affects the Palestine people. During this time, when millions of people are being told to stay at home, some Palestinians are having their homes demolished. This is unacceptable and must be condemned.We have seen reports of the first positive cases of COVID-19 in Gaza. In an area where the health-care system is poor, there are restrictions on the movement of goods, including medical supplies and equipment and people living in close proximity to each other, it can only be anticipated that the number of positive cases may increase. We call on the relevant parties to ensure that the necessary equipment to battle and contain this pandemic is made available to all those who require it. The international donor community should try its best to also assist the Palestinians in dealing with the pandemic. In this regard, we call on the Government of Israel to fulfil its responsibilities, as the occupying power to lift the blockades instituted against the movement of goods and persons into Gaza. Additionally, South Africa calls on Member States and the international community to support the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to provide humanitarian assistance to Palestinian refugees, especially in these uncertain times. We also would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Lazzarini on his appointment as_ the Commissioner-General of UNRWA and wish him well in leading the organization.
