Mr. Serry: The situation between the Palestinians
and Israel remains uncertain and difficult. The events
of the past month demonstrate a dangerous combination
of no political progress, instability and violence on the
ground, especially in Gaza, and an increasingly
precarious situation for the Palestinian Authority (PA).

The Quartet principals met for consultations on
12 March here in New York to assess developments and
to reiterate their commitment to the objectives of their
23 September statement (SG/2178). They welcomed the
important effort led by Jordan to facilitate the resumption
of direct talks between Israelis and Palestinians with a
view to shaping the path to a negotiated agreement
before the end of the year. I met fellow Quartet envoys
in Brussels on 21 March to prepare for the upcoming
meeting of the Quartet principals, now scheduled for
11 April in Washington, DC.

The unfortunate reality is that the parties have not
yet found sufficient common ground to resume direct
negotiations, and the prospects remain slim. The
Jordanian track has been valuable, and we continue to
encourage exploratory talks under Jordanian auspices
to identify ways to move the process forward. We also
continue to urge both sides to avoid any provocations
that would be detrimental to the prospects for peace.

In parallel, we must continue to make progress on
the ground for the Palestinians. The very viability of
the Palestinian Authority is at stake, and ensuring its
sustainability remains a fundamental priority. The
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
2
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC) on 21 March in Brussels reconfirmed the
institutional readiness of the Palestinian Authority to
assume the functions required of a future State.

However, the primary concern of all AHLC
members was the dire financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority. We regret that technical
agreements to strengthen revenue collection by Israel
on behalf of the PA, which provides approximately
70 per cent of the net PA revenue, and to minimize
revenue leakage during transfer have not been
finalized. The AHLC members called on donors to
meet the $1 billion-financing requirement of the
Palestinian Authority for 2012. I therefore reiterate the
call on donors to meet their commitments and front-
load contributions. Israel must also play its full role to
help alleviate the fiscal situation of the PA.

1 must underscore that Palestinian State-building
efforts face increased risks. Little progress was
achieved in the past several months, while financial
and political pressure on the Palestinian Authority
increased. The prolonged absence of a credible
political horizon is beginning to undermine the
viability of the Palestinian State-building effort. In
support of the PA, the AHLC identified a range of
immediate measures to be taken on the ground. The
AHLC called on Israel to take further steps to improve
the movement of people and goods, trade and exports
in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as development in
Area C and East Jerusalem.

Area C remains critical to the viability of a future
Palestinian State. In the coming months, we must
ensure a broadening of community-driven planning in
Area C and the provision of basic services, including
with regard to education and health. Recent progress in
obtaining permits for key infrastructure in Area C is
welcome. The United Nations is already engaged on
those issues, at both the policy and programming
levels. Moreover, due consideration should be given to
the transfer of land to the Palestinian Authority in Area
C, in particular in areas surrounding major urban
centres, so as to facilitate more suitable urban
development and relieve the acute pressure on the land
and housing market.

In the absence of progress, there have been a
number of potentially worrying developments in the
West Bank and Gaza. In the West Bank, a comparison
between January and February revealed that, while the
12-27644
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) search operations in areas
under the full control of the Palestinian Authority
remained at the same level, the number of Palestinians
injured during those operations more than tripled, from
46 to 138. Stone-throwing incidents by Palestinians
increased significantly, along with the use of Molotov
cocktails. Demonstrations and riots in the West Bank
almost doubled. Most demonstrations protested Israeli
actions, but some protested the Palestinian Authority's
perceived failure to achieve reconciliation with Hamas.

Of the more than 100 Palestinians who were
injured by the IDF during the reporting period, at least
90 were injured during demonstrations that resulted in
clashes with the IDF. That included one Palestinian
man critically injured on 5 March at a checkpoint near
Ramallah when a tear gas canister hit his head directly.
Large demonstrations are expected during the
commemoration of the events of 30 March 1976 -
referred to as Land Day by Palestinians - which will
be held in various countries of the region on 30 March.
In Lebanon, where Palestinian factions are also
planning to participate in commemorative events,
Lebanese authorities have declared that they are taking
measures to avoid violence and the occurrence of
incidents close to the Blue Line. The United Nations is
monitoring the situation. Allow me to stress that the
right of peaceful protest must be upheld and that
protests must be kept strictly non-violent.

Citing security, the IDF conducted 273 operations
into the West Bank. Early this morning, three
Palestinians and one Israeli soldier were wounded
during an Israeli incursion near Ramallah. On 8 March,
a young Palestinian was shot dead, and two were
injured, by Israeli security forces during a raid near
Hebron, after a Palestinian stabbed and slightly injured
an Israeli soldier. On 15 March, a l9-year-old female
Israeli soldier was stabbed and moderately injured
while riding the Jerusalem light rail near the settlement
of Pisgat Ze'ev; one Palestinian suspect was
apprehended. On 6 March, two Palestinian children
were killed, and three more were injured, when a piece
of unexploded military ordnance detonated near the
West Bank city of Hebron.

On 29 February, the Israeli Ministry of
Communications and security forces confiscated
broadcasting equipment from two Palestinian
television stations in Area A of Ramallah after an
unresolved dispute on the use of radio frequencies.
Both channels have broadcast since 1996 and are
12-27644

registered with the International Telecommunication
Union. They have partially resumed transmission
through support from other Palestinian channels.

The situation of the approximately 4,400
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention centres, 300
of whom are under administrative detention, remains
an important focus of attention, in particular as some
detainees have continued to protest their situation
through hunger strikes. A high-profile case is that of
Hana Shalabi, a female Palestinian prisoner affiliated
with Islamic Jihad who started her hunger strike on
16 February in protest of alleged ill-treatment under
administrative detention. Her condition has now
reached a life-threatening stage. Meanwhile, on
25 March, an Israeli court rejected her appeal. I call for
a reasonable resolution to this case on the basis of our
reiterated view that the use of administrative detention
must be exceptional. Those detained must be charged
and face trial with judicial guarantees, or released
without delay.

Settlement activity continued during the reporting
period. On 25 March, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled
that the illegal settlement outpost Migron, located on
private Palestinian land, must be evacuated by the end
of July, thus extending its own deadline for evacuation
by four months and striking down an agreement
reportedly reached between the Government and
settlers to delay the evacuation by three years.
Incidents of settler violence against Palestinians and
their property resulted in 13 Palestinians injured,
including one child. Demolition of Palestinian property
left 158 people, including 38 children, homeless in
East Jerusalem and Area C.

On 22 March, among other decisions, the Human
Rights Council decided to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to examine the impact of Israeli settlements on
Palestinian human rights. Israel is highly critical of the
Council's action.

On a positive note, I am pleased to inform the
Council about the substantive progress achieved in the
implementation of the mandate entrusted by the
General Assembly to the United Nations Register of
Damage caused by the Construction of the Wall in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around
East Jerusalem. It has collected more than 26,000
claims for material damage caused by the construction
of the barrier, which deviates from the Green Line. It
has finished its work in four out of nine affected
3
governorates and has started its work in Salfit. That
represents half of the estimated work. In that
connection, in the light of the most recent visit to the
occupied Palestinian territory by the Executive
Director, we continue to urge that sustained donor
support be provided to the work of the Register.

In Gaza, the most extensive escalation of violence
since Operation Cast Lead took place from 9 to
13 March. The Quartet principals expressed concern
and called for calm. The initial Israeli strike against the
leader of the Popular Resistance Committees, who was
allegedly involved in advanced planning for an attack
against Israeli targets, resulted in a four-day exchange
that resulted in 24 Palestinians being killed, including
five civilians, and 71 Palestinians injured, including 55
civilians. A total of 11 Israeli civilians were injured,
including one in critical condition. The Israeli Iron
Dome anti-missile system was effective in intercepting
military Grad missiles fired toward urban centres.
Relative quiet was restored on 13 March through
Egyptian mediation; President Abbas was also active in
that regard. The calm remains tenuous and fragile, and
we cannot stress enough the paramount importance of
all efforts to maintain it.

Overall during the reporting period, a total of 211
rockets, including 80 Grad rockets, and 36 mortar
shells were fired from Gaza into Israel, while the IDF
conducted one incursion and 42 airstrikes into Gaza,
resulting in four Palestinian civilians killed and 54
injured, while 20 Palestinian militants were killed and
15 injured. We have consistently condemned
indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel.
Such attacks are unacceptable and must stop. We also
urge Israel to show maximum restraint. All sides must
respect their obligations to protect civilians, who often
pay the price of violence.

I am pleased to note Israel's approval of key
United Nations projects in Gaza. The most recent
approvals include two housing projects, consisting of
just under 1,000 units, 10 schools, a road and four
water infrastructure-related projects - all to be
implemented by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. That
brings the total value of approved United Nations
works in the Gaza strip to more than $350 million. We
will continue to work to address the manifold needs of
the population of Gaza.
Our goal remains the lifting of the closure regime
within the framework of resolution 1860 (2009). In that
regard, the recent transfer of Gaza-produced date bars
to the West Bank is a welcome step. An extension of
the fishing limit will help to restore livelihood
opportunities to some 3,000 families. We continue to
call for the unrestricted import through legal crossings
of aggregate, iron bar and cement, which will also
benefit expanded construction of international
community projects. In that effort, calm in Gaza and
southern Israel is an indispensable condition to enable
the proper environment for development.

Gaza also faces a fuel shortage that is beginning
to extend beyond the rationing of electricity for
households, which has been a feature over the past
several years, to a situation where day-to-day life for
Gazans is ever more dire. Hospitals and ambulance
services are finding it increasingly difficult to function,
and already water and sanitation systems are failing.
All sides must take measures to resolve the supply
problems through legitimate means in both the short
and long term as soon as possible, and the de facto
authorities in Gaza should assume their share of the
responsibility in this regard.

There have been no major developments related
to Palestinian reconciliation. We continue to support
reconciliation efforts within the framework of the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the positions of the Quartet and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Turning to Lebanon, the Council heard a briefing
last week on the situation from the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Mr. Derek Plumbly.
As was highlighted in that briefing, the situation along
Lebanon's borders with Syria remains of concern.
Around 900 refugees, fleeing fighting in the Syrian
town of Al-Qusayr, arrived in Lebanon's Bekaa valley
on 3 and 4 March. That was the largest influx of Syrian
refugees since the crisis started over a year ago. The
number of refugees in the Bekaa valley has reached
approximately 5,000, while another 8,100 have
registered with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Government in
northern Lebanon.

Over the past week, tensions have increased in
the Palestinian refugee camp of Ein el Hilweh
following the escape to the camp of the alleged leader
of a militant group that is accused by the Lebanese
Armed Forces of plotting attacks against it. The
Lebanese Armed Forces have increased control
measures around the camp and requested Palestinian
factions to hand over the alleged leader.

The overall situation in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon area of operations has remained
generally quiet. Air violations by the Israel Defense
Forces have continued on an almost daily basis.

On 21 March, the Lebanese Cabinet adopted a
decree on the establishment of a petroleum authority to
manage the exploration and exploitation of Lebanon's
potential hydrocarbon resources.

Let me now briefly say a few words on Syria,
which remains the most pressing issue the United
Nations has to address in the region. Violence on the
ground has continued unabated, resulting in scores of
people killed and injured. Credible estimates put the
total death toll since the beginning of the uprising one
year ago at more than 9,000. It is urgent to stop the
fighting and prevent a further violent escalation of the
conflict.

The Joint Special Envoy, who has recently
briefed the Council, has continued his intensive
diplomatic engagement to bring about a cessation of
the violence and promote a peaceful political solution.
He sent a mission to Damascus last week to pursue
discussions on the six-point proposal he made to
President Al-Assad on 11 March. The presidential
statement (S/PRST/2012/6) adopted by the Council last
week endorsed the six points and was an important
signal, which the Secretary-General strongly welcomed.

We were informed this morning that the Syrian
Government has now written to the Joint Special
Envoy, Kofi Annan, accepting his six-point plan.
Mr. Annan has written to President Al-Assad urging the
Syrian Government to put its commitments into
immediate effect. Mr. Annan has stressed that
implementation will be key, not only for the Syrian
people, who are caught in the middle of this tragedy,
but also for the region and the international community
as a whole. The support of all key regional and
international actors is critical to help secure the
effective implementation of the plan at all levels and
create the conditions for a genuine political process
that will meet the democratic aspirations of the Syrian
people.
The Joint Envoy visited Moscow, where he met
with Russian President Medvedev and Foreign

Minister Lavrov on Sunday. He is now in Beijing for
consultations with the Chinese authorities. The
Secretary-General is going to the League of Arab
States summit in Baghdad with Deputy Joint Special
Envoy Nasser Al-Kidwa, who will also participate in
the Friends of Syria meeting in Istanbul on 1 April.

Immediate steps are now needed on the part of
the Syrian Government to act on its commitments and
demonstrate to the Syrian people that it is ready for a
cessation of violence and a political process, issues on
which the Joint Special Envoy will also engage the
opposition.

It is vital to ensure humanitarian access and that
assistance reaches those in need. The Syrian authorities
invited United Nations agencies and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation to participate in a Government-
led humanitarian assessment from 18 to 26 March,
which visited a number of governorates. That
Government-led assessment falls short of the United
Nations request for unimpeded access for humanitarian
organizations. However, the participation of the United
Nations at a technical level has allowed for the
gathering of critical information, which confirms that
there is a significant need for medical and food
assistance, as well as for education and non-food items.
We are ready to provide emergency aid immediately,
and the Humanitarian Coordinator is in discussions
with the Syrian authorities to ensure prompt and
sustained delivery.

Turning back to the Middle East peace process,
let me conclude by emphasizing the increased risks of
a continued political vacuum. As I said to the AHLC
last week, it will become increasingly difficult to
sustain the achievements of Palestinian State-building
without a political horizon, and the absence of progress
can easily be filled by negative trends that make each
day more uncertain.

It is this uncertain situation that the Quartet will
have to address at its meeting on 11 April in
Washington. It is imperative that the Quartet assume its
responsibilities in directing collective efforts towards
overcoming gaps in trust and substance, so that we do
not lose sight of the ultimate and agreed goal of a two-
State solution.

