The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, Council members will hear detailed
briefings by the representatives of Peru and the United
Kingdom in their capacity as co-leads of the Security
Council mission to Colombia on from 11 to 14 July.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Peru.

The Security Council, led by Peru and the United
Kingdom, visited Colombia from 11 to 14 July at the
invitation of the Colombian Government. The goal of
the visit was to express the full commitment of the
Council to the peace process and its support for the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace;
observe and support the efforts of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, in accordance with
its mandate; and better understand the expectations and
concerns of the parties and other stakeholders.

In keeping with the practical mindset that structured
the visit, I will report on the meetings held in Bogota
during the first day of work on Friday, 12 July, while
Ambassador Allen will discuss the visit on the ground
in the department of Cauca on Saturday, 13 July.

In Bogota, we had a broad agenda that included
meetings with various interlocutors, whom we thank for
their exceptional frankness and eagerness to talk with us.
At breakfast with President Ivan Duque Marquez and a
meeting with several Government Ministers, including
Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia, who is present
here today, the highest-level authorities of Colombia
stressed their commitment to the implementation of the
peace agreement and the role of the United Nations to
that end, the importance of the reincorporation process,
concerns about and measures intended to respond to
threats to and the killings of social leaders, and the
need for rural development. At the same time, the scope
and the difficulties of these tasks were explained. At
the end of breakfast, the President gave the Security
Council a letter requesting the extension of the mandate
of the Verification Mission.

At a meeting with the members of the congressional
peace commission, the majority of representatives
underscored the historic importance of the peace
agreement and the Council's support. While stressing
the progress made in the implementation of the
agreement, they also emphasized such difficulties as
political polarization, the need for comprehensive rural
reform and for making progress in crop substitution, the
lack of State presence in rural areas, and the killings of
social leaders, which they blamed on drug trafficking
and paramilitary groups.

At lunch with the country team, some representatives
explained the various tasks that they perform across
20 agencies and programmes of the United Nations
represented in Colombia, in particular in support of
the implementation of the peace agreement. In that
regard, they shared the progress made and challenges
faced with respect to rural development, guarantees
for reincorporation and security, the rights of victims
and reparations, the voluntary substitution of illicit
crops, the management of mixed migration flows and
the participation of children and young people in the
peace process.

At our meeting with the political party Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun, despite the
difficulties, senators and representatives reaffirmed
the full commitment of former combatants to the peace
agreement and reiterated the need for the support of
the Council. In particular, they questioned the lack
of concrete results with respect to reincorporation,
the deaths of social leaders and former combatants,
persistent political violence and criticism of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. In that regard, they pointed to
the need for a national political agreement to overcome
the divisions of the past.

At our meeting with civil society, which included
representatives of peacebuilding organizations, human
rights groups, ethnic groups, organizations for women
and the protection of children and young people, the
Church, the private sector and academia, the progress
made and challenges faced in implementing the
agreement were also highlighted. Participants cited the
need for greater results in the areas of comprehensive
rural reform, the substitution of illicit crops, political
participation, the dismantling of armed groups, the
suppression of fear, the prevention of murder and the
vulnerability of ethnic groups, women and children.
In that regard, they called for, among other measures,
the promotion of a national pact to facilitate the
participation of women and young people in political
processes, as well as for the convening of the National
Commission on Security Guarantees and the allocation
of the necessary resources to the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace.

During our meeting with the comprehensive system
of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition, the
representatives of the three institutions that make up
the system shared with the Council the sensitive issues
and difficulties they encounter in fulfilling its mandate,
while ensuring a profoundly inclusive and participatory
transition. It is a colossal task that involves addressing
the structural aspects of the conflict through the quest
for truth and justice. We trust that the Colombian people
are committed to that task.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Allen.

