Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too thank
Mr. Gambari for his comprehensive briefing on his
recent visit to Myanmar. His efforts on behalf of the
good offices of the Secretary-General bear witness to
the international community's commitment to, and
unwavering support for, peace and stability in
Myanmar. South Africa fully supported the Secretary-
General's decision to send his Special Envoy,
Mr. Gambari, to visit Myanmar for the second time in
three months. We also wish to express our thanks to the
Government of Myanmar for having allowed the
Special Envoy to visit the country in fulfilment of his
mandate.

South Africa welcomes recent developments in
Myanmar that saw talks between opposition leader
Aung San Suu Kyi and representatives of the
Government. We further note with satisfaction that, for
the first time in four years, Aung San Suu Kyi was able
to meet with her fellow Central Committee leaders of
the National League for Democracy. My delegation is
optimistic that those positive steps will have a
significant impact in bringing about much-needed
political progress in Myanmar. The lifting of the
curfew and the release of the detainees and even of
some of the political prisoners, as mentioned by
Professor Gambari, are proof to us that we are now in a
new situation of progress in Myanmar. My delegation
believes that only negotiations among all parties will
lead to a resolution of the country's challenges. We
wish to encourage all parties in Myanmar to remain
committed to finding a long-term and lasting solution
to the challenges facing their country.

South Africa welcomes the decision by the
Government of Myanmar to allow Professor Paolo
Sergio Pinheiro, Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar, to also visit Myanmar. We
encourage the Government to continue to provide Mr.
Pinheiro with all the cooperation necessary for the
fulfilment of his mandate from the Human Rights
Council.

South Africa continues to support the efforts by
the international community, including the Secretary-
General's good offices and Special Envoy Gambari's
tireless efforts, to facilitate dialogue in Myanmar that
will bring about a resolution of the country's
challenges. We further commend the continuing role
played by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and its neighbouring countries in supporting
Mr. Gambari's efforts and in assisting all the parties in
Myanmar to resolve the challenges facing their
country. We note that the forthcoming ASEAN
Summit, to be held on 20 November 2007, will discuss
the situation in Myanmar as part of its agenda. In that
regard, South Africa stands ready to support the efforts
of that regional body.

In conclusion, we urge the entire international
community, in particular the Security Council, to rally
behind the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
Mr. Gambari, as well as Myanmar's neighbours, as
they continue in their endeavours aimed at bringing
about lasting peace in Myanmar.

