Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this open debate on the human cost of
the illicit transfer, destablilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons. The issue is
of the utmost importance in the current context and
underscores how the challenges to peace and security
of nations are closely linked to illicit arms trafficking. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the West Africa Action Network on Small Arms for
their briefings and reports.

For many years, Colombia has suffered the
terrible impact that the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons has not only on the life and security
of individuals but on a country's stability and
development prospects. Colombia is aware that illicit
arms trafficking is a phenomenon that does not respect
borders and that is related to the world drug problem,
transnational organized crime, terrorism and violations
of human rights. Accordingly, the phenomenon should
be approached from a broad, multilateral and holistic
perspective. That is why Colombia has actively
participated in all efforts to ensure that this issue is
addressed in multilateral forums. For example, in the
late 1980s we began to request, initially with a small
group of countries, that the issue of illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons be included on the
agenda of the General Assembly. The most important
development of that process was the approval of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects in July 2001. The Programme of
Action includes a vigorous process of review that has
made it possible to periodically evaluate and review its
implementation and propose the measures necessary to
ensure its continued relevance.

At the level of our hemisphere, we participated
in the negotiation of the Inter-American Convention
against the Manufacturing of and Illicit Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related
Materials, adopted in December 1997, and, until
recently, the only binding instrument on this issue.
Colombia also raised the issue of illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons in the Security Council.
During our presidency in August 2001, an open debate
(see S/PV.4362) was held during which a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2001/21) was approved. 1 would like
to highlight several elements of that statement.

First, the destabilizing accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, in addition to increasing the intensity and
duration of armed conflicts and thwarting efforts to
prevent armed conflict, poses a major obstacle to the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

Secondly, there is a need for effective national
regulations and controls concerning small arms and
light weapons, that is, arms-exporting countries
should exercise the highest degree of responsibility
with regard to transactions involving small arms and
light weapons. All countries have the responsibility
to prevent the illegal diversion and re-export of such
weapons so that the spread of legal weapons to illegal
markets is contained.

Thirdly, the Council welcomed the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

By the same token, Colombia participated in the
most recent developments in this field - the Arms
Trade Treaty - and argued that small arms and light
weapons should be included in the Treaty and that
measures to prevent their diversion be defined. On
24 September 2013, the President of the Republic
signed the Arms Trade Treaty, having determined that
the Treaty is a useful and necessary tool to prevent
crimes such as the diversion and illicit trade in arms by
such unauthorized persons as terrorist groups, criminal
gangs and criminal organizations. At this time, my
country is in the process of ratifying the Treaty.

Also at the domestic level, my country, which
acknowledges the nefarious consequences of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
destabilizing impact of their use by unauthorized
actors, included in its Constitution article 223, which
states

"only the Government can introduce and
manufacture weapons, munitions and explosives.
No person shall possess or carry them without
permission from the competent authority."

Since 2002, together with South Africa and Japan,
we have presented every year a draft resolution on
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects, which underscores, in addition to
other elements, the need for States to intensify their
cooperation, build national capacities related to the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
and which urges all countries to fully implement the
Programme of Action.

In conclusion, allow me to mention that, while the
international community has over the past few decades
developed the instruments necessary to effectively
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, the economic benefits that derive from that
trade and the lack of political will to implement those
instruments have allowed the trade to remain a problem
of alarming magnitude, as many of the previous
speakers have noted. That is why we believe it is time
to act with a greater sense of humanity and to truly
commit to fulfilling our obligations, legal, political and
moral, and to move towards a world in which arms are
only used by the proper authorities to guarantee peace,
security and the safety of their citizens.

