Ms. Beerli: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
to address the Security Council on the subject of the
protection of civilians, a subject that the Council has
put at the centre of many of its resolutions, including on
Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Iraq, the Central African
Republic and the Lake Chad region.

In 2015, ICRC operations reached more than
40 million people, including more civilians than ever
before in its history. Regrettably, we see the underlying
trend of increasing humanitarian needs as likely to
continue over the next year.

International humanitarian law on the protection of
civilians in international and non-international armed
conflict is clearly established and binding on all parties
to armed conflict, State and non-State alike. The ICRC
continues to believe that the current legal framework
for the protection of civilians remains relevant and that
the main challenge in protecting civilians centres on
greater compliance with international humanitarian
law by all parties to armed conflicts.

For the ICRC, working on the ground with the
victims of armed conflict, it is obvious that political
action ultimately determines the fate of civilian
populations. If there no political solutions to armed
conflict can be reached, then many millions of people
will continue to endure the personal tragedy and
humanitarian consequences of armed conflict for years,
decades or even lifetimes.

This year, we will mark the fifth anniversary of
the Syrian crisis. Syria has in many ways become an
emblematic conflict, with immense suffering on the
part of the civilian population. In terms of violations
of the law, that conflict is emblematic of a restrictive
interpretation of humanitarian space, of the illegal use
of weapons and of the use of illegal weapons, all of
which have led to dramatic displacements of people,
in turn putting pressure on neighbouring States' basic
services and their social fabric.

The link between the suffering and the lack of
respect for international humanitarian law could not
be clearer, when you talk to the severely malnourished
people of Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya, as my colleagues
have done over the past weeks. Women, men and
children have died, and unless full compliance with
international humanitarian law is assured, many
more are at risk of dying. Today, the overwhelming
humanitarian needs necessitate that the sieges be lifted
immediately. The Security Council has the possibility
to support and practice confidential engagement for the
respect of the law, in Syria and elsewhere. On behalf of
the civilians that the ICRC serves in armed conflicts
around the world, I urge the Council to do so.

All the foregoing suggests that much more needs to
be done to resolve armed conflicts. In that regard, the
emphasis in last year's High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations on the primacy
of politics and the need for political solutions to be in
the driver's seat of United Nations efforts is important
and timely. The ICRC welcomes the Panel's recognition
that the protection of civilians is a core obligation of
the United Nations. We also recognize that the single
greatest contribution to ending the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict is always the effective prevention and
resolution of armed conflict.

With that in mind, the ICRC urges the Council
to find consensus wherever it can and to build the
necessary political strategies that will prevent and end
armed conflicts. Where there is no end to an armed
conflict and when international humanitarian law
applies, compliance with international humanitarian
law is critical to ensuring the protection of civilians.

The conduct of hostilities - the way armed
conflicts are fought - is the key determinant of
civilian suffering. The misuse of weapons, direct
attacks against civilians and civilian populations and
indiscriminate attacks, starvation and displacement
that become part of a military strategy and attacks
against health-care facilities all too often combine to
create civilian suffering that involves serious violations
of international humanitarian law.

In the ICRC's experience, much widespread harm
and suffering caused by armed conflict is wrongly
seen as an inevitable consequence of war when in
fact it is frequently a violation of law. Far too much
civilian suffering in these last years has resulted from
a failure of the parties to a conflict to take into account
the protection of civilians in the conduct of military
operations and to strike the appropriate balance between
military necessity and humanitarian imperatives as
required by international humanitarian law.

Yet violations of international humanitarian law
occur daily: explosive weapons are used indiscriminately
in populated areas; civilian populations and civilian
objects are deliberately targeted; civilian communities
are forcibly displaced, trapped in lengthy sieges and
deprived of the means of survival; women and men, girls
and boys are regularly the victims of rape and sexual
violence; schools are attacked or used for military
purposes, leading to their loss of protection against
attack; detainees are summarily executed, tortured,
kept in inhumane conditions and denied due process
of law. Such violations of international humanitarian
law are well known to members of the Council and are
often referred to explicitly in the Council's resolutions
with an evident determination to end them.

The use of explosive weapons in populated areas
is one example that raises serious concern in terms of
compliance, especially in urban environments. These
weapons are prone to indiscriminate effects, with
often devastating consequences for civilians. Many
civilians are killed or injured by such weapons. Critical
infrastructure on which civilians depend for their
livelihoods and survival, such as power stations, water
treatment plants and hospitals, can be continuously and
cumulatively damaged so that they cease to be able to
provide essential services to meet people's basic needs.
Precisely for those reasons, the ICRC has urged that
the use of explosive weapons with a wide impact area
should be avoided in densely populated areas.

To address this humanitarian issue, States should
make known their policies on the use of such weapons
and explain how their use of explosive weapons
in populated areas complies with international
humanitarian law. We also ask that the upcoming
third United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development, which will address
the development of a new urban agenda, take account of
the risks faced by many millions of people threatened
by armed conflict and other situations of violence in
today's densely populated and fast-growing cities.

The second main aspect ofcompliance that the ICRC
would like to emphasize is the necessity for States and
non-State armed groups to comply with their obligation
to meet the basic needs of the population under their
control and, if unable to do so, to allow and facilitate
rapid and unimpeded passage of relief for civilians in
need, subject to their right of control. If these basic
needs are not met, parties to armed conflict shall
positively respond to offers ofservice made by impartial
humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC and shall
authorize their humanitarian activities, which include
protection and assistance. Humanitarian activities
are all those aimed at preserving life and security or
seeking to restore the mental and physical well-being of
victims of armed conflict. In this process, a concern to
protect the dignity ofa person is fundamental.

Questions of humanitarian access necessary to
carry out protection and assistance activities is an
aspect of international humanitarian law for which the
Council has continued to express significant concern
in 2015. These questions will be particularly relevant
in 2016 as States prepare to make new commitments on
humanitarian action at the World Humanitarian Summit
in Istanbul in May. At the Summit, the ICRC very much
wants to see a significant and practical recommitment
by States to their obligations to protect and assist the
civilian population in armed conflicts. Clear recognition
of the complementary albeit essential and lawful role
that impartial humanitarian organizations - local and
international - can play in meeting this humanitarian
objective also needs to emerge from the Summit.

Practical recommitments to the rules of international
humanitarian law on access, protection and assistance
will be particularly important in 2016 because of the
unprecedented number of internally displaced people,
refugees and vulnerable migrants that are fleeing and
moving because of the humanitarian consequences
of armed conflict. The ICRC welcomes the United
Nations summit on managing large-scale movements of
migrants and refugees due to take place in September
this year, and we are committed to playing a significant
role in its process and debate. At the same time, we ask
that a sharp focus of the Council's attention remain on
the millions of internally displaced persons affected by
armed conflict, many of whom die as a result of armed
conflict.

The need to respect and ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law is urgent. States and
non-State armed groups must comply with these laws,
and close the existing implementation gap. The mere
existence of obligations and prohibitions is not sufficient
to prevent or put a stop to suffering or to deter future
violations. The rules of international humanitarian law
must be known, understood and implemented by the
parties to an armed conflict if its purposes are to be
fulfilled. This is a multifaceted process which requires
that appropriate action be taken by actors at the national,
regional, and international levels.

I thank you, Mr. President, for giving the ICRC this
opportunity to speak at this important debate. I hope
members have heard us encourage the Council's efforts
to protect civilians and urge all States to find whatever
consensus is possible to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts as the single best way to protect civilians.
Meanwhile, as armed conflicts go on, respecting the
law is the single most impactful choice States and
non-State groups can make to avoid civilian suffering.

