Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. We also
congratulate your predecessor, the Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Poland, who presided over
Council matters last month.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) contained in document S/ 1997/304 of 14 April 1997.
Most significantly, we rejoice with the international
community at the most wonderful news that has come from
Angola, that beautiful country full of people whose
resilience amid pain and suffering has touched many of our
hearts.

We are informed that the ceremony that ushered in the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation on ll
April 1997 was solemn and moving. Many of our leaders
were present at the ceremony, including Malawi's own
President. They witnessed the symbolic renewal by the
Angolan Government and UNITA of a covenant not to
allow, yet again, the people of Angola to languish in misery
and despair. The international community now expects the
two sides to keep their solemn promises and to take
greater strides in consolidating peace, tranquillity and
reconciliation throughout the whole of Angola, and in that
way, also throughout our continent of Africa.

There is no doubt that the developments that have
taken place in that part of our region in the past two
weeks have been most encouraging and augur well for the
future of Angola and the region as a whole. We urge both
sides to continue by being magnanimous and by taking
the necessary vital steps in the implementation of the
remaining and outstanding aspects of the Lusaka Protocol.

As the Secretary-General has rightly observed, much
remains to be done. Fortunately, the essential components
are attainable. All that is required is the necessary will,
particularly on the part of UNITA. It is imperative that all
the military and police aspects of the process be
addressed resolutely. We enjoin the Joint Commission to
continue playing the positive role it has assumed,
especially on the question of the incorporation of UN ITA
soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and the Angolan
National Police. The other aspects of the question
commented upon in paragraph 19 of the
Secretary-General's report also require urgent attention.
But perhaps most important is a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, which would
definitely add fresh impetus towards a firm and final
solution, building confidence, trust and honourable
commitment to the building of a new nation on our
continent. My delegation strongly supports the holding of
such a meeting as soon as possible.

The situation in Angola has now reached its most
critical and delicate stage. It is important that we should
all harness our efforts to ensure that nothing goes wrong
again. The international community must continue to play
an important part in ensuring that Angola returns to full
normalcy. We therefore support the proposal of the
Secretary-General contained in paragraph 20 of his report.
We also support his previous calls for financial and other
assistance to Angola. We specifically invite the
international community to fulfil the pledges made at the
1995 Brussels Round Table Conference.

We wish to conclude by once again paying tribute to
the Secretary-General, to Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, his
Special Representative, to UNAVEM. III personnel and to
all those who have lost their lives in this sad and tragic
story, the brave that have worked tirelessly in the search
for peace in Angola. The events of the last two weeks

 

show what dedication and perseverance can do to fulfil our
prayers for love and peace in Angola. It is our prayer that
the renewal of the mandate of UNAVEM. III and its
eventual transition will finally help to consolidate the gains
already made.

As an African, from an African country and from the
southern region of Africa, I believe that the rebirth of
Angola will strengthen the new growth and the new hope
that our countries - which have for a large part of this
century suffered through the problems of building up new
democracies - are slowly beginning to show for
democracy and human rights observers.

