Mr. Fall: Mandatory measures imposed under
Article 41 in Chapter VII of the Charter are today,
more than ever, an important tool available to the
Security Council in seeking to maintain or restore
international peace and security. However, concerns
have been expressed over the negative effects that
comprehensive sanctions regimes can have on civilian
populations and on neighbouring and other affected
States. Difficulties in implementing Article 50 of the
Charter have also reinforced the need to consider
possible improvement of the sanctions instrument. In
his reports to the General Assembly on the work of the
Organization and in his report on Africa, the Secretary-
General has underlined the need for a mechanism that
renders sanctions a less blunt and a more effective
instrument. Efforts towards developing the concept of
smart sanctions, which seek to pressure regimes rather
than peoples and thus reduce humanitarian costs, are
therefore to be welcomed. Sanctions need continued
refining to strengthen their effectiveness and to ease
any possible negative impact, thus consolidating
support by the international community.
Member States, intergovernmental and non-
governmental organizations and academic experts, with
substantive support from the Secretariat, have been
making efforts to contribute to attaining that objective.
It should be noted that the recent sanctions measures
imposed by the Security Council have been targeted.

The series of Interlaken expert seminars hosted
by Switzerland in 1998 and 1999, with substantive
support from the Secretariat, on targeting Security
Council financial sanctions explored the basis for
cooperation among Member States, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and experts in the
field, as well as the design and application of targeted
Security Council financial sanctions against decision-
making elites. After having heard what the
representative of Switzerland has just said, it is not
necessary to come back to the outcome of the
Interlaken expert seminar, except to note that the
monitoring mechanism concerning the sanctions
against UNITA is currently attempting to put some of
the Interlaken recommendations into practice by
tracing the financial transactions of UNITA. I am also
hopeful that the knowledge gained at Interlaken can be
successfully tapped and put to use within the context of
the recently established Security Council Committee on
Counter-Terrorism.

The Bonn-Berlin process, which took place from
1999 to 2000, reviewed the successes and shortcomings
of arms embargoes and travel bans. Here also, I will
shorten my statement, after what the representative of
Germany has just said about the results of the Bonn-
Berlin process. Many of the suggestions made there
and discussed in the Security Council Working Group
on General Issues on Sanctions have subsequently
contributed to the improvement of sanctions
resolutions.

Work, such as that which took place in Interlaken
and Berlin, should continue on smart sanctions, and I
would particularly like to welcome the fact that
Sweden will be taking on this role of building on the
previous work, this time in the context of expert
seminars on, among other things, the monitoring and
implementation of Security Council sanctions. Here
also, I do not need to elaborate further after what the
representative of Sweden had to say.

If sanctions are to continue to be a useful tool at
the Security Council's disposal in the maintenance of
international peace and security, a constructive
dialogue on their implementation and monitoring must
take place. Pragmatic solutions must be found to the
difficulties of monitoring sanctions. This task is the
primary responsibility of Member States, but many of
them lack the capacity to monitor their implementation
and require assistance in carrying out this
responsibility. Such assistance could be provided to
interested Member States by a duly augmented
sanctions secretariat and by competent regional
organizations. The Security Council can encourage
State compliance by continuing to devote greater
attention to mitigating the negative effects of sanctions
measures on civilian populations and third States.
Providing support and inducements for neighbouring
States could also greatly enhance the potential
effectiveness of sanctions.

The Security Council might also consider taking
steps to assist, upon request, Member States in
developing greater legal authority and administrative
capacity for implementing Council sanctions. Indeed,
many Member States do not have the necessary legal
and institutional capacity for implementing these
measures. To assist them, the United Nations could
develop examples of model legislation, as was done
during the Interlaken process, that could enable
interested Member States to make the necessary
adjustments in their domestic laws and regulations to
permit compliance with United Nations sanctions.

The Security Council has addressed this issue of
constructive dialogue and effective support through the
establishment of expert panels and mechanisms, and
some sanctions committees are looking into improving
cooperation with regional and international
organizations involved in the implementation of
Security Council sanctions. A number of Member
States advocate the establishment of a permanent
sanctions monitoring mechanism to ensure better
targeting and implementation of smart sanctions and to
bring information on non-cooperation and non-
compliance to the Council's attention. This framework
might allow more systematic follow-up for those who
violate sanctions or who do not cooperate with
sanctions committees, as well as provide a point of
contact between the Security Council and other
international and regional organizations dealing with
sanctions, such as the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) and Interpol.

What is needed most is better coordination
between all parties involved in the implementation of
sanctions regimes. Sanctions committees have recently
been establishing strong cooperation with international
and regional organizations such as ICAO and Interpol,
that are involved in the implementation of Council
sanctions regimes. The Chairmen of the Angola,
Liberia and Sierra Leone sanctions committees are also
discussing ways of increasing cooperation among their
committees with a View to holding a joint meeting.

The Security Council might also make more
frequent use of humanitarian assessments before the
imposition of sanctions, and continue to monitor the
humanitarian impact once sanctions have been
imposed, as has recently been the case with
Afghanistan and Liberia.

The use of mandatory sanctions is, as pointed out
by the Secretary-General, "a valuable tool available to
the Security Council, permitting the United Nations to
bring pressure to bear without recourse to the use of
force". The Secretary-General has also stressed the
importance of continuing "efforts to integrate smarter,
more targeted sanctions into an overall preventive
strategy". Targeted sanctions can have important
deterrent and preventative roles, and I urge members to
consider the use of sanctions in this context in the
future. Security Council sanctions can also be seen as a
calculated response by the international community to
emerging breaches of international law.

By way of conclusion, I feel it would be remiss of
me not to reiterate that an enhanced substantive support
to the various sanctions committees, and a more
effective administration of sanctions regimes by the
Secretariat, would require the commitment of adequate
resources. Within the modest resources available, the
Secretariat is doing its utmost to support the work of
the sanctions committees. Developing more effective
Security Council sanctions policies, however, will
require specialized expertise and analytical capacity of
staff supporting those Committees.

Such technical expertise and enhanced analytical
capacity would enable the Secretariat to manage a
credible monitoring system in cooperation with
Member States and regional organizations and to assess
the effectiveness of the sanctions measures. Technical
expertise is urgently needed in the Secretariat in such
areas as military technology, illegal arms trafficking,
illicit diamonds, customs regulations and
investigations, and international finance and asset
management. Greater availability of legal expertise is
also needed. In short, making sanctions smarter will
not be enough. We must also provide the necessary
means, and the will, for them to succeed.

