Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ukraine for having taken
the initiative of convening this important debate. I
should also like to thank the speakers thus far for their
insightful statements.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

The examples of terrorist attacks that have targeted
critical infrastructure, particularly transportation, are
regrettably numerous, as we were reminded with the
tragic attacks on the Brussels airport and Metro in
March 2016 and on the Istanbul airports in December
2015 and June 2016.

This debate gives the Council another opportunity
to send a strong and united message on the important
of international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, as we have already done in other meetings
on the financing of terrorism, on the fight against
propaganda and on international legal cooperation.
The fight against terrorist threats must be waged on all
fronts, with respect for international law and for States'
national authorities. It is especially necessary for each
State to have robust preventive and protective measures
in place in order to deter terrorists from carrying out
attacks against potentially vulnerable targets or, failing
that, in order to be able to react rapidly and effectively
when they do occur.

France considers protecting the people and ensuring
the continuity of the essential national functions to
be a strategic priority. In 2006, we set up a security
mechanism for vital activities in order to protect them
from malicious acts, such as terrorism. Today there are
more than 200 public and private entities classified as
organs of vital importance that are subject to special
rules and vigilance. The list of ths infrastructure is
kept confidential and includes administrations, media,
transportation entities and industrial actors in different
sectors. They ensure activities that are crucial to the
functioning and the survival of the nation.

In that context, France welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2341 (2017), the first to be so
closely concerned with this key topic. I draw the
Council's attention to two messages contained therein.

The first involves the prevention of and preparation
for potential threats. Early identification of the major
challenges and vulnerabilities in terms of protecting
critical infrastructure, and the elaboration of a targeted
strategy to be implemented in the event of an attack
are essential. Such approaches help not only to reduce
risks, but also to improve responsiveness.

The second message concerns the observation that
strengthening critical infrastructure protection cannot
be done in isolation. Cooperation, whether intra- or
inter-agency or among States, is essential in order to
ensure an adequate level of protection. That includes
exchanging information, knowledge and experience.
Owing to the very nature of the activities carried out by
critical infrastructure, close cooperation between the
public and private sectors is absolutely essential.

There are many challenges. But the scale and
particularly high level of the terrorist threat today
must prompt us to strengthen our efforts to protect
populations and to ensure the continuity of crucial
State services.

Allow me to conclude by thanking once again the
Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for this
very useful debate on a question that is both specialized
and technical, but also touches on the daily lives of
all our fellow citizens. Rest assured that France will
continue to play its full part in such efforts.

