Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like to join my colleagues in welcoming to the
Security Council the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland,
Mr. Gilmore, the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I should like to thank him for his extensive
briefing and to congratulate him on his assumption of
the chairmanship of the OSCE for 2012.

Morocco accords particular importance to the role
of regional and subregional organizations and to their
cooperation with the United Nations, pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, which has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The OSCE makes a significant contribution in
that respect through its efforts in the area of conflict
resolution and conflict-prevention mechanisms,
through the Conflict Prevention Centre. We welcome
the experience and expertise that the OSCE has gained.

The Security Council was informed in February
2011 about the priorities of the Lithuanian
chairmanship of the organization. We are very pleased
to note the progress that has been made in achieving
the objectives set out at that time. We believe that the
priorities set out by the Irish chairmanship are in line
with those objectives and build upon the achievements
made. In that respect, we welcome the identification of
priority areas such as the human dimension, arms
control, transnational threats and the promotion of
peace and security through good governance - areas
to which Morocco attaches particular importance.

In March 2011, the representative of Morocco
highlighted before the OSCE Mediterranean Contact
Group the efforts Morocco was undertaking and the
reforms it was carrying out at the political, socio-
economic and human rights levels. Morocco is
following closely the efforts of the Irish chairmanship
and stands ready to enhance cooperation with the
OSCE.

Morocco is one of the OSCE's Mediterranean
partners and takes an active part in the Mediterranean
Contact Group. Morocco's interest in the
Mediterranean partnership of the OSCE derives from
the great importance it accords to the priority areas of
that partnership: migration and development; security
issues, including the combat against terrorism; the

12-2284]
combat against other forms of crime and
discrimination; trafficking in persons; the promotion of
tolerance; and the economic and environmental
dimensions.

I should like to reiterate in that regard my
country's call for a review of the status of the
Mediterranean partners for cooperation in terms of
ensuring them a more participative role. In that regard,
Morocco had submitted a document reflecting the
Moroccan vision of the format and content of that
partnership, which includes a number of proposals
aimed at enhancing the partnership and making it more
substantive on the basis of a renewed agenda.

Morocco, which supports all initiatives aimed at
promoting tolerance and interreligious dialogue and at
combating all forms of discrimination, reiterates its
appeal to enhance cooperation between the OSCE and
the Alliance of Civilizations. We believe that that
appeal is in line with the priorities set out by Ireland
for its chairmanship and enhances the objectives of the
OSCE in terms of peace, security and cooperation.

Morocco remains convinced that the United
Nations could benefit from the experience and
capacities of the OSCE in a number of areas, including
arms control, non-proliferation and the combat against
transnational threats. To that end, we are encouraged
by Ireland's readiness to enhance cooperation with the
United Nations, particularly in the area of combating
transnational threats, including organized crime and
terrorism.

Along those same lines, we welcome the entry
into force of the memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and the OSCE on
cooperation in the area of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, particularly the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

We wish every success to the Irish chairmanship
of the OSCE.

