Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to welcome
Mr. Zahir Tanin and congratulate him on his
appointment as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Kosovo. We thank him for his briefing on
the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/833) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), and we pledge Angola's support to
the Mission in carrying out its mandate. We welcome
the participation in today's meeting of Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and we welcome Ambassador Vlora
Citaku.

We reaffirm Angola's position that resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be a suitable legal framework for
reaching a comprehensive solution in Kosovo through
dialogue and negotiations, based on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
within the framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. UNMIK continues to play a fundamental
role in Kosovo in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights and cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, as
well as in its continuing constructive engagement with
Pristina and Belgrade and all communities in Kosovo.

The Secretary-General's report points out that the
situation in Kosovo remained generally stable during
the period under review, despite recent troubling and
totally unacceptable events involving illegitimate
pressure on the Government and Assembly of Kosovo.
We welcome the progress made in the dialogue process
between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by the
European Union, including the conclusion of agreements
on crucial issues such as energy, telecommunications,
the establishment of an association/community of
Serb municipalities in northern Kosovo and freedom
of movement in the town of Mitrovica. It is our hope
that the Parliaments in Belgrade and Pristina will
approve those agreements and that such steps will help
to improve the lives of citizens in the region. We also
hope that the First Agreement on Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations will be effectively
implemented.

However, the different interpretations by Belgrade
and Pristina of the agreement on the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which
remains a contentious issue, are a matter of concern.
We disapprove of the aggressive rhetoric and use of
violence and intimidation by some Kosovo opposition
parties with regard to the establishment of the
association/community. In that regard, we urge the full
integration and accordance of citizens' rights to the
Serbian community of Kosovo, whose multi-ethnic and
multicultural nature must be preserved.

We take note of the continued implementation of
the Belgrade Pristina agreement on the integration
of the judiciary, and of the continued integration of
formal Serbian civil protection personnel in northern
Kosovo. We value the participation of Belgrade and
Pristina in the High-level Forum on Durable Solutions
for Displaced Persons from Kosovo, organized by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the outcome of which was a joint communique on their
commitment to regional cooperation in solving the
refugee and displaced persons issue.

With regard to human rights, we commend the
UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Paneland its review
of complaints of alleged human rights violations
committed between April 2005 and March 2010, and
hope that the Panel can clarify and close the remaining
outstanding cases by the end of 2015. We greatly value
the round-table meeting, organized in September by
the European Union Office and the Kosovo Centre for
Security Studies, on the role of women in countering
violent extremism in Kosovo, as well as the strategic
plan to fight violent extremism adopted by the
Government of Kosovo.

