Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan supports the
Secretary-General's mediation initiatives, which
are deeply interlinked with conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and the sustaining peace agenda. We
welcomed the establishment of the Secretary-General's
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation last year, and
we are encouraged by his field visits and continued
work on mediation activities.

Japan has for many years played a positive role in
aiding the peaceful settlement of disputes. Regarding
our support for the resolution of the Mindanao conflict
in the Philippines, for example, Japan contributed to a
peace agreement between the Government and a former
anti-Government armed group, the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front, by hosting a meeting ofthe parties. We
also deployed experts to the International Monitoring
Team to monitor the ceasefire and the socioeconomic
situation, and to provide community development and
other support to help sustain peace in the conflict areas.

Today, as an active player of mediation, Japan
wishes to highlight three points: inclusivity, capacity-
building and partnerships.

First, to achieve sustaining peace, mediation should
involve not only the combatants, but all the relevant
actors, including women, young people, civil society,
local communities and others as part of an inclusive
process. In that regard, Japan welcomes greater gender
balance among the members of the High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation, as well as the Secretary-General's
commitment to increasing the number of women
mediators. Japan also promotes women's participation
in conflict resolution and prevention based on its
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security.
Japan contributed $1 million dollars to UN-Women to
promote women's leadership so as to prevent emerging
violent extremism in the Sahel region.

Secondly, sustaining peace will not be achieved
without respecting national ownership. Here, capacity-
building is crucial. One of Japan's main pillars of
peacebuilding is an emphasis on people in the field.
In Mindanao, after the ceasefire agreement, we
supported capacity-building for students, teachers,
local Government officers and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front on peace education and conflict
resolution to ensure lasting peace and prevent a relapse
into conflict. Our support is provided under the banner
of Japan Bangsamoro Initiatives for Reconstruction and
Development, without excluding any religion. We will
continue to make such efforts.

Thirdly, peace does not happen alone. Partnerships
with relevant actors - including international, regional,
subregional and local organizations -must be enhanced
and continued. It is encouraging to see the efforts of
African regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU), the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and others that engage actively in
negotiations or dialogue among all relevant actors in
order to resolve conflicts regarding the continent.
Strengthening the Organization's partnership with the
AU Peace and Security Council, such as by convening
joint annual meetings with the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, is one way that Member
States can further contribute.

The power of mediation is widely understood,
yet challenges remain. It is essential to have proper
conflict analysis and to share information with
everyone. In that connection, the three points I
highlighted earlier - inclusivity, capacity-building
and partnerships - must be interlinked and enhanced.
Mediation is by nature rarely a public affair, but this
open debate reaffirms its importance and helps to
continue discussions both inside and outside of the
United Nations system on how it can best serve to
advance the cause of sustaining peace.

