Mr. Bhandari (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Viet Nam, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month and to extend our best wishes for a successful tenure. I further thank the presidency for convening this timely open debate. I also congratulate the new non-permanent members of the Council and wish them success in their mandates. I align my statement with the statement delivered by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)). The Charter of the United Nations is the embodiment of the aspirations of people to universal peace, security and prosperity. The principles enshrined in the Charter, including respect for national sovereignty, territorial integrity, peaceful settlement of disputes and non-interference in the internal affairs of States, constitute the fundamental basis for the peaceful world we all want to live in. As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is time to acknowledge the achievements the United Nations has made in the maintenance of international peace and security. We also need to commend it for its role in reducing poverty and promoting sustainable development. However, we must concede that the world is not yet free from poverty, inequality, conflict, climate crisis and terrorism, among other scourges. This is where the roots of the problems in our efforts to maintaining international peace and security lie. No one is spared those problems as they transcend the boundaries and borders of societies, nations and regions. In this context, we believe that, more than ever, the world needs to reassert its faith in the principles of the United Nations Charter and multilateralism. We must reflect further and work together to address the challenges facing the world. I am proud to inform the Council that the Constitution of Nepal recognizes the United Nations Charter and its principles as guiding principles of Nepal's foreign policy. Since 1958, three years after joining the United Nations, Nepal has contributed its peacekeepers to United Nations peace operations in an effort to maintain international peace and security. The role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security has been included in the school-level curriculum to increase the awareness of Nepali citizens from a formative age. As the birthplace of Lord Buddha, Nepal's culture and world view are imbued with peace, compassion and harmony. Nepal believes that while strict observance of the United Nations Charter is essential, our efforts must also be focused on enhancing the Charter's centrality and indispensability in multilateralism. We also believe that the United Nations needs continuous reforms to adapt to evolving challenges. The reform efforts should make the United Nations more responsive to the development needs of countries, including, inter alia, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. Failure to adapt to changing realities may make fulfilling the purposes of the United Nations an increasingly unrealistic proposition. In conclusion, there is no alternative to peace, and we, the people of the United Nations, have no choice but to build a stronger United Nations to maintain peace and security where each and every Member State, large or small, rich or poor, has an equal opportunity to prosper and grow in harmony.
