Mr. Adamia (Georgia): I should like to express
my delegation's gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
this meeting at a very important juncture for the
Security Council and the entire international
community.

The illegal possession of weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism and aggressive separatism, often
intertwined, pose threats to the very foundations of the
international system. In this situation, it is the
discharge by the Security Council of its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security that is
being put to a highly critical test.

From our tragic experience of ongoing conflicts
in the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region of Georgia, we
have learned many important things. First and
foremost, we have come to better appreciate the value
of peace; at the same time, we have learned that a high
toll is always to be paid when the international
community is not in a position to act in concert and
resolutely in situations affecting international peace
and security.

Peace should always be given a chance and,
clearly, this is the substance of the offer extended to
Iraq by Security Council resolution 1441 (2002). At the
same time, however, we cannot afford inaction as Iraq
continues to possess weapons of mass destruction that
represent a threat to international peace and security.
The Iraqi regime has failed to meet the important
requirements of resolution 1441 (2002): full, accurate
and complete declaration and voluntary, unconditional
and active cooperation with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Therefore, we would like to associate ourselves
with those delegations that have called on the Security
Council to meet its responsibilities and to take
effective action in order to secure Iraq's immediate
compliance. No one should be allowed to breach their
obligations under the Security Council's mandatory
resolutions, much less when these breaches put
international peace and security at stake. Otherwise,
the appropriate consequences should be imminent.

