Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I thank the Senegalese presidency for
organizing today's important debate.

(spoke in English)

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. In addition, we fully support
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Italy, in the light of our cooperation related to the
upcoming termthat we are splitting with Italy in the
Security Council. During this split term, in 2017 and
2018, the Netherlands, together with Italy, will continue
its sustained efforts for more effective peace operations.
As the representative of Italy stated, we encourage
other countries to join us in that endeavour.

The environment in which our peace operations
have to operate has become more dangerous and
more challenging. Asymmetric threats in particular
abound. Yesterday's attack on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) convoy was a case in point. We
mourn the people killed, and our thoughts are with the
people wounded.

I would like to address three elements that in our
View are of crucial importance for peace operations
when addressing these new asymmetric threats. They
are: the need for a comprehensive approach; the need
for better-qualified troops; and the need for better
intelligence.

First, let me elaborate on the need for a
comprehensive approach. During the recent visit to
the Netherlands by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali, Mr. Diop, the latter stressed that we needed to
address the problem of violent extremism and terrorism
in a more sustainable way. We therefore need to fully
understand and fully address what really drives young,
often moderately religious Malians to resort to joining
terrorist groups. We need to address their hopes, their
ambitions and their fears.

To do so, in our View peace operations need to be
part of a more integrated approach. Peace operations
must be linked to other available instruments for
promoting peace, security and stability. We therefore
need to connect peacekeeping with the political process
and with economic development. The term we in the
Netherlands use is the "3D" approach, combining the
means of diplomacy, defence and development. We must
create economic opportunities for young people who
might be receptive to the ideas of Violent extremism. We
must make sure that there is a political perspective, and
we must make sure to prevent and address violence and
to protect civilians. Only an integrated, comprehensive
approach can ensure a lasting impact.

This brings me to my second point: the United
Nations needs better-trained and better-equipped
peacekeeping troops and police forces in order to face
asymmetric threats.

As we have seen in South Sudan, protection of
civilians has become a vital element in a lot ofmissions.
But the recent report on Juba in South Sudan proves
yet again how important training and equipment are for
missions in order for them to be able to implement their
mandates.

In terms of equipment, let me highlight the issue
of helicopters and vehicles resistant to improvised
explosive devices. These are scarce assets and
expensive capabilities, but they are essential to counter
asymmetric threats. These are also assets that are crucial
to continuing to increase the necessary interaction of
Blue Helmets with the local population.

We welcome the fact that the United Nations is
looking for innovative solutions. In particular, we
welcome the work being done for a long-term rotation
plan for helicopters in MINUSMA, in Mali. Under such
a plan, countries would agree to provide helicopters
for a specific period as part of a longer-term planning
effort. This would make it on the one hand easier for
countries to commit their troops and their assets and on

the other would make it easier for the United Nations to
enter into long-term planning.

Let me turn to my final point: better intelligence.

In complex and dangerous environments such as
Mali, the gathering, analysis and use of intelligence
is vital, not only for the effective implementation
of the mandate but also for the security of United
Nations personnel. We have worked together with
the United Nations in developing and introducing a
substantial intelligence capacity in MINUSMA, and
this capacity helps the peacekeepers in seeing, hearing
and understanding what is happening around them. It
helps peacekeepers to understand the threats around
them and helps them to address these threats, both
traditional and asymmetric, as early as possible. We
can all see that the concept of intelligence within the
United Nations system is evolving. We believe that it
has to evolve further in View of the asymmetric threats
we discussed today.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a partner in
further developing the use of intelligence in peace
operations. In short, let us work together in making our
peace operations more intelligent.

In conclusion, it is clear that in the current
environment the United Nations can no longer rely only
on traditional methods to counter asymmetric threats.
We need to innovate, to adjust and to be flexible. We
need to step up to face these new challenges, before
terrorist groups disrupt delicate peace processes,
before more civilians become the victims of terrorists,
before we lose even more peacekeepers. Let us all
work together to make peace operations more effective.
Let us work together to make peacekeepers better
equipped and better trained, and let us work together
to connect peace operations, diplomacy and sustainable
development. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
remain the Security Council's partner in that ambition.

