Ms. Becker: I would like to thank the presidency
and the members of the Security Council for giving
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) the
opportunity to participate in this important forum. It is
an honour to be here.

I am speaking today on behalf of the Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict, an international network
of NGOs including grassroots civil society groups as
well as some of the largest humanitarian and human

08-2361]
rights organizations in the world. Many of our
colleagues are witnessing war every day and struggling
to protect children from the constant threat of violence.

Today's open debate provides an important
opportunity to reflect on the progress achieved by the
Security Council in strengthening protections for
children. We welcome the Council's achievements -
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the
development of action plans to end the use of child
soldiers, and the very important efforts of the innovative
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

However, we are not here to celebrate. As
members know, in many ways children in armed
conflicts today are no better off than their peers were
years ago. Impunity for those who brutally attack them
is too often the norm. Today, it is as important as ever
that all of members of the Council stay focused on the
purpose of their work and redouble their efforts to
make real change for children.

We urge the Security Council to take several
critical steps without delay. Those steps reflect the
12 recommendations set out by the Secretary-General
in his latest report on children and armed conflict.
First, the monitoring and reporting mechanism must be
strengthened and its scope expanded. Secondly, strong
and consistent action must be taken against
perpetrators that repeatedly violate the rights of
children. Thirdly, accountability must be demanded
from perpetrators by imposing targeted measures when
warranted. Finally, the full range of actions in the
Working Group's toolkit in response to continuing
violations must be utilized.

It has now been over two years since resolution
1612 (2005) set the groundbreaking monitoring and
reporting mechanism into motion. While the
mechanism is still in its infancy, a recent Watchlist
field-based study found that the mechanism has made
impressive strides in the quest to collect timely,
accurate and objective information. Our study also
identified obstacles and challenges, including the need
for greater collaboration with other existing networks,
stronger support for the participation of civil society
groups, better efforts to protect the safety of survivors
and others who provide information, and more
effective responses to violations. To address those, we
have provided practical recommendations to the United
Nations and its partners, which should be swiftly
implemented.

Fundamentally, the Security Council must also
address the scope of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Currently, the mechanism is triggered only
by violations involving the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, and is automatically applied only to the
situations on the Council's formal agenda. It should be
automatically applied to all situations of armed conflict
in which children's security and rights are violated by
armed forces and groups.

As recommended by the Secretary-General, we
also urge the Council to give equal consideration to all
six grave violations against children so that any of
those violations could trigger the application of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the listing of
a party in the Secretary-General's annexes. At the same
time, we recognize that an incremental and pragmatic
approach has contributed to the success of the children
and armed conflict agenda. For that reason, as a next
step, we encourage the Council to add rape and other
forms of gender-based violence as an additional trigger
for the mechanism.

Some parties to armed conflict have recruited and
used boys and girls as child soldiers year after year, in
defiance of both international law and the Council's
own resolutions. Between 2002 and 2008, at least
14 parties to armed conflict have been named in all
five of the Secretary-General's reports on children and
armed conflict. Those persistent violators include the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka, the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional in Colombia, the
Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda, and the
Government forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Myanmar.

Those persistent violators should be subject to the
Council's strongest action. In resolutions 1539 (2004)
and 1612 (2005), the Security Council said that it
would consider the imposition of targeted measures,
such as arms embargoes, against parties that do not end
their use of child soldiers. Yet the Security Council has
taken targeted measures against just one individual,
imposing a travel ban and asset freeze on a former
commander in Cote d'Ivoire.

The Security Council cannot expect to achieve
accountability based on empty threats. To ensure their
own credibility, Security Council members must be
prepared to exercise their powers to impose targeted
measures when warranted. That entails systematically

referring information to relevant sanctions committees
and, in other cases, applying measures through
country-specific or thematic resolutions of the full
Security Council.

Finally, I would like to address the Security
Council Working Group's use of its toolkit in
responding to grave violations against children. The
toolkit provides a valuable array of actions to
encourage parties to armed conflict to comply with
their international obligations. While the Working
Group has used some of the actions in the toolkit
regularly, others have been used seldom or even not at
all. Those tools are already available to Council
members, and they should immediately put them to
use. Full and robust use of those tools will result in
improved protection for children and accountability
from perpetrators. There is no time to waste.

As NGOs working on behalf of children in
appalling circumstances, we support the Security
Council's important efforts. We will continue to
participate in the monitoring and reporting mechanism
and to build and strengthen programmes for children
on the ground. We will continue to pressure
perpetrators to end their violations and to offer support
to the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
For us, those are urgent priorities.

We commend the Security Council on the
progress it has made to end violations against children,
but we appeal to it not to stop short of making that
progress consistent and tangible for children caught up
in extremely dangerous situations. We urge Council
members to commit to negotiating a new resolution
within the next year to close existing gaps, maintain
the progress achieved to date, and ensure that all
parties to armed conflict are held to account for their
violations against children.

