Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas and
Mr. Sma'il Chergui for their briefings.

Before I start, we wish to express our sincere
condolences to the authorities and the people of the
Niger, as well as the families of the victims, in the
wake of Wednesday's atrocious terrorist attack against
a military camp, which claimed the lives of 71 people.
We also wish to convey our condolences to Nigeria
following the execution on Friday of four humanitarian
workers who had previously been abducted. We
condemn those acts in the strongest possible terms.

As we witness, once again, deplorable acts such
as the foregoing, we underscore the urgent nature
of the issue that brings us together this morning.
Unfortunately, it is against a backdrop of pain, a sense
of powerlessness and collective insecurity that we must
stand ready and alert to try to resolve the situation
being endured by the peoples of West Africa and the
Sahel, who are the victims of violence in many forms,
as well as terrorism.

We are gravely concerned by the dramatic
deterioration in the security situation in the region as a
result of the spread of violent extremist groups. These
groups exacerbate tensions between communities,
including between farmers and herders, and are linked
to transnational organized-crime networks devoted to
trafficking in drugs and persons, maritime piracy and
the exploitation of resources, among other crimes. It is
clear that the issue of intercommunal violence and other
conflicts requires us to tackle the structural causes
thereof, including shortcomings in economic and social
governance, which in turn undermine the capacity of the
authorities to meet such basic needs of the population
as food, education, health, water, energy and limited
or unequal political representation. Consequently,
improving living conditions, particularly for the
region's young people - who are estimated to make
up 65 per cent of the population and thus constitute a
growing majority - is a priority.

Another major issue whose consequences are
becoming increasingly palpable is the impact of climate
change as a security-risk factor. This impact is tangible
for a large part of the population of the region, which,
every day, is faced, inter alia, with water scarcity, the
decrease of cultivable areas, soil erosion and droughts.
All of that affects people's food security, health and
livelihoods. It is therefore necessary to continue to
support the affected countries in assessing their risks,
designing strategies to mitigate them and constructing
their resilience.
Particular attention should be paid to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
region, which has changed the nature of intercommunal
violence, having made it increasingly deadly owing
to the increased migration of transhumance flows
of farmers and livestock, which, as I just said, is
recognized to have been triggered by climate change
and the challenges that exist with regard to providing
equitable and lasting solutions. When weighing
the lines of action to pursue in order to remedy the
situation, we encourage collaboration with regional
bodies that strengthens local mechanisms with a focus
on peacekeeping, consolidating social cohesion and
addressing structural causes through, for example, job
creation initiatives for rural youth aimed at reducing
inequalities and social divisions, as well as addressing
the governance deficit in some of those areas.

Given the context of the security crisis in West
Africa and the Sahel, particularly in areas where
people depend on agriculture and livestock for their
livelihoods, investment in rural areas is essential to
creating opportunities, especially for young people, as
a means to prevent and mitigate conflicts over natural
resources. From our own experience, our country
recognizes and promotes the positive and catalytic
impact that rural investment generates.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Economic
Community of West African States to promote the
systematic participation of women in initiatives to
combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism. The
role of women as mediators in the prevention and
resolution of conflict, as well as in peacebuilding
and post-conflict situations, is essential, as is the
development of comprehensive strategies to address
the structural causes of crises. The Council must
continue to work in a unified manner to address the
threats, challenges and opportunities in a coordinated
and comprehensive manner in the light of their
multidimensional nature.

