Mr. Labbe (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the presidency of the Republic of Korea for
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). We also appreciate the presence
of Foreign Minister Yun Byung-se in the Council. We
appreciate the leadership of the Republic of Korea in
this and all matters tied to international security. Chile
supports the desire of Korean President Park Geun-
Hye to provide renewed momentum towards a world
free of nuclear weapons, starting with a completely
de-nuclearized Korean peninsula.

Resolution 1540 (2004), adopted unanimously on
28 April 2004, is an historic milestone that Chile helped
to adopt, since at that time my country was serving as a
non-permanent member of the Council. It was the first
resolution of the Council which, under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, addressed the threat
posed by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons among non-State actors, filling a
legal vacuum in the international system. The Council,
continuing the course set by the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) on global counter-terrorism efforts, took
appropriate action on that occasion in the exercise
of the powers conferred on it by the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Today, as was the case then, the terrorist threat is
real. The mere idea that non-State actors have access
to weapons of mass destruction is a source of great
concern, which was made clear at the latest Nuclear
Security Summit of March 2014. In that context, Chile
believes that the goal of resolution 1540 (2004) is still
fully relevant. States must continue to adopt measures
to preclude the financing of prohibited activities
related to weapons of mass destruction, their means of
delivery and related materials, and to account for and
secure materials related to such weapons, guaranteeing
security in their production, use, storage and transport.

Over the past 10 years, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has succeeded in
raising the international community's awareness of the
terrorist threat and the serious dangers posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It has done
so by providing assistance in the areas of legislation,
training and equipment, as well as by facilitating
cooperation among various regional organizations and
Member States, fostering better practices in general, in
order to anticipate and reduce terrorist risks. So far, 171
countries have submitted their national implementation
reports on resolution 1540 (2004). However, we must
move on to the next stage, since new challenges show
that the threat is still present, for example, in the area
of financing terrorism.

My country has consistently planned for the full
and effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in an effort in the context of a State policy
that makes the maintenance of international peace and
security one of the priorities of its foreign and defence
policies. In that connection, Chile has duly adapted
and harmonized its national legislation to meet the
standards of resolution 1540 (2004), as reflected in the
various implementation reports transmitted by Chile to
the Committee since 2004. We recently informed the
Committee of the designation of Chile's focal point as
we begin to update information, using the new matrix
and preparing a national strategy, following the 1540
Committee guidelines.

Chile remains firmly committed to the implementation
of the resolution and, in a broader context, to the global
architecture of non-proliferation and disarmament. Our
participation in the recent Nuclear Security Summit
is proof of that. We should also like to emphasize the
importance that we attach to the dissemination of work
being done by the 1540 Committee and to its facilitation
of cooperation. From that perspective, we believe
that, in order to avoid proliferation, it is essential for
the institutions responsible for local and cross-border
controls to be staffed with people trained in the
relevant legal instruments. We emphasize, for example,
the work being carried out by customs and border
control police. In that regard, we reiterate the need for
States with greater capacity in that area to share their
experience and good practices. I would recall, among
other initiatives at the regional and global levels, the
seminar on legal and normative provisions governing
international trade and security that was hosted in my
country in both Santiago and Valparaiso in September
2009 in conjunction with the University of Georgia.

We would also highlight the importance of
providing advanced training to the relevant officials via
seminars and workshops that encourage the sharing of
experiences and practices geared to the needs of each
State with regard to the treatment of non-proliferation
activities. Such activities should also involve civil
society across the most diverse possible spectrum, from
academia to business. In that regard, we particularly
welcome today's presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7
on that point. Chile believes that resolution 1540 (2004)
supports the effective implementation of the universal
instruments on the issue of non-proliferation and
reiterates its commitment to the objectives and goals
that inspired that resolution.

To conclude, I would like once again to thank the
Republic of Korea for its leadership in this important
sphere.

