Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Timor-Leste
(S/2009/72). I also thank you, Mr. President, having
convened this open debate. We value very highly
Japan's leadership in the Security Council and in the
Timor-Leste Core Group.

It is an honour and a pleasure to welcome
President Ramos-Horta one year after the serious
attack on his life. The President's recovery and
resumption of responsibilities is a tribute to his
strength and determination. We also thank him for his
recent visit to New Zealand.

We congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste
and President Ramos-Horta on the significant progress
made over the past year. The United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), under the leadership
of Mr. Khare, has a critical and ongoing role to play in
Timor-Leste, helped by the International Stabilization
Force, to which New Zealand continues to contribute,
working with Australia.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, there
have indeed been many encouraging developments
over the past years: the closure of most internally
displaced persons camps; the resolution of the
petitioners issue; the more stable, though still fragile,
security situation; and the efforts being made to
strengthen institutions and to stimulate economic
development.

Continuing effort to strengthen democratic
governance is also a vital ingredient for going forward.
We strongly encourage the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste to continue to consolidate their
democratic institutions and to make full use of
parliament to resolve all political differences. Local
elections in 2009 are an important part of this process
and should be supported by UNMIT and other partners.

A great deal of work lies ahead for the
Government and for UNMIT. An immediate challenge
is transferring policing responsibilities to the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste. New Zealand welcomes
the planned commencement of that process and the
joint assessment currently being carried out by the
Government and UNMIT. We believe that, if
implemented properly, the mutually agreed criteria for
assessing the state of readiness of each district will
help to ensure that each area is in fact ready and able to
take over full policing responsibilities. We strongly
support the phased implementation of that process.
UNMIT will need to monitor it closely and be ready to
step in and provide additional support if necessary.

We believe that a single policing model needs to
be agreed in the coming months and that this will
enable international policing assistance to be
channelled more effectively. New Zealand is pleased
that its pilot community policing project in Becora and
Suai has received a positive response.

We acknowledge the broader efforts undertaken
in the security sector, including the recent seminar in
Dili, and we encourage the Government and UNMIT to
continue that work. We believe that clearly defining the
respective roles of the military and the police and
strengthening the civilian oversight mechanisms are
necessary for long-term stability.

Accountability issues and, especially, countering
perceptions of impunity are relevant to the
development of the justice sector. They affect its
credibility and strength. We acknowledge the serious
constraints in the justice sector and the need for
international support to accelerate the development of
national capacity. Dialogue and reconciliation efforts
are also relevant, and we value the essential role that
President Ramos-Horta is playing in that respect.

In conclusion, New Zealand strongly supports the
extension of UNMIT for 12 months at its current
authorized level, as recommended by the Secretary-
General. As a regional partner and friend, we remain
committed to assisting Timor-Leste. We continue to
offer our support and encouragement to President
Ramos-Horta, to all the leaders and people of Timor-
Leste and to Mr. Khare and the UNMIT team.

