Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Let me begin by
expressing our deepest condolences to the Government
of the Russian Federation for the lives that were lost,
including that of President Kadyrov, in the bombing
incident that took place in the Republic of Chechnya
on 9 May. Such terrorist acts should never be tolerated
on any grounds.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this public meeting. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Timor-Leste will soon commemorate the second
anniversary of its independence. Looking back at the
last several years, the Government of Japan is deeply
gratified to see that the Government of Timor-Leste
and its people have been working as a united whole to
build, brick by brick, the foundations of a new,
independent State out of the turmoil that preceded its
formation, with the support of the international
community, especially the United Nations and the
parties concerned, including Indonesia. The role of
United Nations in particular has been significant. Japan
reiterates its sincere appreciation for the contributions
made by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) under the leadership of the late Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma.

As a nation belonging to the Asia-Pacific region,
Japan attaches special importance to the stability and
development of Timor-Leste and has been devoting its
efforts to helping to achieve those objectives. We are
therefore delighted that Timor-Leste has attained its
current level of progress, after travelling such a long
way on the path towards independent statehood. At the
same time, my Government is of the view that the
international community must continue to extend its
support, so that continued progress for peace and
development in Timor-Leste is ensured. More
concretely, we believe it is crucially important to make
certain that the valuable incipient achievements in the
areas of peace, the rule of law, respect for human rights
and development take root and endure, and we believe
there is still an important role for the United Nations to
play in helping to reach that objective.
From that point of view, the Government of Japan
welcomes the Secretary-General's proposal to extend
the mandate of UNMISET for a one-year consolidation
phase, while clarifying which tasks are truly necessary.
At the most recent Security Council meeting on this
issue, Member States expressed various opinions in
response to the Secretary-General's proposal, and the
stakeholders in this enterprise, including Japan, have
been in close contact with the Secretariat in an effort to
build a consensus. My Government is convinced that
this proposal is one which the international community
can endorse unanimously.

What has been achieved by the international
community in Timor-Leste since the United Nations
undertook the transitional administration there may be
regarded as a striking success story. However, in order
for the story to be followed through to its conclusion,
UNMISET must complete its activities and achieve its
goals within this final one-year period. It is therefore
necessary to conclude during this period the transition
from the phase of peacekeeping operations for
resolution of the conflict to the next phase of
development activities, conducted through bilateral
channels or relevant international institutions.

Timor-Leste in turn must recognize that this will
be the final one-year period of active assistance on the
part of the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
must redouble its efforts to ensure that it will be able to
stand on its own. In that connection, the review of the
size of UNMISET, which is scheduled to be conducted
at the end of this year on the basis of the progress
achieved at that point towards the fulfilment of the
mandate, should be duly carried out.

In support of the building of a sustainable Timor-
Leste, Japan has pledged and has been steadily
implementing assistance of up to $60 million over the
first three years following independence, with a focus
on peace-building and on reconstruction in the three
key areas of agriculture, infrastructure and human
resources development. We are pleased to learn that the
roads and bridges which the Engineering Group of our
Self-Defence Forces has constructed and repaired for
the activities of UNMISET is benefiting the people of
Timor-Leste as well. We also plan to hand over the
equipment of the Engineering Group, including various
types of vehicles, to the Government of Timor-Leste,
in the hopes that it will meet their requirements. My
Government is also making efforts to transfer
technology by educating Timor-Leste Government staff
in the operation, maintenance and management of the
donated equipment and material. We believe that such
support is in line with the needs of Timor-Leste as
described in the report of the Secretary-General.

Japan has thus been devoting its energies, through
the activities of the Self-Defence Forces Engineering
Group and through official development assistance, to
the development of Timor-Leste. There remain,
however, many areas in which further international
assistance for nation-building is needed. For that
reason, my Government believes that it is essential for
the international community to continue its assistance
to Timor-Leste in those areas where support is still
required through well-coordinated activities of the
United Nations and bilateral contributions.

Finally, I wish to underscore once again how
important this final one-year period will be for Timor-
Leste. The Government of Japan is convinced that,
through the efforts of UNMISET and the people of
Timor-Leste, guided by their wise leaders, stability and
the foundations for development in Timor-Leste will be
strengthened, and the United Nations peacekeeping
operation will successfully complete its mission.

