Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today is one of those rare occasions when
a delay by the Security Council in adopting a draft
resolution is the result of positive developments
in events. We welcome the signing in Quito, on
4 September, ofthe agreement on a temporary ceasefire
between the Government of Colombia and the Ejercito
de Liberacion Nacional.

We appreciate the support of Brazil, Chile, Cuba,
Ecuador, Norway and Venezuela, the guarantor
countries for the peace process. Thanks to their services
as mediators, this important agreement has become a
reality and, in our View, is an important step towards a
permanent ceasefire. We hope that, in conjunction with
the successful conduct of the reconciliation process
with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC), it will bring us closer to a final settlement of
this decades-long internal conflict and the attainment
of civil peace in the country.

We thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Head of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, for his briefing, and
consider his recommendations to be a helpful basis for
informed discussions on the so-called second special
political Mission, the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which will start work as early as
26 September.

We welcome the successful progress in the peace
process, particularly the completion of the surrender
of weapons and the demobilization of insurgents under
United Nations supervision, which has paved the way
for transforming the FARC into a political force. We
hope that the parties will carry out their remaining
tasks in good faith and a timely manner, including
destroying arms caches and taking steps to achieve
the former combatants' socioeconomic and political
reintegration. We expect the Verification Mission to
provide the necessary assistance for that. However, it
will be important to keep a close eye on the security
situation to ensure that no power vacuums arise. For
our part, we affirm our readiness to continue to fully
support the intra-Colombian peace process and the
people and the Government of Colombia as they work
to build a durable peace and development post-conflict.

