Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing and deeply appreciate his
efforts to weigh in on the grave challenge that we are
facing, in order to ensure that what should and must
be avoided will not happen because of miscalculation
or a lack of thoughtfulness or of appreciation for the
tremendous responsibility that the Security Council,
especially its permanent members, bears. The Cold War
is back with a vengeance, the Secretary-General said,
but this time, he went on to tell us, in a less managed
manner. It is difficult to quarrel with him. His approach
was quite comprehensive, focusing, as he said, on the
multiplicity of dangerous conflicts that the Middle East
is facing. While his approach may be better, I choose to
focus on Syria because it is the current flashpoint.

Following the alleged chemical attacks in Douma,
it is regrettable that the Council was not able to adopt
a resolution to create an independent, impartial and
professional investigative mechanism for identifying
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. This is a problem that has been with us
for some time and a reality that sadly reflects the
lack of unity in the Council even on matters that are
manifestly in the common interest of all. We certainly
welcome the deployment of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding
Mission to Syria to establish the facts surrounding
the alleged use of chemicals as weapons. We have
repeatedly stated that using chemicals as weapons is
inhumane, and we condemn their use by any actor
under any circumstances. One matter remains, and that
is establishing a mechanism for attribution. We hope
that will be done as soon as possible, but that does not
mean that in the meantime we should cease to exercise
maximum restraint in the interests of peace.

Right now, pragmatic considerations and simple
rational calculation suggest that we must get our
priorities right. We need to continue to live if we are
to be able to fight evil. We have continued to express
our deep concern about the current dynamics in Syria
and their devastating implications for regional and
international peace and security. We fully concur with
the Secretary-General, who stressed in his statement
of 11 April that it is vital to ensure that the situation
does not spiral out of control (see SG/SM/18984).
He stressed that legitimate concern again today. The
Security Council, as the principal body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
should not and cannot allow that to happen. At a time
when we are talking about preventive diplomacy - as
well as after appointing a Secretary-General who told
us, in his maiden speech to the Council (see S/PV.7857),
that prevention is not merely a priority, but the
priority - now is the time for the United Nations
to undertake the search for diplomacy for peace in
earnest. If we are seriously committed to moving
our Organization from a culture of reaction to one of
prevention, now is the time to stand firm, speak with
one voice and take proactive and collective action that
can be respected by all major stakeholders.

That requires the Council to be united for global
peace and security. We know that is difficult, but we
believe that we have no other sane option. This is
the time for the Security Council to stand up and be
counted. The Security Council is the custodian of the
Charter of the United Nations, which, growing out of
the devastation of the Second World War, promised to
save succeeding generations from that scourge. That is
a clarion call the Council should heed and act on. The
situation should not be allowed to spiral out of control.
The Secretary-General is right and the Council should
listen to him.

