Mr. Dauda (Sierra Leone): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and by thanking you, first, for having convened
this meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone and,
secondly, for giving my delegation the opportunity to
contribute to this debate. Let me also express our
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
detailed report on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) for the period of 1 September 2011 to
29 February 2012 (S/2012/160).
I convey on behalf of His Excellency President
Ernest Bai Koroma, the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone profound appreciation for the relentless
support and active interest of the United Nations and
friends of Sierra Leone in consolidating peace and
security in the country. Permit me to single out in this
regard the strong leadership and commitment that the
Canadian Chair continues to demonstrate in the pursuit
of peace and security in Sierra Leone, as amply
evidenced by Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski
during his recent visit to Sierra Leone. Our thanks also
go to the outgoing Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sierra Leone and Head of
UNIPSIL, Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, for his
role in the consolidation of peace and security and for
maximizing the gains of our post-conflict development
efforts.

The report seeks to reflect developments in Sierra
Leone, including progress made so far and the
challenges faced since September 2011. As we
commend ourselves for the gains made through the
joint efforts of the Government and people of Sierra
Leone, the United Nations and the international
community, it is crucial that together we resolve to
tackle the remaining challenges in order to consolidate
comprehensively the gains made.

President Ernest Bai Koroma remains committed
to the consolidation of peace, security and sustainable
development, as mapped out in our Agenda for Change.
As noted in the report, the Government has made
steady progress in addressing the three risks of youth
unemployment, corruption and illicit drug trafficking
and organized crime, identified in the Agenda for
Change and endorsed by the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission in its
outcome document of September 2009.

The Government has demonstrated strong
political will in dealing with issues of political
violence, in whatever shape or form and irrespective of
party affiliation, and will continue to use legal
instruments to bring perpetrators of violence to justice.
That was clearly demonstrated when the Government
took action in respect of the political violence in B0, in
the Southern province of Sierra Leone, involving the
presidential candidate of the main opposition party,
which I referred to in my statement to the Council in
September 2011 (S/PV.6609).
12-27246

The presidential, parliamentary and local council
elections scheduled for 17 November 2012 indeed
remain a crucial test for peace and democratic
consolidation in the country. President Ernest Bai
Koroma will continue to constantly engage all
stakeholders, in particular the opposition parties, with a
view to enhancing political dialogue and collective
commitment to peaceful, free, fair, transparent and
credible elections. The Government is currently
considering the report of the Shears-Moses
Commission of Inquiry into the March 2009
disturbances and will soon release a white paper on the
recommendations of the Commission. We therefore
urge the United Nations and all our development
partners to continue to give their full support to the
ongoing electoral process.

The Government, in promoting women's
participation in the decision-making process in line
with the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, has been working with
United Nations entities and various women's groups,
including the Women's Social Support Group, in
drafting a gender equality bill that will soon be
presented to Parliament. The Government continues to
make progress towards the education of the girl child
and the provision of free health care to pregnant
women, lactating mothers and children under five. The
Government will continue to promote human rights
issues in accordance with our national interest.

The Government's commitment to democratic
governance and the maintenance of the independence
of our democratic institutions, such as the National
Electoral Commission, the Political Parties
Registration Commission, the Independent Media
Commission and civil society organizations remains
undiminished. The Government will soon take the
necessary steps to establish an independent police
complaints committee. The independence of the
judiciary has always been a feature of our democratic
governance, and the Government will continue to
maintain the inbuilt checks and balances provided for
in the Constitution. The National Electoral
Commission has duly taken ownership of the electoral
process by playing a leading role in the biometric voter
registration process and in the review and reform of the
electoral laws. The Government recognizes the
important role of the Independent Media Commission
in regulating the conduct of the media and will

continue to provide support to assist the Commission
in effectively performing its functions.

It is acknowledged that Sierra Leone is a success
story in peacebuilding and we therefore renew our call
on the international community to continue to invest in
success in the spirit of the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, adopted in Busan, Republic of Korea,
and to recognize the need for special attention to be
paid to countries emerging from conflict.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm that the
Government, recognizing the 2012 elections as a litmus
8

test for our peace and democratic governance
consolidation, is taking all necessary steps to ensure
that the elections will be peaceful, free, fair,
transparent and credible.

