Mr. Lovald (Norway): I am grateful for this
opportunity to participate in the Council's discussions
concerning Burundi in my capacity as Chair of the
country-specific meetings on Burundi in the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
(S/2007/682) outlines peacebuilding priorities that are
also highlighted in the Peacebuilding Commission's
work on Burundi, from the security situation and
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement, political development and governance,
transitional justice, security sector reform and rule of
law to economic development.

The Peacebuilding Commission takes a
comprehensive approach to its work and hence is
particularly concerned about how the various priorities
relate to each other in the overall peacebuilding effort.

Let me focus on three issues of particular
relevance to the Security Council. First, the
conclusions and recommendations on peacebuilding in
Burundi forwarded to the President of the Security
Council in my letter dated 20 September 2007
(PBC/Z/BDI/2) addressed some of the key challenges
facing the country at that time, including the
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement between the Government of Burundi and
PALIPEHUTU-FNL. The Peacebuilding Commission
recommended to the Council that it continue to closely
monitor the situation in Burundi, in particular with
respect to the effective implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement, and that it
consider, if necessary, undertaking appropriate action
with a view to the effective implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement by the set date.

It was indeed timely that the Facilitator of the
Burundi Peace Process, Mr. Charles Nqakula, Minister
of Safety and Security of South Africa, addressed the
Council last week on the implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement (see S/PV.5786).
It was encouraging that the members of the Council
gave their full support to the efforts of the Regional
Initiative and the Facilitator. I recall that the
07-62914
Peacebuilding Commission, in its conclusions and
recommendations of 20 September, voiced similar
support.

Given the continuing urgency of this issue today,
I wish to reiterate the Peacebuilding Commission's
recommendation to the Security Council that it closely
monitor the situation and undertake appropriate action.

Secondly, given the present challenges facing
Burundi, political stability is particularly important.
The newly reshuffled Cabinet in Burundi and the end
of the parliamentary boycott represent important and
positive developments. They are examples of resolving
political differences within the democratically
established institutions. The Government of Burundi
and the leaders of the political parties in parliament
should be commended for their efforts.

Thirdly, before I conclude, let me update the
Council on the latest developments in the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. Since
the Security Council last discussed BINUB's mandate,
in May, the Peacebuilding Commission has concluded
the development of a Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in Burundi and yesterday adopted a
Monitoring and Tracking Mechanism for that
Framework. This was a critical step for the
Peacebuilding Commission's engagement with
Burundi. It is the foundation for the implementation
and review process which we are about to enter. It has
also been an achievement in itself because of the way it
was developed - together with the Government of
Burundi and following consultations with key
stakeholders on the ground.

As I mentioned in my statement to the Security
Council during its meeting in October on the
Peacebuilding Commission's annual report (see 07-62914
S/PV.5761), while we have focused so far on
peacebuilding priorities, we are now shifting our focus
to the question of how to follow up on these priorities.
In other words, we are moving from identification to
implementation.

In this regard, I take note of the Secretary-
General's call for the Peacebuilding Commission to put
additional emphasis on sustaining international
attention with respect to Burundi and on facilitating the
marshalling of resources for peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts in the country. That will indeed
be an essential role for the Commission and its
members in reviewing the Strategic Framework. The
continued support of the Security Council and other
major organs of the United Nations remains crucial.

