Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We recognize the presence among us of our
brother Jorge Arreaza, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Allow us to
congratulate you, Sir, your team and the people and
the Government of our sister Republic of Equatorial
Guinea on the excellent conduct of the work of the
Security Council this month.

The Government and the people of Nicaragua
have continuously reaffirmed - and we reaffirm
today - our full commitment and our absolute
responsibility to comply with the instruments of the
United Nations, including the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as its mechanisms and everything
that represents the possibility and duty of peacefully
transcending conflicts. Our commitment is reinforced
by the outrageous threats that arise from interference
and intervention in the affairs of States, as well as by
any practice, proposal or discourse that seeks to revive
the offensive history of Latin America and that, by
means of intimidation, disrespect and the use of means
and technologies of information, seeks to promote
hatred and separation between peoples and States and
between brothers and sisters throughout the world.

Nicaragua fraternally summons all those present,
in particular the Governments and peoples of our
America, to defend the Charter of the United Nations,
which embodies the right to live and coexist in peace
and harmony, rejecting speeches and practices that
injure the dignity of peoples, the strength of our
institutions, our laws and above all the Constitution of
each State - the Magna Carta that each State defends
as it defends its honour, its pride, its national rights.

We call on our fellow countries to respect the
will of the people. We call on our fellow countries
to rule out threats and actions that bring instability,
suffering and death to millions of human beings, and
that by denying them peace deny them the possibility
of living with security and well-being. We call on our
fellow countries to cease aggression and hostilities,
which seek to subdue our peoples, condemning us to
poverty, harassment and humiliation while destroying
economies and exposing so many human beings to
misfortune, vulnerability and dependence.

Triggering chaos, instability, violence and
economic strangulation and issuing threats of death and
war constitutes a serious violation of universal human
rights, and alienates countries and peoples that have
been objectified and singled out from the fulfilment
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals, thus increasing
the number of human beings and families living in
exclusion, poverty and insecurity by millions.

In the spirit of brotherhood, and with all the respect
that we owe each other as fellow inhabitants of our
planet, we are called upon to defend 4 with every
fibre of our strength - peace, respectful relations,
and the right of every country to choose its political,
economic and social model without interference,
threats or coercive actions that contradict the intention
of the United Nations Charter and all instruments of
international law.

We have chosen the path of peace and not of war. At
the summit of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, held in Havana in 2014, the Heads of
State and Government in our America and the Caribbean
proclaimed our entire territory a zone of peace, justice
and development, and we must respect - and ensure
respect for 4 that proclamation.

In this sad, unfortunate hour, which seems to repeat
a historical cycle that we thought we had transcended,
we are called upon in brotherhood to defend peace
everywhere, and at this particular moment in Venezuela,
as well as throughout our America and the Caribbean.
We want peace, agreement and dialogue, with a view to
resolving with all problems, contradictions or conflict
in good faith, so that our peoples do not suffer the scorn
and brutality of war in any of its forms, or the poverty
that snatches away all our rights.

Nicaragua welcomes the efforts that the
international community and the organizations
defending international law are carrying out, and that
we are carrying out, so as to avoid other tragedies that
repeat, as we have said, the history of discord and
the desire of the powerful to dominate and force into
submission peoples of dignity. We have learned 4 and
must now know 4 how to choose life with respect, and,
with the strength of our unbending and indestructible
identities, dismiss anything that seeks to ruin the
brave and noble and brave soul of our American and
Caribbean, which emphatically wants peace.

Nicaragua welcomes the Montevideo Mechanism
created by our America and the Caribbean, which,
bringing together Mexico, Bolivia, Uruguay and the
countries of the Caribbean Community, seeks to foster
understanding, agreement, respect and dignity, in order
to promote fraternal and fair solutions in Venezuela.

We salute the heroic and magnificent people of
Simon Bolivar, as well as their President, Comrade
Nicolas Maduro, and in embracing Venezuela, we
embrace all the peoples of our America who proclaim
homeland, life, love and hope. War offers us nothing;
we wish to live in peace.

