Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his briefing.

Russia welcomed the successful holding of
presidential elections in Mali in July and August. We
are pleased that the voting took place without serious
violations or incidents, according to African and
international observers. We are grateful to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for its timely provision
of logistics and technical assistance for the preparation
for the elections. We hope that the election results will
contribute to restoring peace and achieving national
harmony in Mali and will enable Malian society to cope
with its ongoing problems and deal more effectively with
the terrorist threat in the Sahara-Sahel region generally.

We note Bamako's efforts to restore a State
presence in northern Mali. The work on organizing
municipal bodies has been stepped up since the summer
and temporary administrations have been appointed in
most districts. Importantly, the Government has begun
to help to stimulate economic activity in those areas,
which is the best antidote to new social disturbances.

We also note that Malians are making efforts to
reform the security sector. The emphasis here should
be on implementing the 2015 Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. Strengthening confidence-building
measures and collaboration between the country's
armed forces and the groups under the control of the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and the
Platform should become the basis for restoring peace
and order. We support starting joint patrols in Gao as
soon as possible.

We welcome the signing on 15 October of a pact
for peace between the Malian authorities and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It is
important that representatives of the Platform and the
Coordination also announced their commitment to the
document. We hope that it represents an additional
guarantee that the parties will implement the road map
and the Peace Agreement, as provided for in resolution
2423 (2018).

While acknowledging the obvious positive
developments in the work of achieving a settlement
in Mali, we should not omit to point out some other
and unfortunately less encouraging trends there. We
are concerned about the sharp jump in the number of
terrorist acts in the past three months. Interethnic and
intercommunal conflicts are becoming increasingly
intense in central Mali, and the situation is complicated
by the fact that the presence of the authorities in these
areas is still at a critically low level. In that regard,
we should note the results that MINUSMA has had in
reconciling the hostile parties.

We are also concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. The number of people in need
of help has gone up almost one and a half times over the
past year, a very worrying trend. We call on all outside
donors to fulfil their funding commitments for the
humanitarian appeal. We should remind everyone that
the desperate circumstances that Mali's young people
find themselves in leave them with nowhere to go but to
join the ranks of terrorist, extremist or criminal groups.

The situation in Mali is a significant factor for
African security generally. However, neither will it
possible to reach a settlement there without normalizing
the situation in the entire region. The Libya factor is still
playing a negative role in that regard. The connections
between the terrorists operating in Mali and in the
region as a whole are becoming increasingly visible. In
that regard, we support the concrete steps taken by the
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel to form their
Joint Force to fight terrorism and organized crime, and
we hope that their role in ensuring regional security
will increase.

