Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We too
wish to thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his briefing and
for his efforts in the Middle East. The United Republic
of Tanzania remains gravely concerned at the
continuing violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially in the Gaza strip, which has
resulted in the loss of many lives, including those of
women and children, and the destruction of critical
infrastructure. The ongoing cycle of violence and
counter-violence has lead to further tension in the
region, at a time when the parties in the Middle East
should be searching for ways to revitalize the stalled
peace process. Negotiations for a two-State solution,
based on the principle of land-for-peace, must be
revived.

The current volatile situation in the Middle East
is very disturbing. Israeli air strikes on heavily
populated Palestinian areas, extrajudicial killings of
alleged militants, tank shelling and major ground
operations have continued unabated. Israel has
demolished key Palestinian infrastructure, including
the only power plant. Suicide attacks by Palestinians,
as well as indiscriminate rocket and mortar fire at
Israel, have also continued with no end in sight.

We are very concerned by the surge of intra-
Palestinian violence, particularly in Gaza. The
violence, coupled with the closure of key supply lines,
is causing much hardship among the Palestinian people
and the denial of their basic necessities, and thus
constitutes a violation of their human rights. The non-
payment of salaries to Palestinian workers is also
contributing to their desperation and, in turn, breeds
more violence.

Tanzania welcomes the commitment of President
Mahmoud Abbas to peace and Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert's readiness to talk. We also welcome the efforts
of Egyptian diplomats and other regional mediators,
and we encourage them to continue. We also look
forward to the conference to be held in Paris in
January, as announced by the representative of France.

Ordinary Israelis and Palestinians have also
expressed, in many ways and on many occasions, their
desire for a negotiated two-State solution as provided
for in the relevant United Nations resolutions and in
the road map. We believe that this is an opportune time
for the Hamas-led Government to commit itself to the
principles set out by the Quartet, including recognition
of Israel's right to exist, and to the principle of
non-violence.

For its part, Israel should implement its
obligations under the road map, including halting the
construction of the barrier in the West Bank, freezing
settlement activity and allowing freedom of movement
by removing checkpoints and other restrictions on
movement by the Palestinians. Without the resumption
of free movement, a viable Palestinian economy will
not be possible.

Israel should also reverse its decision to withhold
customs and value-added tax payments that it collects
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. The withholding
of those payments, together with the withdrawal of aid
by some donor Governments, has led to a serious fiscal
crisis for the Palestinian Authority. It is high time to
reconsider that position so as to avert a humanitarian
cr1s1s.

With regard to southern Lebanon, we are pleased
to note that the situation has remained calm, enabling
schools to reopen and other activities to return to
normal. We welcome the efforts and contributions of
all the countries that have made it possible for a return
to relative peace in that area. We urge that action be
taken to clear landmines, which continue to claim the
lives of children in southern Lebanon. Lastly, we call
for full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

