Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I wish to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate under the presidency of
Luxembourg. We welcome the presence today of His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for Foreign
and European Affairs of Luxembourg. We also thank
the speakers who briefed the Council today.

Children in armed conflict is a profoundly
disturbing subject for us in Sri Lanka. We went through
a dark and brutal conflict during which, according to
UNICEF records, thousands of children were recruited
as child soldiers and were deprived of their precious
childhood. Mercifully, our war on terrorism ended in
May 2009 and the sad era of forcible child recruitment
for combat by the terror group Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) was brought to a close - but not
before thousands of children paid a heavy price with
their lives.

According to UNICEF in a report published in
2011, more than 60 per cent of the LTTE's fighting
cadre from 1983 to 2002 consisted of boys and girls
less than 18 years of age. UNICEF recorded more than
5,700 cases of child recruitment by the LTTE from
2003 to 2009. Human Rights Watch has suggested a
figure of more than 21,000. Following the tsunami,
orphaned children were harvested for combat purposes.
Child soldiers were also used as suicide bombers,
especially girls. Each family was forced to surrender
even very young children for combat purposes in the
final stages of the conflict. The LTTE had no scruples
about sacrificing thousands of children in the frontline
of combat. Children were given cyanide capsules by
their leaders to commit suicide to avoid capture.

At the Geneva peace talks in February 2006, the
LTTE publicly conceded that it was holding thousands
of children as combatants. With the end of the conflict,
594 child combatants - 231 girls and 363 boys between
the ages of 12 and 18 years - were taken into custody
by the security forces. The Government adopted a
caring attitude with those former child combatants,
treating them with a sensitivity rarely seen elsewhere,
as victims and not as perpetrators of violent crimes.
They were placed in institutional rehabilitation centres
and received access to education, vocational training,
health care and psycho-social support. Following their
rehabilitation process, they have all been reunited with
their immediate or extended families. That happened as
early as May 2010. The rehabilitation and reintegration
of child soldiers was a priority for Sri Lanka. Family
reunions are continuing to take place with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and UNICEF, which has continued to assist with
its extensive background of experience and goodwill.

We have always placed the welfare and protection
of children at the heart of our policy agenda. The
traditional extended family structure in Sri Lanka
prioritizes the welfare and education of children.
Therefore, forcible child recruitment was excruciating
for the affected families in the former conflict-affected
areas, as well as for our society at large. I should like
to mention that in Sri Lanka all children are required to
attend school. Attendance at the primary school level
is now close to 100 per cent, including in the former
conflict-affected areas.

Let me illustrate the pain and personal loss behind
the statistics, with the story of one former child soldier
as described by UNICEF. Rajeewan was only 13 years
old when he was abducted in 2007 by the LTTE while
visiting his sister's family in the Vanni region in the
Northern Province of Sri Lanka. His many attempts
to escape were unsuccessful. He said, "I longed to see
my family. I wanted to go home". He was subsequently
placed in the armed ranks of the LTTE and compelled
to fight with it until the final stages of the conflict.
After the end of the conflict, he surrendered to the Sri
Lankan army and was allowed to return home after a
year at a rehabilitation centre. The teenager, who left
his family at 13, finally returned home as a 19-year-
old battle-hardened grownup. Rajeewan lost seven
years of his young life to the cruel taskmasters who
recruited him. The conflict took away his childhood
and disrupted his education, leaving him no option but
to look for unskilled work on his release. As he also
said,

"I was happy to be finally home, but I was worried
about my future and what I could do to earn a living
and help my ageing parents".

Today, almost five years after the end of the
conflict, child recruitment is a distant but ever-recurring
memory. The story of Rajeewan had a happy ending.
With the help of UNICEF, he attended a vocational
training programme and obtained qualifications that
led to a permanent job as an icecream vendor, selling
icecream in villages and towns. Now he says he loves
his job and, more than anything, he is able to help his
family.

Sri Lanka made its zero-tolerance policy on child
recruitment a non-negotiable condition. Through
sustained political will and proactive efforts, the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former child
combatants under our campaign entitled "Bring Back
the Child" was achieved. Sri Lanka has criminalized
the recruitment of children for armed combat.

Sri Lanka's approach has had a positive effect
on the country's reconciliation process. Former child
soldiers were able to put their pasts behind them
and rebuild their lives as the Government adopted
the overarching principle of restorative justice and
not retributive justice, consistent with our cultural
heritage and reconciliation efforts. For us, revenge and
retribution was not an option. The opportunity was
given to 273 child combatants to continue with their
formal education at Hindu College in Colombo, in
close cooperation with the Ministry of Education, prior
to their reintegration into their families. Following
reunification, they were also given the freedom to seek
admission to a school of their choice. Thirty-five former
child combatants returned to Hindu College to continue
their junior and senior high school education, and 321
former combatants opted to undertake vocational
training conducted by the vocational training authority
of Sri Lanka.

Among the adult beneficiaries who were once
recruited as children, a system called the Catch-up
Education Programme has been initiated in liaison with
the Ministry of Education to enable them to continue
their formal education. In 2010, 175 beneficiaries
completed the national Grade 10 examination, while
361 beneficiaries completed the national Grade
12 examination - 91 passed their ordinary level
examinations and 222 passed the advanced level
examinations.

Let me briefly outline some actions taken by the
Government of Sri Lanka over the years on this vital
issue.

In terms resolution 1612 (2005), Sri Lanka
voluntarily submitted to the Security Council
monitoring process and established the Sri Lanka
Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting in July
2006. Sri Lanka fully cooperated with the Special
Representative, the Council's Working Group and
UNICEF on the rehabilitation and reintegration of
former child combatants.

During the entire conflict period, basic and
essential services such as health care and education
were provided unimpeded to all affected communities
in the north and the east, with particular attention on
safeguarding the rights and needs of children. The
lessons learned and reconciliation commission report
comprehensively details the supply of essential services
to those areas. In 2006, the consultative committee on
humanitarian assistance, an apex consultative body
to ensure a coordinated humanitarian response, was
established following a request by the co-chairs to the
peace process - Japan, the United States, the European
Union and Norway.

Sri Lanka's experience in ensuring the overall well-
being of children in conflict is unique. Even during
the height of the conflict, the Government agreed to
a cessation of hostilities to ensure that the national
qualifying examinations were held in the conflict
zones to enable students to sit their examinations
every year. We were also able to reach agreement on
ceasing hostilities to ensure that the polio vaccination
programme could be carried out in the conflict zones.
In recognition of those dedicated efforts, UNICEF, in
The State of the World's Children 2008, documented
and commended Sri Lanka as the best achiever in our
subregion despite a long-standing conflict. UNICEF
also commended Sri Lanka in its publication entitled
Progressfor Children: Achieving the MDGs with Equity.

Following the end of the conflict, special initiatives
were undertaken to provide access to health services
for children through a collaborative mechanism
between the national child-protection authority and the
department of paediatrics of Colombo University.
In the post-conflict phase, significant attention was
paid to restoring and rebuilding schools. Today, 1,630
schools in the former conflict-affected areas have been
restored.

An armed group released all combatants under
a tripartite action plan with UNICEF and the
Government. It has also since transformed itself into
a legitimate political party by joining the democratic
process. The former adult cadres are very much part of
the democratic process. A former child soldier of that
armed group was elected as the first chief minister of
the Eastern Province.

The Government has established women's and
children's police desks staffed with female police
officers in police stations in the north and the east.
Specially trained police officers function at such desks,
which provide an enabling and protective environment
for children, women and girls and their parents to
report incidents of abuse and exploitation. The network
is also linked to the national child-protection authority.
Sexual and gender-based violence help desks are
located in hospitals in the districts formerly affected
by the conflict.

Due to the progress made and the true commitment
of the Government with regard to its children and
former child soldiers, Sri Lanka was delisted from
the Secretary-General's list of shame in June 2012.
Sri Lanka successfully completed Security Council-
mandated programmes to end the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict.

Finally, Sri Lanka continues with its efforts to help
and support former child soldiers to rebuild their lives.
The Government of Sri Lanka is appreciative of United
Nations agencies such as UNICEF, and countries
such as Japan, which have made key contributions to
the Government's efforts to reintegrate former child
soldiers into society.

The Secretary-General's 2013 report on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245) notes that the evolving
character and tactics of armed conflict are creating
unprecedented threats to children. We encourage
greater engagement between Member States and the
United Nations for the better protection of all children
who are affected by armed conflict.

