The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia and Montenegro, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Miomir Zuzul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, and His
Excellency Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public
Administration and Local Self-Government of the
Republic of Serbia, on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kasljugie
(Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Zuenl (Croatia),
Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda) and Mr. Loncar (Serbia and Montenegro) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Meron to take a seat at the Council
table.

I shall take it that the Security Council decides to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Judge Erik Mase, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I invite Judge Mnse to take a seat at the Council
table.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.

It is so decided.

I invite Prosecutor Del Ponte to take a seat at the
Council table.

I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I invite Prosecutor Jallow to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
to photocopies of letters circulated on 18 and
22 November 2004, respectively, from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, which will be issued as
documents of the Security Council under the symbols
S/2004/897 and 8/2004/921.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
by the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Following those
briefings, I will give the floor to Council members who
wish to make comments or ask questions.

As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I would like to invite them to indicate to the
secretariat if they Wish to take the floor.

I now give the floor to Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.


