Mr. Nitzan (Israel): At each and every open
debate, the representative of Saudi Arabia uses this
platform arrogantly to accuse my country of abusing
human rights and violating the freedom of religion.
And yet the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a world leader
in abusing human rights. In the Islamic State of Saudi
Arabia, nine people were beheaded so far this year. We
are not talking historically, we are talking aboutjust the
past two weeks. In the Islamic State of Saudi Arabia,
a blogger was sentenced to 1,000 lashes for running a
website promoting free speech. And in the Islamic State
of Saudi Arabia, 87 people were executed last year,
while 78 people were executed in 2013.

In response to the Syrian statement, I would like
to quote the figures published today by Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura. The Syrian Government
is solely responsible for the deaths of 220,000 Syrians.
Twelve million people are in need in Syria. Seven
million six hundred thousand people are displaced. And
3.3 million refugees have left Syria. No inflammatory
statements or barage of lies can disguise those facts.

In his briefing this morning, the Assistant
Secretary General ad interim referred to a letter that
my delegation wrote regarding Hizbullah's military
capabilities. I note that the Secretariat did not report that
the missiles and weapons being supplied to Hizbullah
were coming directly from the Islamic Republic of Iran,

and it is very important to emphasize that point. The
Iranian Revolutionary Guard is a Security Council-
designated entity responsible for the murder of the tens
ofthousands of civilians in the Middle East, and behind
countless terror attacks around the world.

Mr. Galvez took the Chair.

Even as the Security Council was debating the
situation in the Middle East today, Hizbullah chief
Hassan Nasrallah was making more threatening
statements on Lebanese television. He said that

"despite the current preoccupations, Hizbullah is
completely ready to face Israel... Hizbullah is ready
to invade Israel's Galilee and beyond during any
upcoming war... Hizbullah is working to contrive
the greatest victory in its wars against Israel".

Nasrallah said this only a few hours ago. Iran and its
proxies, be it the Syrian Government or Hizbullah, are
a threat to international peace and security, and it is
time to seriously address this threat.

I also found it amusing that the Turkish
representative said that the Palestinian issue is a
priority for Turkey. Turkey is currently providing a
platform for the terrorist activities of Hamas. Hamas
terrorists freely operate on Turkish soil, instructing and
financing Hamas terrorist operations against Israel.
As we speak, Turkey's sponsorship of terrorism in the
Middle East should also be a priority for the Council.

Israel is fully committed to finding a political
solution with the Palestinian Authority. Israel is
committed to the solution of two States for two peoples
through, and only through, direct negotiations between
the parties. There is no alternative to negotiations.
Many have talked today about the importance of direct
negotiations, but let me also remind the Council that it
was President Abbas who flew to Doha, Qatar, a few
months ago, despite the efforts ofthe United States, and
chose Hamas over peace talks with Israel.

That was not the first time that this has happened;
it happened also in 2012 when, just as we were on the
verge of a breakthrough, Abbas abandoned the talks
and flew to Doha to sign a unity deal with Hamas. I
would remind the Council that Hamas is a designated
terrorist organization and recognized as such around the
world. Still in 2012, a few months later the Palestinian
leadership went to the United Nations seeking to
bypass direct negotiations. That also happened at the
end of last year with the draft resolution presented by
the Palestinians (S/2014/916) and other unilateral steps
taken by the Palestinians - all to avoid direct talks. It

is much easier to travel to New York than to negotiate
directly with the Prime Minister of Israel in Jerusalem.

Finally, I would like to conclude by reminding a
certain Security Council member who referred to
the work of the Council in 2014 that the Council also
worked on a draft resolution to bring a solution to
the Gaza Strip by facilitating the entry into Gaza of
construction materials. However, that draft resolution
was singlehandedly rejected by the Palestinian
Authority.

