The President: I should like, at the outset of the
meeting, to extend on behalf of the Council a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of Guinea-
Bissau to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Alfredo
Lopes Cabral. We look forward to cooperating with him in
the Council's work.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(S/1996/622)

Letter dated 2 August 1996 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/632)

Note by the Secretary-General (S/1996/648)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/ 1996/622, report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Transitional Administration
for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium;
S/ 1996/632, letter dated 2 August 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and S/ 1996/648, note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the text of the Agreement on Interim
Co-financing of Public Services on the Territory
Administered by UNTAES, by the Government of the
Republic of Croatia, concluded on 8 August 1996 by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia and UNTAES.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 5 August 1996
(S/l996/622) on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES), and the letter from
the Secretary-General of 2 August 1996
(S/ 1996/632) concerning the funding of the existing
local administrative structures in the area of
operations of UNTAES.

"The Security Council welcomes the progress
made by UNTAES in implementing the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/ 1995/951, annex)
signed on 12 November 1995 (the Basic Agreement), and in promoting the full and peaceful
reintegration of the region of Eastern Slavonia into
the Republic of Croatia. It stresses that the
restoration and maintenance of the multi-ethnic
character of Eastern Slavonia are important to
international efforts to maintain peace and stability
in the region of the former Yugoslavia as a whole.
It reminds both parties of their obligation to
cooperate with UNTAES. It underlines the
importance of economic rehabilitation of the Region,
the establishment of a Transitional Police Force and
the return of displaced persons and refugees to their
homes in the Region, as well as the importance of
the promotion by the Government of Croatia of the
return of displaced persons and refugees to their
homes of origin elsewhere in the Republic of
Croatia. It further underlines the importance of the
holding of elections in accordance with the Basic
Agreement, once the necessary conditions have been
established.

"The Security Council reminds the Government
of Croatia of its responsibility to cooperate with

 

UNTAES and to create conditions conducive to
maintaining stability in the Region. It calls on the
Government of Croatia to take the necessary action
without further delay.

"The Security Council recalls the statements of
its President of 22 May (S/PRST/ 1996/26) and 3 July
(S/PRST/1996/30) and again urges the Government of
Croatia to adopt a comprehensive amnesty law
concerning all persons who, voluntarily or by
coercion, served in the civil administration, military or
police forces of the local Serb authorities in the
former United Nations Protected Areas, with the
exception of those who committed war crimes as
defined in international law. The Council notes with
concern that the amnesty law and the action
subsequently taken by the Government of Croatia, as
described the Secretary-General in is report of 5
August, have been insufficient to create confidence
among the local Serb population in Eastern Slavonia.
The Council notes the general agreement reached by
President Tudjman and President Milosevic in Athens
on 7 August 1996 that a general amnesty is an
indispensable condition for the safe return of refugees
and displaced persons. It expects this agreement to be
followed up by corresponding concrete measures.

"The Security Council notes with appreciation the
agreement reached by the Government of Croatia and
UNTAES on issues relating to the funding of public
services on the territory administered by UNTAES
(S/1996/648, annex). It notes, however, that this
funding is not sufficient to cover all the costs of such
services and it expects further funding to be made
available by the Government of Croatia urgently and
without conditions. It stresses the importance of
ensuring a functioning civil administration so as to
maintain stability in the region and help ensure the
fulfilment of the mission objectives of UNTAES.
The Council, having regard to its resolution 1037
(1996), also reminds the Government of Croatia of
the need to contribute towards the costs of the
UNTAES operation.

"The Security Council recalls that the Basic
Agreement provides for a transitional period of 12
months which may be extended at most to another
period of the same duration if so requested by one
of the parties. It stresses the importance it attaches
to UNTAES being able to complete its mandated
tasks, including the organization of elections as
provided for in the Basic Agreement, promptly and
in full. These tasks are, as the Secretary-General
notes, the building blocks for the difficult process of
reconciliation. To that end, the Council affirms its
readiness to consider, at an appropriate time,
extending the duration of the mandate of UNTAES,
on the basis of the Basic Agreement, its resolution
1037 (1996), and a recommendation from the
Secretary-General.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Transitional Administrator and
his staff, and reaffirms its full support for the efforts
of the Transitional Administrator.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.35 am.

