Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
15 members of the Security Council of resolution 2375
(2017) on non-proliferation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. It also commends the constructive
spirit that has prevailed in the negotiations on and the
adoption of this resolution, whose penholder is the
United States delegation.

As the Security Council has the primary
responsibility in maintaining international peace and
security and in accordance with the many resolutions
that it has adopted on this issue, the Council had to
take action by adopting supplementary measures that
considerably bolster those that are already in force.
Strong reactions are logical as the regime of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
pursue an illegal military regime, in flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions and of non-proliferation
resolutions. Its nuclear programme is furthermore
a direct threat to aviation security and the safety of
millions of people who live, work and travel throughout
the region, as the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
gave no warning or notice concerning the launches and
tests ofa hydrogen bomb on 3 September, which caused
an earthquake that was felt in neighbouring countries.

The Senegalese delegation wishes to underscore
that this set of targeted measures, taken quite rightly in
response to the challenge posed by the ballistic missile
programme of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, must be pursued in the framework of global and
political strategies to encourage the parties to engage
in dialogue with a view to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula, with the support of the international
community. I therefore reiterate once again my country's
support for a peaceful settlement of this issue.

I call on the Council to remain unified with regard
to the resumption of the six-party talks in order to
achieve a verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula that will ensure the peaceful coexistence of
countries and peoples of the region. Fortunately, the
strong point of today's resolution is that paragraphs
28, 29 and 30 of resolution 2370 (2017) pave the way
for a commendable political solution. We must now
rise to the challenge of implementing this resolution.
As the Permanent Representative of Italy stated during
consultations, in his capacity as Chair ofthe Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), there remains much
to be desired in its implementation.

