The President: I thank Ambassador Ben
Mustapha for his kind words addressed to the members
of the Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/200l/218)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
Yugoslavia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Mlaa'enovic'
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr.
Nesho (Albania), Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr.
Schori (Sweden), Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and Mr.
Go'ktu'rk (Turkey) took the seats reserved for them
at the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hans Haekkerup, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Haekkerup to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, document
S/2001/218.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. On behalf
of the Council, I would like to welcome the Special
Representative. Since it is your very first appearance
before the Council, Sir, in your present capacity, let me
congratulate you on your recent assumption of these
duties. It is my pleasure to recall that back in January
the Council was unanimous in welcoming your
appointment by the Secretary-General.


