Mr. Forster: I would like to thank you very
much, Mr. President, for having given me this
opportunity to address the Security Council on an
issue - the protection of civilians in armed conflict -
that is at the core of the mandate and operational
priorities of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC).

In contemporary conflicts civilians are often the
victims of the deliberate disregard shown by bearers of
weapons for the strict obligation that they have under
international humanitarian law to spare those not
taking part in hostilities. Unarmed men, women and
children are intentionally targeted for what they are.

The lack of political will to fully respect
humanitarian law and other applicable rules remains
the main impediment to protecting civilians in times of
armed conflict. The prime responsibility for providing
protection and solutions falls upon State authorities and
all those who bear weapons. Humanitarian endeavours
like those of the ICRC can never be a substitute for
political action.

Article 1 common to the four Geneva
Conventions clearly stipulates that States have an
obligation not only to respect but also to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law in all circumstances.
That duty encompasses measures ranging from purely
preventive action to the repression of serious violations
of humanitarian law.

The ICRC has a duty to act on behalf of all
persons affected by armed conflict and other forms of
violence, without distinction. However, it takes into
account specific vulnerabilities and needs, such as
those of internally displaced persons, women, missing
persons and their families, and children, with regard to
whom the Security Council so strongly expressed its
deep concern in the recent past.

The plight of internally displaced persons is of
primary concern to the ICRC, whose priorities in this
area centre mainly on challenges such as how to
prevent displacement, how to alleviate the suffering
caused by displacement once it has occurred, where
and how to relocate internally displaced persons, how
to take into account the needs of the resident
population in areas hosting such persons and how to
ensure security and protection for returnees.

The ICRC is convinced that enhanced
cooperation is crucial to addressing the protection
needs of internally displaced persons. Its efforts to
coordinate with other humanitarian actors in this area
are reality-based and action-oriented. We also believe
that it is extremely important for humanitarian
organizations to work in a complementary manner.
That approach has sometimes led us to focus on
preventing displacement, particularly in remote areas,
and might lead us to do so again.

In times of armed conflict, women are the victims
of various forms of Violence due to violations of
international humanitarian law. Many are wounded or
killed. Others are marginalized and suffer anguish and
deprivation after losing or being separated from family
members. Sexual violence is all too often used as a
weapon of war, targeting not only women, but through
them the entire community. It is indeed one of the most
difficult issues for humanitarian organizations to
address. The social repercussions of rape are totally
devastating for women if the community responds by
stigmatizing the victim rather than by prosecuting the
perpetrator.
Another issue to which I would like to refer is
that of the plight of countless families whose relatives
have gone missing as a result of armed conflict. These
families make desperate attempts to ascertain the fate
of their loved ones and are often unable to overcome
their pain and rebuild their lives again, even years after
the events. Any infringement on their right to know
what happened to their relatives hampers reconciliation
and peace efforts. The authorities must spare no effort
to prevent people from disappearing and to deal with
the consequences when they do. The ICRC takes a
comprehensive approach to this issue, endeavouring to
make a decisive contribution by carrying out
preventive activities, visiting detained persons,
advocating for and taking part in mechanisms to
discover the fate of missing persons, promoting
forensic activities and the return of human remains and
also - last but not least - providing support to
families.

To build acceptance, establish dialogue and play
its humanitarian role effectively, the ICRC believes
that it must continue to be, and be seen to be, neutral
and independent. While recognizing that there are other
approaches to humanitarian action, we believe that
neutral and independent humanitarian action has a
clear added value for the protection of civilians in
times of armed conflict and that it is essential to avoid
the misperception that political, military and
humanitarian actors all pursue the same objectives.
Building trust and acceptance among all the parties to a
conflict is an arduous undertaking. Such trust and
acceptance may be rapidly destroyed, with lasting
consequences, if doubts arise as to the independence of
a humanitarian actor.

Let me conclude by stressing how important it is
for the international community to prevent armed
conflict and to support actions aimed at addressing its
underlying causes in an effective and sustainable
manner, thereby making the renewal of hostilities less
likely. The adoption yesterday, by a diplomatic
conference, of the Third Additional Protocol to the
Geneva Conventions, whereby an additional emblem
will be created, is a very important step that will enable
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
movement to achieve universality at last, and thus
protect civilians in armed conflict more efficiently.

