Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish first of
all to welcome to the Council the Vice-Minister of
External Relations of Angola.

I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for the
information and comments contained in his most recent
report on developments in Angola, contained in document
S/2000/23. My thanks go also to Mr. Kieran Prendergast
and to Ambassador Robert Fowler for their
comprehensive and instructive briefings. My delegation
endorses the ideas set out in the report and in those
briefings, and I should like to make some comments in
that regard.

First, let me stress that Mali attaches great
importance to a continued United Nations presence in
Angola. Such a presence can make a major contribution
to promoting peace, national reconciliation, respect for
human rights, and the security of the region. To that end,
it is important to restore trust between the United Nations
and the Government of Angola.

From this standpoint, my delegation welcomes the
positive developments with regard to the status of the
mission, which will allow the United Nations Office in

 

Angola to become operational. In the same vein, we
welcome the appointment of Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari
the Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Africa, with
special focus on the situation in Angola.

Secondly, we believe that the chief cause of the
current crisis in Angola is UNITA's failure to comply with
its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Mali welcomes the
sanctions imposed on UNITA, in particular the provisions
contained in Security Council resolution 1237 (1999), and
supports the recommendations contained in the reports of
the Chairman of the sanctions Committee in documents
S/ 1999/644 and S/1999/829.

Thirdly, my delegation is profoundly concerned by the
repercussions on regional security and on the Angolan
people of the continuing conflict and of its expansion. I
should like to emphasize in particular the situation of
internally displaced persons and vulnerable groups, namely,
children, women, the elderly and the disabled. I should like
to echo the statement issued at the thirty-fifth Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity, held in Algiers in July 1999, which urged
the international community to provide the Angolan
Government with the necessary assistance to enable it to
fulfil its primary responsibility of meeting the humanitarian
needs of the Angolan people. We commend the Angolan
Government for having set up an emergency humanitarian
assistance plan.

Fourthly, my delegation believes that lasting peace and
national reconciliation can be secured only through political
dialogue. In this respect, the lesson that we can learn from
Angola is abundantly clear. That is why my delegation
believes that the Lusaka Protocol must be revitalized so as
to put an end to the suffering of the Angolan people and
permit my mentor, friend and compatriot, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, the architect of that Protocol, to rest in
peace.

