Ms. Bird (Australia): As Article 24 of the Charter
makes clear, Security Council members act on behalf of
the United Nations membership as a whole. This open
debate usefully enables the broader United Nations
membership to inform the Council of its expectations.

Let me briefly highlight a few working-method
reforms that Australia believes should be priorities.

First, with respect to atrocity prevention, proposals
calling for restraint on use of the veto and negative votes
in situations involving mass atrocities are fundamental
working-method reforms which should be supported.

Secondly, concerning conflict prevention, the
peacebuilding review found that the Council should
do better on conflict prevention and that overcoming
fragmentation between the principal organs of the
United Nations would strengthen its work in preventing
conflict and sustaining peace. To this end, the Council
should draw more regularly on the Peacebuilding
Commission's advice.

The Council should also make better use of early-
warning mechanisms and timely briefings on threats.
The Secretariat should be empowered to bring to the
Council's attention emerging threats, in line with the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and Article 99 of the
Charter.

Thirdly, a better informed Council is a more
effective Council. The use of a diverse range of briefers
and informal mechanisms such as Arria-Formula
meetings will help ensure that the Council is well
informed.

Fourthly, concerning procedural decisions, the
Council's general practice of deciding on procedural
matters by consensus is appropriate. But where
consensus cannot be reached on crucial matters, the
Council should not prevent itself from taking the
necessary action. That was the case with the vote that
took place in December 2014 (see S/PV.7353) that placed
on the Council's agenda the situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

Finally, with respect to improved interaction with
the General Assembly, let me note, as many others have
today, that last month the General Assembly adopted by
consensus historic resolution 69/321, which demands
greater transparency in the selection of the Secretary-
General. The onus is now on the Council to act soon,

including by issuing a joint letter by the Presidents
of the Council and the General Assembly to solicit
candidate nominations.

Australia recently announced its candidacy for the
2029-2030 Council term. Working-methods reform in
the interim will help determine whether the Council at
that time will be transparent, credible and effective.

