Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My delegation welcomes
Foreign Minister Rassoul to this meeting and thanks
him especially for his very important statement. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his very
comprehensive briefing.

Our intervention this morning will focus on three
principal areas: security, political post-electoral
development, and economic and regional cooperation.

Nigeria notes with deep concern the deteriorating
security situation in Afghanistan, which to a large
extent continues to distract the Government's
commitment and initiatives in the full
operationalization of the transition and the Kabul
process. The high toll in civilian casualties has reached
an alarming proportion, and this serious challenge must
be met with decisive action through the collaborative
efforts of the international community.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms the
senseless and meaningless terrorist attack last week in
Kabul that resulted in deaths and injuries. In the same
vein, the targeted assassination of former Afghan
President and Chairman of the High Peace Council
Rabbani, who had dedicated his life to campaigning
assiduously for a sustained peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan, was indeed a huge blow to the
peace process. This great loss and tragic incident must
not dampen our hopes for a new Afghanistan.

Nigeria reiterates its commitment to supporting
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to advance
the peace and reconciliation process, and indeed
supports the efforts of the international community in
combating terrorism. We should ensure that those
responsible for committing acts of terrorism are never
allowed to truncate the cause of peace, unity and
freedom in a new Afghanistan.

It is in this regard that we welcome the
formalization of the agreement to increase the size of
the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), which
will enable it to effectively respond to the growing
security threat in the country. In addition, the formal
transition of security responsibility to the ANSF in
some critical areas is a welcome development. The
assumption of increasing control by the ANSF over
Afghan security would strengthen the country's
independence and development towards long-term
stability. We hope that this approach will reinforce the
capacity of the Afghan forces to maintain security.
Suffice it to say that the transition of the first set of
districts and provinces to full Afghan security control
earlier in the year continues to face significant
obstacles, especially in the area of border protection.

It is gratifying to note that Afghanistan continues
to record positive progress in its reconciliation and
integration efforts, despite the cynical trend of events
in the country. Nigeria reiterates its support for this
process to be Afghan-driven in order to forge the
national unity envisaged within the framework of the
peace process. That process must be further
consolidated by Afghanistan's democratic institutions
by way of resolving the legislative impasse created by
the announcement of some changes in the membership
of the National Assembly. While we support the need
for Afghans themselves to reach a negotiated political
solution to their problems, the reference point must
remain the application of the rule of law in accordance
with the Constitution. Other democratic and
constitutionally mandated institutions, including the
electoral bodies, must adhere to this ground rule. In
that regard, the pivotal role of women in the peace
process must not be undermined.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play an active role
in promoting constructive dialogue among all
stakeholders, as well as to assist the Government in its
framework for sustainable peace. We encourage all the
parties to renew their commitment to the consolidation
of the democratic peace process for the attainment of
lasting peace and security.

On economic development, we note the
Secretary-General's observation that the sustainability
of the achievements recorded in Afghanistan will
depend on the success in strengthening institutions, in
particular at the sub-national level, the creation of jobs
and economic opportunities, and on access to and
delivery of basic justice. Moreover, the Government
will need long-term international support and private
sector investment to boost revenue generation and all
its ramifications. We therefore continue to support the
channelling of funds and other forms of assistance
through the Afghan budget system for greater
coherence and efficiency.

We welcome the increasing cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. Their joint efforts to
combat organized crime, including drug and human
trafficking and arms smuggling, will not only facilitate
the implementation of the Government's national
priority programme, but also strengthen regional
security. We believe that the Istanbul Conference of 2
November, which has been referred to in various
statements, will provide yet another important platform
to focus on prioritizing areas for regional cooperation.

We extend our appreciation and support to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
De Mistura for his exceptional leadership, and to the
staff of UNAMA and all United Nations personnel for
their renewed commitment towards the sustainability
of a democratic Afghanistan.

