Let me complement David Shearer's briefing today by focusing on three main areas: first, the humanitarian situation and the outlook in the coming months; secondly, the protection of civilians and aid workers; and, thirdly, the support that humanitarian agencies need to ensure their work can continue. Despite some encouraging developments since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in September 2018 and the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity this year, humanitarian needs, already high after years of conflict, are again now rising due to more violence, flooding and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which is bringing a host of health and wider consequences, including increasing food insecurity. Nearly 6.5 million people - more than half the population - faced severe food insecurity at the height of the annual hunger season a few months ago. COVID-19 has made this worse. Another 1.6 million vulnerable people, mainly in urban settings, have been pushed to the brink. Overall this year, 7.5 million people now need humanitarian assistance, which is close to the levels in 2017, when we warned of famine. One million three hundred thousand children under the age of five are forecast to be malnourished. That is the highest in four years. To put it another way, about 10 per cent of the entire population of South Sudan will be malnourished children who have not yet reached their fifth birthday. The risk of famine is emerging again in areas suffering localized violence. Famine-like conditions - Integrated Food Security Phase Classification phase 5 at the household level, in the jargon - are reported in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. The violence in those areas has destroyed livelihoods, forced people to flee their homes and driven down food production. A 19-year-old woman from Pibor recently told United Nations staff: "We have been living a miserable life. This all started in February, and we did not expect this situation to last for so long. I ran into the bush with my three- month-old daughter. She was sick and died in July. Today is the first time that I have had access to a health-care facility since February." South Sudan's economy is contracting, affected by lower global oil prices and the wider global recession. The Government has little money to respond to the health and socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. The price of basic commodities has increased sharply. For example, the price of maize flour, which many people rely on, increased by 50 per cent between March and July. COVID-19 is also adding to the pressure on an already fragile health system. Years of conflict have devastated basic services, including the health-care system. South Sudan has one of the highest under-five mortality rates in the world. Approximately 75 per cent of all child deaths in South Sudan are due to preventable diseases, such as diarrhoea, malaria and pneumonia, with malnourished children succumbing where the better fed would not. The Council of Ministers has decided that schools, closed since March, can reopen, but 2.2 million children were already out of school before COVID-19. Two consecutive years of severe flooding have exacerbated food insecurity, malnutrition and displacement. Last year, nearly 1 million people were affected. The floods started earlier this year, and more than 500,000 people have so far been affected. We fear the worst is yet to come, with the peak of the flooding season normally in November and December. Humanitarian access has been challenging in South Sudan for years, but the pandemic, along with increased violence in some areas, has magnified pre-existing access challenges. The capacity of humanitarian agencies to reach people who need aid is now limited in some areas. The authorities imposed a range of restrictions early in the pandemic, including on humanitarian agencies. They are being addressed through ongoing negotiations, and domestic travel restrictions for humanitarian workers have recently been lifted. However, other challenges continue to limit on-the-ground presence in some conflict-affected areas, such as Jonglei. Humanitarian agencies are looking at how to set up small humanitarian hubs in remote areas to enable aid workers to deploy more rapidly. Stocks are also being pre-positioned ahead of the rainy season, when transport access will deteriorate, and larger distributions of rations are taking place. I am also concerned about the safety of civilians and aid workers. This year's violence has resulted in hundreds of people killed, another 157,000 displaced and the abduction of large numbers of women and children. Although the peace agreement in 2018 has allowed an expansion in humanitarian coverage and enabled some 1.1 million displaced people to return, about 1.6 million remain internally displaced. In order to address that, what is needed is sustainable peace, land allocation and the presence of basic services in areas of return or where people choose to settle, including in urban areas. An additional 2.2 million South Sudanese are still refugees in neighbouring countries, mainly in Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda, where the generosity of host communities is being stretched and tested due to limited funding for the refugee response. The violence continues to take its toll on women and girls, who face extreme levels of sexual and gender-based violence. Most incidents between May and July this year occurred during waves of local violence, with survivors unable to access timely medical or psychosocial assistance. South Sudan also remains one of the most dangerous places in the world for humanitarian workers. At least 122 aid workers have been killed since 2013. While we saw an improvement in the operational environment in 2019, it is now deteriorating again as a result of increased violence. This year, seven aid workers have been killed. Another 144 have had to be evacuated and relocated as a result of threats to their security. Aid supplies have been looted on at least 17 occasions, and a number of health centres have been forced to suspend activities, interrupting life-saving services. Notwithstanding an extremely challenging operating environment, the humanitarian response in South Sudan is keeping millions of people from sliding into famine. Despite COVID-19, humanitarian workers continue to deliver aid and help save lives. Aid agencies have assisted more than 5 million people across South Sudan in 2020. But continued funding is needed to sustain health services and other life- saving programmes. As a result of the fighting, flooding and COVID-19, funding needs continue to grow. The South Sudan Humanitarian Response Plan is now larger than ever, at $1.9 billion, funded to the tune of approximately one-third to date. Let me conclude by seeking the Security Council's support in three areas. First, the Council should continue its backing for efforts to find political solutions to end the violence. South Sudan needs a stable political and security environment to recover from the impacts of prolonged conflict. Humanitarian need will persist as long as conflict and underdevelopment persist. Secondly, the Council should use its influence to ensure that humanitarian relief operations are facilitated and aid workers are protected. Thirdly, I call on the Council to provide additional resources for the Humanitarian Response Plan. W27
