Ms. Bensouda: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to present my latest report on my Office's
activities in relation to the situation in Libya. Before I
do so, allow me to congratulate the Republic of Poland
for holding the presidency of the Security Council
during the month of May, as well as to thank you,
Madam President, for presiding over today's briefing.

In 2017, I announced before the Council that Libya
is a priority situation for my Office. I am pleased to
inform members that since I last reported, in November
2017 (see S/PV.8091), my Office has made significant
progress, including a return to investigations on the
ground in Libya. Despite that progress, significant
challenges remain, including ongoing conflict and
insecurity throughout Libya, which have had an
adverse impact on our ability to progress swiftly
with our investigations. That ongoing conflict and
instability continue to create fertile ground for violence
and, regrettably, the commission of atrocities. Hence,
I welcome the efforts of stakeholders in Libya to hold
broad-based inclusive consultations aimed at breaking
the long-drawn-out political stalemate, in an effort to
stabilize and bring an end to conflict in Libya.

The efforts of those who continue to sow the seeds
of further Violence and discord are, first and foremost,
at the expense of the suffering Libyan people. I express
my condemnation of the recent double suicide bombing
of the headquarters of the Libyan High National Election
Commission in Tripoli a few days ago, on 2 May, which

reportedly resulted in the deaths of at least 15 people
and injured many others.

Surely, accountability for the grave and
destabilizing crimes under the Rome Statute and full
respect for the rule of law are integral to sustainable
peace, stability and development in Libya. My Office
continues to do its part within the four corners of its
mandate, notwithstanding the challenges inherent in
undertaking our investigations and prosecutions in a
situation of ongoing conflict, as is the case in Libya. I
am pleased to report that, on the strength of our resolve
and commitment, we are steadily progressing in our
investigations into not only crimes committed in 2011,
but also more recent and ongoing crimes.

As the Council is aware from previous reports, due
to security considerations, my Office had not conducted
investigative missions in Libya for over five years.
During that time, my Office sought innovative ways
to continue its investigations and, as a result, secured
successes. Nevertheless, not being able to investigate
on the ground in Libya was far from ideal. We have
remained committed to sending our investigators to
Libya and have looked for every opportunity to do so.
I am therefore pleased to report that, in March 2018,
members of my Libya team travelled to the country for
our first mission on Libyan territory since June 2012.

That recent Visit to Libya marks significant progress
in my Office's investigative activities. The value of
the opportunity to work in the territory where alleged
crimes have been, or are being, committed cannot be
overemphasized. I am confident of the prospect of
future missions to Libya that will offer renewed hope
of more rapid progress in our investigative activities.

I would be remiss ifI did not take this opportunity
to express my deep appreciation to the Libyan
Prosecutor-General's office for facilitating the mission
in March and hosting my team. The visit would also
not have been possible without the invaluable logistical
support of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), and in particular the support of the Special
Representative to the United Nations Secretary-General
and Head of UNSMIL, Mr. Ghassan Salame, whom I
had the privilege to personally meet on the margins of
the Munich Security Conference in February. I am most
grateful to him and his staff for their invaluable support
and concrete assistance. I look forward to continued
constructive collaboration with those key partners
in Libya.
I equally take this opportunity to invite the Council
to engage further with my Office to identify areas on
which we can work together to advance the trinity
of peace, justice and stability in Libya, within our
respective and complementary mandates.

As the Council is aware, three public warrants
issued in the Libya situation remain outstanding. Most
recently, on 15 August 2017, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued
a public warrant of arrest against Mahmoud Mustafa
BusayfAl-Werfalli for his alleged role in committing or
ordering seven executions that resulted in the murder of
33 people. The executions were filmed and graphically
depicted in videos posted on social media.

The arrest warrant against Mr. Al-Werfalli
demonstrates my Office's commitment and capacity
to quickly and effectively respond to alleged crimes
that are increasingly being committed, as a result
of social media, before our eyes. Investigators and
prosecutors working under my supervision are able
to gather and analyse evidence and, where reasonable
grounds exist, apply for a warrant within a short period.
The expeditious issuance of public warrants can be
essential in circumstances where a deterrent effect may
be achieved.

However, that desired deterrent effect can go only
so far. Greater deterrence can be assured only through
the arrest and surrender of suspects to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) so that they may answer the
charges against them. That is critical. The case of
Mr. Al-Werfalli demonstrates the crucial importance of
the timely arrest and surrender of individuals subject to
ICC warrants of arrest. The Council is certainly aware
that, despite being the subject of an ICC arrest warrant,
Mr. Al-Werfalli remains at large and appears to have
continued to act as a commander in the Al-Saiqa
Brigade. Regrettably, there are now credible allegations
that, in the period since the warrant was issued, he has
committed further murders, which may be prosecuted
by my Office as war crimes under the Rome Statute.

Since the issuance of the warrant, last year, I have
repeatedly called on the Libyan national authorities to
comply with their obligation to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Werfalli to the ICC. Ihave also specifically called
on General Khalifa Haftar, Commander of the Libyan
National Army (LNA) and superior of Mr. Al-Werfalli,
to cooperate with the Libyan authorities to enable and
facilitate his arrest and surrender. ICC suspects who
are indicted with charges of grave crimes under the
Rome Statute cannot be sheltered or given refuge. They
must be apprehended and face justice before the Court
so that their guilt or innocence can be established. The
Libyan people deserve answers. The victims of atrocity
crimes in Libya deserve to have justice done and see
that it is genuinely done. I have also appealed to all
States, including members of the Council, to assist
in effecting Mr. Al-Werfalli's immediate arrest and
surrender to the Court.

That notwithstanding, to date Mr. Al-Werfalli has
not been surrendered to the Court. What is further
troubling is that, on 24 and 25 January, photographs and
video footage emerged on social media that appeared to
depict Mr. Al-Werfalli brutally murdering 10 people in
front of the Bayat Al-Radwan Mosque in Benghazi. At
the time of their deaths, those people were blindfolded,
with their hands tied behind their backs. That horrific
execution was reportedly carried out in retaliation for
the equally horrific bombing carried out by unknown
perpetrators at the same mosque the day before. Those
two bombings resulted in the killing of at least 34
people, including children, and the wounding of more
than 90 others. Those are all terrible crimes.

As I made clear in my public statement on
26 January, the bombings in front of the Bayat
Al-Radwan Mosque, as well as the execution of 10
persons in apparent retaliation, demand condemnation
from us all. They also demand action to prevent further
atrocities that claim the lives of Libyan citizens. My
Office continues to closely monitor the volatile situation
in Libya, including in and around Benghazi. I will not
hesitate to file new applications for warrants of arrest
in relation to the Libya situation, including crimes
in Benghazi, where there are reasonable grounds to
believe that crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court
have occurred, and the evidence supports such action.

The LNA has claimed that it is investigating. Mr
Al-Werfalli in relation to this most recent execution. In
August 2017, the LNA also publicly stated that it was
investigating Mr. Al-Werfalli for the alleged executions
that are included in the ICC warrant of arrest. In the
light of the additional murders allegedly committed by
Mr. Al-Werfalli, which were filmed and shown on social
media, those claims simply do not appear credible.

In my report to the Council in November 2017,
I expressed my concern that the continued failure to
secure the arrest and surrender of ICC suspects in
Libya emboldened those already committing crimes.
Mr. Al-Werfalli's immediate arrest and surrender is now
more important than ever, not only for him to answer
for his alleged crimes but to also send a clear message
to would-be perpetrators that such reprehensible
crimes will not be tolerated and that there will be real
consequences for the commission of such crimes.

I repeat my call to the Council to engage with my
Office and lend its support in assisting with strategies
for the arrest and surrender of ICC fugitives in Libya.
Once again, I appeal to all States, including members
of the Council, the Libyan authorities and the LNA,
to facilitate Mr. Al-Werfalli's immediate arrest and
surrender to the Court.

Turning to the other Libyan cases, reports about
Saif Al-IslamAl-Qadhafi's whereabouts have appeared
in the media. Those reports often present conflicting
accounts about whether or not he continues to be
detained in Libya. Regardless of Mr. Al-Qadhqri's
custodial status, I take this opportunity to reiterate
that the ICC warrant of arrest against him remains
outstanding and that Libya continues to be under an
obligation to immediately surrender him to the Court. I
call on the Libyan authorities to take all the necessary
steps to have Mr. Al-Qadhafi surrendered to the
Court, in accordance with Libya's international legal
obligations, the Court's rulings and repeated calls by
members of the Council.

The warrant of arrest against Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, former head of the Libyan Internal Security
Agency, also remains outstanding. That warrant was
issued in April 2013, and made public in April 2017.
Despite efforts by my Office, in cooperation with
other organs of the Court, Mr. Khaled remains at large.
Without assistance and reliable information from States,
persons or other entities in a position to assist, it will be
difficult to ensure his surrender to the Court. Without
arrests, both the cause of international criminal justice
in Libya and the very raison d'etre of resolution 1970
(2011) will be undermined.

Cooperation remains a cornerstone of the Rome
Statute legal framework and the effective functioning
ofthe Court. My Office continues to engage with States
and relevant organizations to exchange information,
where possible, and assist national authorities carrying
out investigations and prosecutions of crimes relating
to Libya. That is in the spirit of complementarity as
enshrined in the Rome Statute, specifically foreseen
under paragraph 10, article 93, of the Statute. That
approach is also in line with goal 9 of my Office's
strategic plan for the period 2016-2018. In our parlance,
strategic goal 9 seeks to develop with relevant judicial
actors, and with full respect for their respective
mandates, a coordinated investigative and prosecutorial
strategy to close the impunity gap for Rome Statute
and other serious crimes that foster further insecurity
in Libya.

Recently, there has been a focus on crimes relating
to human trafficking and abuses against migrants.
That engagement allows for more collaborative efforts
to gather and analyse information and helps identify
which of the judicial actors is in the best position to
investigate or prosecute alleged crimes. I take this
opportunity before the Council to offer the support
and expertise of my Office to States and organizations
engaged in combating criminality in Libya and across
its borders, where a symbiotic relationship in the fight
against impunity can be fostered.

In addition to Libya, my Office continues to
receive significant support from a number of other
States, including Italy, the Netherlands, Tunisia and the
United Kingdom, as well as regional and international
organizations, such as INTERPOL, and many
non-governmental organizations. Cooperation from
Libya, State parties and non-State parties, as well as
support from the Council, is Vital to achieving progress
in the cases before the Court and to the rapid progress
of our ongoing investigations. The exemplary efforts
of a number of States and organizations are worthy of
emulation, with the end goal of reversing the trend of
violence and impunity for serious crimes in Libya.

Even though my Office is making important
progress, significant challenges remain. The volatile
security situation in Libya is exacerbated by the
ongoing armed conflict among militias in many parts
of the country. As I highlighted in my fifteenth report,
there continue to be extra-judicial killings, high
civilian casualties and the systematic use of arbitrary
detention of individuals, who are often subjected to
serious Violations of human rights. I am also concerned
about the large numbers of migrants held in detention
centres - whether run by the national authorities or
by militias. Migrants are reportedly killed, abused or
mistreated while in detention and in transit.

I also remain extremely concerned about the reports
of slave auctions in Libya. The fact that such abhorrent
acts could occur in the twenty-first century is an insult
to the memories of the Victims of bondage of the past
and an assault on the oneness of humankind and the
historical progress made to eradicate such callous acts.
I reiterate that my Office continues to be seized of the
Libya situation, and our investigations are ongoing. I
also benefit from this occasion to state that we expect
we will be in a position to apply for warrants of arrest
against other suspects in the near future.

Let me conclude by reiterating my appeal to the
Council to demonstrate its commitment to the pursuit
of justice in Libya by fulfilling its responsibility
to facilitate the provision of financial support, as
envisioned under article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute, as
well as practical support to my Office. Such support is
needed now more than ever as my Office forges ahead
with the ever-challenging task of executing its mandate
under the Rome Statue, as triggered by the Council in
resolution 1970 (2011) approximately seven years ago.

That responsibility includes leveraging the
Council's unique authority under international law to
ensure the timely execution of the Court's decisions
and, in particular, the execution of ICC arrest warrants.
Seeking justice for those in Libya who are victims of
crimes under the Rome Statute will remain a priority
for my Office. We remain determined to fulfil the
responsibility the Council entrusted to my Office,
with the Rome Statute as our guide. My Office will
do its part, but our work alone is not enough. We have
a collective responsibility to cultivate a culture of
accountability for Rome Statute crimes in Libya and
to deter the commission of future crimes. The tragic
consequences of a failure to do so are well known to
us all. I count on the Council's support and I thank
members for their time and attention.

