Mr. Petrie (Slovenia): Let me first say that
Slovenia fully associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the Permanent Representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union.

I would like to thank Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans, Mr. Carl Bildt, for
his briefing. I would also like to extend a warm
welcome to the High Representative for the European
Union Common Foreign and Security Policy and
Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Union (EU), Mr. Javier Solana, and to thank him for
his contribution to today's debate. We consider his
appearance today to be symbolic confirmation of the
strengthened commitment of the EU to the region.
Above all we thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate.

South-eastern Europe, the Balkans, is a region in
which the international community has made a series of
mistakes, but has also had successes. The international
community enabled the smooth transition of Eastern
Slavonia, prevented the spillover of conflicts and
tensions into the Republic of Macedonia and averted a
humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo. The necessary
action of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, as
well as the year-long efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force, represent a success, in spite of the problems that
Kosovo is still facing. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
every prospect oftaking its place in Europe as a multi-
ethnic and democratic country with an urgent need for
economic revival. Numerous lessons were learned in
the past 10 years and we are optimistic that, in the
future, the international community will be able to
relate to the whole region as a model of successful
international involvement that brought it from the
midst of conflict to democratic and multi-ethnic
societies, economic prosperity and integration with the
rest of Europe.

We strongly support your approach to consider
South-East Europe comprehensively and in the regional
prospective, since all the problems there are related and
interconnected. Much too often the specific problems
of the region have been approached separately,
individually, as they popped up. It is true that the
region was, and still is, loaded with religious, national
and ethnic antagonisms and conflicts. However, it is
also true that nations in the former Yugoslavia lived,
coexisted and cooperated in peace.
The fall of the Berlin Wall created an opportunity
for nations in South-East Europe too to join the process
of democratization and transformation. Unfortunately,
however, the extreme nationalistic and basically still
Communist regime in Belgrade provoked the crisis in
order to try to stop these processes.

This policy ofinequality and superiority is, by the
way, still pursued by the Belgrade Government, even
here in the United Nations, by denying four successor
States their equal rights regarding succession to the
predecessor State and by not complying with Security
Council resolution 777 (1992) and General Assembly
resolution 47/1. The Council in its resolution
considered that "the State formerly known as the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has ceased to
exist" and the Assembly decided that "the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia should apply for
membership in the United Nations". It seems that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia pretends to be the only
State to enjoy the rights of United Nations membership
without ever applying for membership.

The indictment of the highest leaders of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is the
border that separates the regime in Belgrade from the
rest of the world. Full legitimacy ofleaders indicted by
the International Tribunal established with the
authority of the Security Council under Chapter VII
and composed of the distinguished international judges
elected in the General Assembly is questionable, to say
the least.

Individual responsibility for the war crimes must
be established in order to prevent the unjustified notion
of the collective guilt of the whole nation. The only
way for the international community to proceed is to
extend full support for the work of the Tribunal so that
it will be able to quickly conclude its proceedings.

We are aware that there will be no self-sustaining
peace and stability in the region without the full
cooperation and integration of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in the region as well. For reasons explained
above, this cannot be the current regime in Belgrade.
The international community must cooperate with,
support and encourage the forces within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia that are striving for democracy,
peace, reconciliation, economic recovery and a return
to simple normalcy oflife.

We share the hopes of seeing the new, democratic
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia soon being part of a
stable and prosperous South-East Europe. Serbian
people have suffered a lot and long during last decade,
and they have the right to a normal and decent life, free
of despair, intimidation, fear and isolation.

I am glad that Branco Lukovat, the Foreign
Minister of Montenegro is attending today's session.
By denying equal rights to the constituent Montenegrin
nation, and by constant pressure on and threats against
the democratically elected Government of Montenegro,
Belgrade is as well losing its legitimacy to speak for
Montenegro.

In this context I would like to draw attention of
the Council to document S/2000/6ll. Tensions between
Belgrade and Podgorica is a type of dispute the
continuation of which is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
therefore deserves closer attention of the Security
Council.

We would like to recall the statement by the
President of the Council on the role of the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflicts, of 30
November 1999 (S/PRST/1999/34). In this statement
the Council emphasized its continuing commitment to
addressing the prevention of armed conflicts and
recognized the importance of its early consideration of
situations which might deteriorate into armed conflicts.
The Council expressed its readiness to consider
appropriate preventive action in response to the matters
brought to its attention by States or the Secretary-
General and which it deems likely to threaten
international peace and security. We want to stress that
the situation of Montenegro requires appropriate
attention and action of this Council, better early than
too late.

A specific characteristic of the current efforts for
peace in the region is the creation and functioning of
the Stability Pact for South-East Europe. The Stability
Pact offers a unique opportunity for further
stabilization and strengthening of peace in the region,
primarily through recognition that full democratization
and respect for the rule of law, economic revival and
reintegration, return of refugees, reconciliation and
larger security are conditions for the full normalization
ofthe relations in the region. Furthermore, the Stability
Pact gives specific meaning to the notion that South-
East Europe is part of Europe and that the long-term
solutions for its future clearly lie within the process of
European integration.

Slovenia has successfully developed friendly
relations with all nations in the region of South-East
Europe and is determined to continue to strengthen
them in the future. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
is the only country in the region with which we have no
diplomatic or consular relations. This is due to the
preconditions posed by the Government in Belgrade,
that Slovenia recognize the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia as a continuing legal personality of the
former State and thus accept inequality among the
successor States of former Yugoslavia.

Slovenia is determined to contribute to the
revitalization of the region with all its efforts. In the
past few years we proved ourselves capable of
contributing constructively to the strivings of the
countries of the region to become a democratic and
prosperous part of Europe.

I would just like to mention that the International
Trust Fund for Demining collected $28 million for
demining in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is today the
most active demining programme in the country,
expanding its activities to Kosovo. We are also
engaging in activities to revitalize the economic
processes in the region, and more than 200 Slovenian
investments are presently engaged in Bosnia and
Herzegovina alone.

Economic development and cooperation among
the countries in the region, based on their own
independent will, on an equal basis and with mutual
interest is the only way to normalize the relations in the
region as a part of a democratic, stable and united
Europe. The role of the international community and
especially the European Union thus is crucial, not
simply because of the continuing need for donor
resources for the programmes to revitalize the
economic processes, but more importantly, in providing
the prospect of a future for the region and its peoples to
be integrated in a free, democratic and prosperous
Europe.

