Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation abstained in the voting on the
resolution. We have always closely followed the
situation in the Darfur region of the Sudan and support
efforts to reach an agreement on an early political
settlement of the question of Darfur through the
negotiations held under the auspices of the African
Union. At the same time, like other members of the
international community, we deeply deplore the gross
Violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law in Darfur.

Undoubtedly, the perpetrators must be brought to
justice. The question is: What is the most effective and
feasible approach in this connection? In addressing the
issue of impunity, we believe that, when trying to
ensure justice, it is also necessary to make every effort
to avoid any negative impact on the political
negotiations on Darfur. When punishing the
perpetrators, it is also necessary to promote national
reconciliation. When trying to solve the question of
Darfur, it is also necessary to sustain the hard-won
results in the North-South peace process.
Based on that position and out of respect for
national judicial sovereignty, we would prefer to see
perpetrators of gross violations of human rights stand
trial in the Sudanese judicial system. We have noted
that the Sudanese judiciary has recently taken legal
action against individuals involved. In order to ensure
the justice, transparency and credibility of the trials,
the international community could provide appropriate
technical assistance and necessary monitoring. Of
course, the African panel for criminal justice and
reconciliation, proposed by Nigeria on behalf of the
African Union, could also serve as a way out. We are
not in favour of referring the question of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) without the consent
of the Sudanese Government, because we are afraid
that that would not only severely complicate efforts to
secure an early settlement of the Darfur issue, but also
have unforeseeable consequences for the north-south
peace process in the Sudan.

It should also be pointed out that China is not a
State party to the Rome Statute and has major
reservations with regard to certain of its provisions. We
cannot accept any exercise of the ICC's jurisdiction
against the will of non-State parties, and we would find
it difficult to endorse any Security Council
authorization of such an exercise of jurisdiction by the
ICC.

For those reasons, China had no alternative but to
abstain on the draft resolution sponsored by the United
Kingdom.

