Mr. Sin Son H0 (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Mr. President, allow me first of all to
express my gratitude to you for the very timely
convening of today's open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation fully believes
that under your able leadership, the current debate will
bring about substantial results.

My delegation highly appreciates and fully
supports the statement made by His Excellency
Ambassador Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt and
Chair of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Middle East question, which arose with the
Israeli occupation of the Arab territories in 1948,
continues to be at a stalemate, despite the many United
Nations resolutions that have been adopted so far and
the various proposals, including the Arab Peace
Initiative, brought to the table for negotiation. That is
due entirely to Israel's stand against peace and to the
prejudicial Middle East policies of some forces.
Palestinian land and other Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, are still under the Israeli military
occupation. The use of force continues to prevail and
the construction of settlements continues to increase.
That reality is negatively affecting the peace and
security process in the Middle East.

My delegation believes that an early solution to
the Palestinian problem is the core element of the
Middle East question. We must therefore put an end to
Israel's military occupation, discrimination and
violations of human rights in Palestine at the earliest
possible date and allow the Palestinian people to
exercise their full rights for national self-
determination.

It is also the position of my delegation that
mediation in the peace talks between Palestine and
Israel should be carried out in line with the principles I
have mentioned.

Palestinian membership in the United Nations in
particular is vital to the settlement of Middle East
question. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
officially recognized Palestine as a State in 1988. Since
then, we have extended our unreserved support and
solidarity to the efforts of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent sovereign State. In that
regard, my delegation strongly urges the Security
Council to take speedy action with regard to the
application for full United Nations membership
submitted by Palestine on 23 September 2011. My
delegation will continue to extend full support for
Palestinian membership in the United Nations.

My delegation takes this opportunity to draw the
Council's attention to the violation by an unmanned
United States spy plane of Iranian air space on
4 December 2011. The United States drone invasion of
Iranian air space constitutes a clear violation of the
independence and territorial integrity of a sovereign
State. That act contravenes all universally accepted
international norms on sovereignty and the
inviolability of the airspace of sovereign countries.
While strongly denouncing such an act, my delegation
demands that the Security Council take appropriate
measures to stop such acts against sovereign States.

My delegation also would like to draw the
Council's attention to Lebanon and the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights. Israel's continued violations of the
sovereignty of Lebanon must be addressed and halted
immediately, as they are serious breaches of resolution
1701 (2006). My delegation strongly condemns Israel,
the occupying Power, for all its attempts to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights, and demands that Israel return
unconditionally to the borders of 4 June 1967, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea will
continue to stand firmly with the Palestinian and Arab
peoples in their struggle for peace, stability and their
just cause.

