Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's briefing on the review of
the peace process in Colombia. WE would also like to
welcome the presence at this meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia. His
presence is a good illustration of the Colombian
Government's commitment to working towards the
success of the ongoing peace process. My delegation
also congratulates Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
on his informative briefing and wishes him every
success in his new position.

My delegation notes, in the light of the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/20l8/1159), that significant
progress has been made in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). The report sets forth observations on the
tangible results of the peace process, the challenges
ahead and the critical role of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.

With regard to the tangible results of the peace
process, my delegation welcomes the combination of
the political will shown by the Colombian authorities
with the commitment of the other stakeholders in the
process, which has enabled the progress unanimously
recognized by the international community. This
combination of actions by all actors in the peace
process has made it possible to move from a rationale
of conflict to one of peace. Accordingly, after several
decades of conflict, Colombia held its first peaceful and
inclusive elections, which saw the participation of the
FARC-EP, now transformed into a political party, the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Coman (FARC).
In the same vein, the legal framework to promote
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
transitional-justice institutions have been put in place.

My delegation welcomes the determination of the
new authorities to pursue the peace process through
concrete actions, including the implementation of
the "Peace with legality" plan, aimed at eradicating
violence in conflict-affected areas, promoting rural
development and launching a new anti-drug policy. We
also welcome the preparation and presentation of draft
laws on peace, the regular holding of hearings of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the commencement of
the work of the Truth Commission and the resumption
of the work of the National Reintegration Council to
promote income-generating activities.

We furthermore welcome the progress made in
political reintegration. Indeed, the FARC effectively
occupies the five seats granted to it in the Colombian
Congress, and arrangements are under way to enable
it to take part in the 2019 regional and local elections.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes all those encouraging
developments and urges the Colombian authorities to
continue their efforts to address all the challenges related
to peacebuilding. In that regard, we call for a synergy
of actions among the Government, State institutions,
political parties, civil society and the private sector,
with the support of the international community.

Cote d'Ivoire is of the opinion that the general
aspiration for peace deserves to be strengthened and
protected from any action that could affect the valuable
achievements of the peace process. We therefore strongly
condemn the heinous attack on the police academy in
Bogota on 17 January, which caused approximately
20 deaths and many injuries. We offer our condolences
to the grieving families and our wishes for a speedy
recovery to the injured. My country calls on the
National Liberation Army to renounce all armed action
and resolutelyjoin the peace and reconciliation process.
With regard to the challenges ahead, C6te d'Ivoire
believes that the implementation of the peace agreement
requires a systematic approach and sustained efforts by
all stakeholders and the international community to
promote security, economic reintegration andjustice.

With respect to security issues, my delegation
condemns the ongoing attacks on social leaders
and human rights defenders. Similarly, it remains
concerned about the increasing activities of illegal
groups and criminal organizations, the growing illegal
economy and the taking up of arms again by some
FARC members, frustrated by the slow pace of the
peace process.

In that context, the challenge of economic
reintegration, which is at the heart of the peace
process, deserves particular attention. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the increase in the number of
approved income-generating projects to a total of 20 to
date. However, it believes that the difficulties in former
combatants accessing such opportunities for economic
reintegration remain an obstacle to the peace process.

My delegation therefore urges the Government,
with the support of the international community, to
increase measures to strengthen the technical capacity
of cooperatives, access to land and markets and the fight
against corruption and to take into account the gender
dimension to promote the empowerment of women. My
delegation also encourages the Colombian authorities
to redouble their efforts to ensure the continuity of
basic services, in particular health, education, water
and electricity services in the most remote rural areas.

In the area of justice, my delegation encourages
the Government to continue its efforts to facilitate
the smooth functioning of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and to provide adequate responses to outstanding
issues regarding legal guarantees.

To address all those challenges, C6te d'Ivoire urges
the political authorities, the Colombian institutions
and all other stakeholders to persevere in their efforts
to build trust and to promote reconciliation among
all Colombians in order to ensure the success of the
peace process.

With regard to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, my country would like to
acknowledge the key role played by the Mission in
Colombia, in conjunction with the United Nations
country team and the various partners. My delegation
particularly welcomes its commitment to peacebuilding
and issues related to gender, child protection and ethnic
and cultural integration.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire assures the Colombian
authorities of its full support in their determination to
work for the success of the peace and reconciliation
process. In addition, we recall the need for the Council
to continue to support the Government's peace and
reconciliation efforts.

