I congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November, and I thank the presidency for organizing today's very relevant and timely open debate on the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the other briefers for their incisive remarks. Since the creation of the United Nations, 75 years ago, the international community, the United Nations and its Member States have gained a better and more in-depth understanding of the common drivers and root causes of conflicts. They include, but are not limited to, social, economic and political inequalities, economic downturns, rising levels of unemployment and poverty and weak governance structures. As the world continues to expand and advance, new drivers of conflict have emerged, including climate change, health crises and cyberthreats. Further new challenges are likely to emerge. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has rapidly brought to light the peace and security implications that a global health crisis can have on our world. In the mere eight months since COVID-19 rapidly spread around the world, the pandemic has caused a global financial and employment crisis. It has also widened the gap and created greater social, economic and political inequalities. Those living in conflict zones have become even more vulnerable. The Secretary-General warned in his statement before the Council on 2 July that "la]s pre-existing grievances and vulnerabilities become more accentuated and entrenched, the potential for instability and violence only grows" (S/2020/663, annex 1). This pandemic is therefore exacerbating already well-known drivers of conflict and instability. As I noted in my statement to the Security Council in September during the open debate on the humanitarian impact of environmental degradation on peace and security (S/2020/929, annex 29), armed conflicts and violence, their causes, dimensions and their resolutions can be intimately linked to climate change in some instances. Furthermore, climate change threatens to reverse the economic growth and development gains countries have made over the years. Therefore, climate change has been recognized as a threat multiplier, whereby it aggravates pre-existing risks and challenges. The present situation in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin are concrete examples. As the lake continues to shrink, communities that relied on it are bound to struggle. There is growing competition for dwindling resources, and more and more people are migrating to bigger cities. This vicious circle contributes to tensions and, ultimately, the eruption of conflict in the region. Climate change also presents a real threat to coastal States, including our beautiful country, through rising sea levels, which threaten both lives and development progress. As highlighted in the concept note for today's open debate (S/2020/1064, annex), in a presidential statement on behalf of the Security Council dated 11 February 2011, the Security Council reiterated that "in order to support a country to emerge sustainably from conflict, there is a need for a more comprehensive and integrated approach which incorporates and strengthens coherence between political, security, development, human rights and rule of law activities, and addresses the underlying causes of each conflict." (S/PRST/2011/4, third paragraph) That statement also highlighted the Council's support for the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and noted the contributions that the Economic and Social Council could make. The Council should make greater use of the expertise and insight that both the PBC and the Economic and Social Council can provide on their respective focus areas. Such collaboration would serve only to benefit those who are seeking to build peace and security and ensure the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Development. As the world becomes more interconnected and faces multifaceted interdependent challenges, so too should the United Nations system adopt an integrated and coherent whole-of-system approach. The COVID-19 pandemic and the ever-growing climate crisis have served only to reinforce the idea that the Security Council must tackle and address the multiple root causes of conflicts. The Council should also invest more in prevention mechanisms, including developing, implementing and monitoring early-warning systems. We, as Member States, must also work harder to address these issues nationally and regionally. In his pre-recorded general debate address to the General Assembly this year, Mr. Hage Geingob, President of the Republic of Namibia, underscored that, as we face the COVID-19 pandemic and its devastating effects, we should reaffirm our collective commitment to cooperate in a world governed by international law and a multilateral system in which no one should feel left out (see A/75/PV.6). While not perfect, multilateralism and the rules-based order are essential tools in strengthening governance and protecting civil liberties and the fundamental rights of the people we serve in our respective countries. An effective, rules-based multilateral system is our insurance policy against existential threats such as wars, nuclear proliferation, pandemics and climate change. It is therefore of the utmost importance that we continue to defend multilateralism at all costs.
