Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Eide for the efforts
that he has been making in the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We also thank
him for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
for having introduced the periodic report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617).

We share the Secretary-General's concern over
the continuing deterioration of the military and
political situation in Afghanistan. Here, we note in
particular the stepping up of terrorist activity by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups. The
attack on the President of Afghanistan, widespread
terrorist acts in Kabul and other regions of the country
and increasingly frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel and United Nations staff members,
responsibility for which has been claimed by the
Taliban, are clear evidence of uncompromising
aggression by extremists who are striving to obtain
power and who are ready to sacrifice the lives of
totally innocent people in order to achieve to their
goals.

Under such conditions, there is a need to
unswervingly follow the policy of isolating extremist
leaders, first and foremost those who are on the
sanctions list of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), while
maintaining for rank and file Taliban members who are
not tainted by military crimes the opportunity for a
return to peaceful life. It is precisely such a policy that
should be maintained by the United Nations Mission
within the framework of the implementation of its
mandate.

We believe that the tactic of pacification of the
Taliban and other extremist groups is inherently
flawed. Any attempts to play up to them are fraught
with irreparable damage to the positions of the central
power and the leading anti-Taliban political forces.
Unfortunately, the idea of reconciliation with the
extremists continues to find supporters both among
representatives of international organizations and
within Afghanistan.

The actions of the terrorists and of insurgents
who have not laid down their arms are fuelled
primarily by drug dealing. More and more often,
terrorists and drug dealers are closely coordinating
their actions, while international efforts to combat the
Afghan drug threat, unfortunately, are not yielding
visible results. Moreover, we are observing an
unprecedented rise in the production of drugs in
Afghanistan, which is a direct threat to the entire
international community.

Under such conditions, we believe that it is
vitally necessary to step up anti-drug efforts both in the
territory of Afghanistan - including the destruction of
drug crops, the pursuit of drug dealers, the
implementation of alternative agricultural crops and
curbing unemployment - and in the territory around
Afghanistan, and to do so through the coordinating role
of the United Nations and with the participation of
neighbouring countries, and through the establishment
of a system of anti-drug and financial security belts.

There is also a need to make fuller use of the
potential of regional organizations that have
demonstrated the effectiveness of their work in this
area, in particular the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. At present, the most effective mechanism
for making use of international efforts to counter the
flow of Afghan drugs is the anti-drug Operation
Channel carried out since 2003 under the aegis of the
CSTO.

We also believe that the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) cannot remain on the
sidelines of international efforts to counter the drug
threat coming from Afghanistan. It is important to note
that resolution 1833 (2008), recently adopted by the
Security Council, is aimed at focusing ISAF efforts on
interaction with the Government of Afghanistan and
other interested parties, including regional players, in
this sphere. Without combating the drug threat, given
the close link between terrorist activity and drug
production, ISAF'S activities will not be fully effective.

We are ready to further develop practical
interaction between the CTSO and NATO in counter-
terrorism and anti-drug work. On several occasions, we
have informed our NATO partners of this fact.
However, so far, NATO has not responded in any way
to our proposal, although objectively such interaction
would make it possible to obtain better results from the
efforts of ISAF and the forces now active in
Afghanistan and headed by NATO. A clear example is
the agreement reached in Bucharest on the
simplification of procedures for transit through Russian
territory of non-military cargoes in order to secure the
rear of ISAF in Afghanistan.

Another important sphere for cooperation is the
NATO-Russian Council project for joint training of
personnel for anti-drug agencies of Afghanistan and the
transit countries of Central Asia at the Ministry of
Interior training centre in Domodedovo. That is a real
means of interaction in countering the Afghan drug
threat.

We share the Secretary-General's concern
regarding the increasingly frequent deaths of peaceful
Afghan civilians as a result of the actions not only of
extremists but also of international military presences.
Such incidents are clearly undermining the trust of the
local population in international efforts in Afghanistan.
There is a need for ISAF to take measures to prevent
the deaths of peaceful civilians, first and foremost of
children, as a result of indiscriminate or excessive use
of force, including bombings.

Here, we should like once again to emphasize
that there is no alternative to the imperative need
enshrined in a recent decision of the Security Council,
namely the need for compliance with international
humanitarian law to prevent loss of life among the
civilian population. That is an extremely important
objective in the context of the long-term stabilization
of Afghanistan, which was reaffirmed as well by the
Afghan leadership and by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Russia is convinced that effectively settling the
situation in Afghanistan and resolving the serious
problems now facing the country's leadership will be
impossible without an integrated approach on the part
of the international community, led by the United
Nations, and without delegating to Afghan leaders
greater independence in resolving inter-Afghan
problems.

We support the initiative of the French
Government and others that organized the International
Conference in Support of Afghanistan, which was held
in Paris on 12 June and in which we were active
participants. We believe that its outcome should be
seen as a kind of road map for the attainment of the
objectives now facing Kabul, which are reflected in the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy for 2008
to 2013. We believe that the international community's
efforts to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan and to
counter the terrorist and extremist threats emanating
from that country will not provide effective results
until conditions are created for the Afghan Government
to independently ensure security within the territory of
the country. Of particular importance here is the
formation of genuinely operational national armed
forces and law enforcement agencies, equipped with
modern arms.

The steps now being undertaken to rectify the
security situation must be backed by efforts towards
the socio-economic revival of the Afghan State. Our
country must continue to be an active participant in
those efforts. Russia is actively working in that area,
participating in the implementation of a number of
projects to restore energy and transport infrastructure
in Afghanistan.

Another contribution of ours to stabilizing the
economic situation of the country is the agreement
signed in Moscow on a settlement of the Afghan debt
to Russia, by which the Afghan debt to our country was
reduced from $11.112 billion to $730 million. In order
to promote the development of higher education in
Afghanistan, since 2007 the Russian Federation has
been awarding 80 scholarships per year to pay the
tuition fees of Afghan students in universities of our
country. Russia has also provided Afghanistan with
military technical assistance on a non-reimbursable
basis, totalling $220 million. We are ready to continue
making the appropriate efforts.

