Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this debate. I also thank Ms. Zewde and
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
Chergui for their very interesting briefings.

For France, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is of strategic
importance for international peace and security, and we
are firmly committed to supporting it. The partnership
is fully in keeping with the current evolution of
peacekeeping, which requires better coordination
among the United Nations, regional organizations and
subregional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to better exploit
the comparative advantages of each organization,
thereby better preventing and responding to crises.

In that context, we welcome the progress made
over the past year under the personal leadership of the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, to better coordinate and analyse crises and
our responses to them. For example, the joint visit
of the Commissioner and Jean-Pierre Lacroix to the
Central African Republic highlighted the importance
of coordinated action by the two organizations in
support of the peace process in that country to achieve a
comprehensive political agreement as soon as possible.

In the face of evolving threats in Africa and the
need for the United Nations and the AU to improve their
responses and efficiency, France is in favour of United
Nations reinforcement of African peace operations.
President Macron made a clear commitment to this goal
during his speech in Ouagadougou, in November 2017,
and more recently at the thirty-first African Union
Summit in Nouakchott. We believe that African Union
operations should be supported in two areas.

First, it is important to promote the concept
of African peace enforcement operations that are
mandated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council.
African peace operations can be deployed more quickly
than United Nations peacekeeping operations in
carrying out offensive peace-enforcement or counter-
terrorism operations. That division of tasks would
allow United Nations peacekeeping operations to focus
on peacekeeping, which is at the core of their mandate.

At the political and military levels, such operations
should therefore be provided with a stable framework
for cooperation, as has been done with the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the African Union
Mission for the Central African Republic and Central
Africa and, more recently, to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). The proposals
of the Secretary-General and the Chairman of the
African Union Commission to establish ajoint process
for the analysis of threats, developing mandates and
operational concepts, planning and the evaluation of
African peace operations constitute a solid basis for
further efforts, and we invite them to develop it further.

The second key point for enhancing African peace
operations is the need to move concretely and swiftly
towards their predictable and sustainable financing, as
called for in resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).
Given the current situation, it now seems logical that
African peace enforcement operations, which would
complement United Nations peacekeeping operations,
should also enjoy sound and predictable funding,
including through mandatory contributions from the
United Nations.

In that regard, we welcome the reforms led by
the African Union, including the revitalization of the
Peace Fund, and the African Union's commitment
to funding 25 per cent of African peace operations.
We also commend the unprecedented financial
commitment of AU member States to replenishing
the Fund. Of course, several crucial points still need
to be discussed concerning financing, in particular
regarding the acceleration and finalization of ongoing
work on compliance frameworks in the fields of
international humanitarian law, human rights and
conduct and discipline, as well as work related to chains
of command in African peace operations. However, we
remain confident that the work will proceed and allow
us to move forward.

I conclude by emphasizing that France considers
the progress achieved by our African Union partners
to be real and must now be strongly supported by
the Security Council. France will play an active role,
together with its partners in the Security Council, to
ensure progress in the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, in the name of peace
and security on the African continent.

