Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to start by
thanking you personally, Madam President, for the
patience that you showed towards the representative of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. One can
understand that someone such as him who is usually
deprived of speaking about anything in his own country
is sorely taking advantage of the opportunity to speak
freely and at great length. It is too bad that it is at our
own expense.

I wish to commend you, Madam President, on your
able stewardship of the Security Council this month and
for holding this important debate.

Yesterday, Israel celebrated its sixty-sixth
anniversary. Across the country, there were parties
and picnics, fireworks and festivities. Amid the joy
and celebration, the day was touched by sadness
because, right before celebrating Independence Day,
Israel observes Memorial Day. For 60 seconds a siren
wails across the entire country. Cars racing down the
highway slow to a halt, and drivers step out onto the
road. Children pause their games and fall silent. Men
and women stop working and stand at attention. Where
else in the world does an entire nation stop everything
to remember its fallen heroes? In Israel, we bow our
heads and pay tribute to the people who enabled us to
live freely in a democratic country.

In its 66 years of history, Israel has not known a
single day in which it has not fought for its survival. In
Israel, every child grows up with armed guards outside
his school. Every home has an emergency bunker.
Almost every family is bereaved, having lost a loved
one to terrorism or war. For the 8 million citizens of
Israel, that abnormality is the reality.

Ten years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1540
(2004) to enforce measures against the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery to terrorists. Yet it is clear that a great
deal more must be done to stem the flow of weapons,
particularly in the Middle East.

Earlier this year, a shipment of advanced rockets
was loaded onto a plane in Damascus and flown to
Tehran. From there they were transported over land
to the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas and loaded onto
a civilian vessel, the KLOS-C. From the outside, it
looked like an ordinary cargo vessel but the KLOS-C
was not carrying parcels for UPS. It was operating as
T.P.S. - the Terrorists' Proliferation Ship.

The KLOS-C set a course towards Port Sudan, a
transit point in a weapons supply route used by Iran to
move arms to the Gaza Strip. On 5 March, the Israeli
Defense Forces intercepted the ship in the southern
Red Sea. Our forces discovered tens of thousands
of munitions and tons of sophisticated rockets. The
advanced weapons onboard the ship would have placed
millions ofIsraelis in the crosshairs of terrorists.

This is not the first time that Iran - the world's
leading State sponsor of terrorism - has been caught
red-handed. In 2002, the Karine-A was intercepted
while carrying 50 tons of Iranian weapons. In 2009, the
Israeli Navy seized the MVFrancop carrying hundreds
of tons of weapons bound for the Hizbullah terrorist
organization. And in 2011, the MV Victoria was caught
carrying illicit arms destined for terrorists in the Gaza
Strip.

The KLOS-C was a close call and a reminder that
each and every day, illegal arms are being smuggled
across the sea, over land and through the skies. In the
Middle East, radical groups are taking advantage ofthat
instability to learn about the ABC of terrorism- atomic,
biological and chemical weapons.

In Syria, they learn from the dictator in Damascus,
who sees no problem in dropping barrel bombs packed
with explosives, shrapnel and chlorine on homes,
hospitals and markets. For years, Al-Assad and his
regime denied having chemical weapons, I remind
all members. In its reports to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Syria declared that "the Syrian Arab Republic
is a State that neither possesses nor intends to acquire
WMD [weapons of mass destruction], their means of
delivery or related materials".

As Sherlock Holmes said, there is nothing more
deceptive than an obvious fact. And the obvious fact
is that Syria is deceiving us. It is a regime that lies in
bed with Iran and sees no problem with lying to the
international community.

It is not enough to take Syria at its word when it
says that it is complying with the elimination of its
chemical weapons. We must verify and validate the
situation on the ground. The failure to do so could have
deadly consequences if Syria's stockpiles were to fall
into the hands of terrorist groups such as Hizbullah.

Just as it is with one's family, we do not get to
choose our neighbours on the map. Israel finds itself
in one of the most hostile parts of the world and so,
out of necessity, we have become leaders in combating
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.

In addition to developing state-of-the-art
technologies and tools, Israel has instituted significant
legal measures to fight terrorism. Israel is party to the
core universal instruments on counter-terrorism, fully
implements resolution 1373 (2001) and has enacted
legislation to reduce threats against our citizens.

The Israeli export control legislation restricts the
goods and technologies that can be used by non-State
actors, States supporting terrorism and other countries
of concern in the manufacture, development and use
of WMDs and their means of delivery. That legislation
incorporates lists of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Australia Group and the Missile Technology Control
Regime.

Not long ago, Israeljoined the handful of countries
that ratified the 2005 amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. That is in
addition to having signed the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Israel has a policy of supporting efforts to promote the
universality of those two important conventions.

In addition, we are closely engaged in
non-proliferation initiatives, such as the Global
Threat Reduction Initiative and Proliferation Security
Initiative. Israel is also sharing its unique expertise with
other nations. From the plains of Africa to the jungles
of Central America, Israeli experts have contributed
their knowledge on a range of issues - from terrorist
financing and forensic investigation to aviation security
and border protection.

As we speak, smugglers are transporting cargoes
loaded with rockets, missiles and explosives across the
Middle East. One of those rockets could spark the next
major conflict. One of those missiles could trigger the
next terror attack. One of those shipments could carry
a dirty bomb.

Winston Churchill said,

"One ought never to turn one's back on a threatened
danger and try to run away from it. If you do that,
you will double the danger."

The world is more dangerous than ever before. From
smartphones to smart bombs, technology has made it
easier for terrorists to inflict mass destruction. Each of
us is an eyewitness to this danger, and we cannot turn
a blind eye when rogue States' regimes cross red lines.

Resolution 1540 (2004) must be strengthened
with real preventative measures, real enforcement
mechanisms and real consequences for terrorists and
rogue regimes. In conclusion, if we work together,
we can ensure that the world's most dangerous people
never acquire the world's most dangerous weapons.

