Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We are very disturbed
by and strongly condemn today's assassination of
Pierre Gemayel. We call on all parties to show self-
restraint and to refrain from actions which could cause
a deterioration in the already volatile situation in
Lebanon and further destabilize the country.

I wish to express our thanks to Under-Secretary-
General Gambari for his informative and
comprehensive briefing today.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.

During the past weeks, we have seen an alarming
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, and especially in Gaza. Both the
Security Council and the General Assembly have
examined the tragic events in Beit Hanoun, and I shall
not repeat here all that has been said on this issue.
However, what is obvious from the events of the past
few weeks is that there is no military solution to the
problem.

While Greece unreservedly condemns all acts of
violence and terror, it recognizes, in this regard,
Israel's legitimate right to self-defence and its duty and
obligation to protect and safeguard its citizens, in
accordance with international law and international
humanitarian law. Nevertheless, it becomes apparent
that violence only begets violence.

We share the View expressed by many that the
existence of a credible political process must underpin
all efforts aimed at stabilizing the situation. The
framework of this process is outlined in the Road Map.
Although there have lately been a lot of questions
raised on whether or not the Road Map needs to be
re-examined and updated, it seems to us that what is
needed is not to reinvent the wheel, but rather to
examine ways of making this wheel roll better. In this
regard, we welcome the active role and contribution of
the Quartet, which would be greatly enhanced by input
from the parties themselves and from the countries of
the region.

We welcome the recent meeting of the Quartet at
the envoy level in Cairo on 15 November, and look
forward to an early meeting of Quartet principals,
which should, in our view, include a meeting with
regional partners as well.

On Lebanon, we are encouraged by progress
made in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
We note with satisfaction that the overall troop strength
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), when combined with its naval component,
has exceeded 9,500 troops. We welcome in particular
the fact that Indonesian troops have now joined the
other 20 countries contributing troops to UNIFIL.

We are following closely events as they unfold in
the political sphere and around the national Lebanese
dialogue. We note with concern that the consensual
atmosphere prevalent before the eruption of hostilities
of this summer is being challenged.

We urge all concerned to put the interests of the
Lebanese people above all else and to avoid
antagonistic rhetoric. The international community, for
its part, should continue supporting the efforts of the
Government of Lebanon both for the economic
recovery of the worn-torn country and for the
consolidation of its territorial integrity, unity and
political independence.

We look forward to receiving the Secretary-
General's next report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), and reaffirm our support for
his ongoing efforts.

