Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be brief. Germany
supports what was said, in particular by my colleague
of the United Kingdom at the beginning of the meeting.
Having listened to the earlier statements, I must say
that there is unity in the Council with regard to Yemen.
I believe that we must our utmost to gain traction on
the subject and try to ensure that we make progress on
the ground.

First, I would like to tell Martin Griffiths that
Germany fully supports his efforts. We have full
confidence and trust in his work. I recall what Mark
Lowcock said at the end of his intervention when he
mentioned the film Groundhog Day and said that
everything had to change in order to achieve a result.
Therefore, we also support his ideas and initiatives so
long as he stays within the mandate and the rules-based
international order. Germany fully supports the work
of Mr. Griffiths.

It is always very depressing to listen to
Mr. Lowcock's briefings - approximately 15 times
now - as the situation continues to worsen. I do
not wish to repeat what I said the last time around.
Germany fully supports Mr. Lowcock and will honour
the pledges we made at the pledging conference. We
have met our pledge of €100 million - equivalent to
approximately $115 million - and we have more in the
pipeline. I would appeal to everyone who participated
in that conference to honour the pledges made. That
also goes for the members of the coalition.

It is good to see David Beasley here in the
Chamber. Germany fully supports his work. Germany
has also been a very reliable partner of the World Food
Programme. We are increasingly worried about what
he told us with regard to the situation on the ground.
Concerning the faction of Ansar Allah impeding his
work, how brutal, cynical and selfish can you be to
do what he has described, to the extent that he is even
forced to consider stopping his work? I do not want to
talk about the wider region; I will focus on Yemen. I
can only repeat what has been said before and appeal to
all those with influence on the parties to do everything
they can to stop the conflict.

As Mr. Cohen, along with several others, said
in his intervention, there is no military solution to
the problem. Instead of realizing that, resuming
negotiations and allowing humanitarian aid, we hear
that there is military escalation. Therefore, we must
be united in condemning such escalation. That also
holds true with regard to attacks on the airport in Saudi
Arabia. Military engagement has not changed anything
on the ground, which is yet another reason to stop the
military escalation.

With regard to the coalition, we are concerned about
reports regarding air attacks on Sana'a and beyond, with
several civilian casualties. As in most humanitarian
situations, women and children are the victims. We
make an appeal to allow access to all humanitarian
actors so that they can do their job. All actors on the
ground must respect international humanitarian law, in
particular with regard to children and women.

I would like to highlight one aspect, which was
mentioned by my Russian colleague, who spoke about
accountability for the attacks perpetrated in the Gulf
of Oman. We condemn those attacks. With respect
to developments in Yemen, we must highlight the
issue of accountability. Such crimes committed in
violation of international humanitarian law should not
go unpunished.

