The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Colombia, C6te
d'Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, Ireland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, Myanmar, Nepal,
Norway, the Syrian Arab Republic, South Africa,
Switzerland, Uganda and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

I invite Mr. Egeland to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/431, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not invite speakers individually
to take their seats at the table and to resume their seats
at the side of the Council Chamber. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the conference officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table.

At this meeting, we will hear a briefing by Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. I now give
the floor to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.


