Mr. Lyons: The Representative of the Secretary-
General has outlined the severe social, economic and
financial difficulties brought about by prolonged
political tension, the army mutinies in 1996 and 1997
and repeated crises of governance in the Central
African Republic. The fundamental problems of human
insecurity that have resulted from this have led the
Central African Republic's Government, with the
support of the United Nations missions in Bangui, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other partners of the Central African Republic, to
engage in a disarmament programme.

Building on the Bangui Agreement of 1996 and
the recommendations of the 1998 National
Reconciliation Conference, and within the framework
of its National Plan to Fight Poverty, the Government
and UNDP agreed in April 1998 on a demobilization
and reintegration programme, with initial UNDP
financing of approximately $2 million.

The new $7 million National Programme for
Demobilization and Reintegration (PNDR), which was
adopted at last year's Special Meeting on Security and
Development, is a continuation and consolidation of
this earlier programme, to which UNDP is now
allocating additional resources. Working together with
other development partners that pledged resources last
May, namely, the European Union and the
Governments of France, Italy, Norway and Germany,
and with Canada, which made a pledge recently, the
United Nations system hopes to have a positive and
direct impact on the livelihood and security of the
population of the Central African Republic.

I am pleased to report that the PNDR has now
established the technical conditions for the
implementation of the demobilization and reintegration
programme. These include the installation of a central
operational office; the conduct of a series of
preliminary studies; the drawing up of an
administrative and financial record of all military
personnel and gendarmes; the establishment of a
computerized data bank; the formulation of legal
instruments for demobilization; the implementation of
the first phase of an information campaign; the
completion of a study on the socio-economic profile of
military personnel and gendarmes; and the organization
of a workshop on strategies for the financing of micro-
projects.

In an initial phase, approximately 700 military
and gendarmes will be demobilized. There will be
approximately 5,000 beneficiaries, when families and
dependants are included. To ensure the effective start-
up of the programme, the Government of the Central
African Republic will need to meet the prior obligation
of settling outstanding civil service wages, including
those of the 700 military and others who are to be
demobilized under the programme. Timely
contributions of the donor community to the PNDR
will also be critical.

More generally, the PNDR needs to be seen as
one of a number of programme initiatives aimed at
enhancing human security and governance in the
Central African Republic. In this connection, for the
period 2000-2003, UNDP has allocated $9 million to
intensify its programme support in several areas. The
first area is good governance for sustainable human
development, encompassing both the political and
economic aspects of governance. I am pleased to
inform the Council that the International Organization
of la Francophonie has expressed an interest in
collaborating with this programme, and that a
formulation mission is travelling to the Central African
Republic this month to prepare the programme,
following which UNDP and la Francophonie will be
seeking additional funding for this purpose.

Closely linked with the governance programme is
the Central African Republic's poverty and sustainable
livelihoods programme, an ongoing programme
implemented in close collaboration with all the United
Nations agencies in the Central African Republic.
Adopting a participatory approach, it emphasizes the
contributions of non-governmental organizations and
grass-roots communities and focuses on income-
generating activities and ensuring access to basic social
services and productive assets.

Continued close collaboration will be maintained
with the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the
development ofthese activities, and we look forward to
sharing with the Council information on the future
progress of our programme activities in the Central
African Republic.

