Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would,
first of all, like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (S/2013/l33). Togo reiterates
its congratulations to the Secretary-General and to
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. Lastly,
I welcome the ministers who have come to New York
in order to take part in this debate convened by the
Russian presidency of the Council.

The situation in Afghanistan remains at the heart
of the concerns of the international community,
which has spared no effort to promote sustainable
peace and development in that country. As a result,
the implementation of the Kabul process regarding
good governance has made progress. International
partners have supported the Afghan Government in
the implementation and follow-up to the commitments
made at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan on 8 July
2012. Along those same lines, discussions on defining
the objectives with regard to the core elements of the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, which must
be achieved before the meeting of senior officials in
July, have continued. We hope that those objectives can
be achieved within the set time frame. In the context
of our debate, my delegation will take up five points,
namely, on the political process, the issue of security,
the human rights situation, humanitarian aid and the
drug scourge.

With regard to the political process, the Secretary-
General's report notes the efforts for reconciliation
and the preparations for the elections in 2014. We hope
that the ulema peace conference, to take place under
the auspices of the High Peace Council, the outreach
activities and the inter-Afghan dialogue, promoted
by UNAMA and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), will help to strengthen the basis
of a true reconciliation in the country.

At the same time, we note the readiness stated by
the President of the country to renew contact with the
Taliban who wish to hold talks with the High Council.
To that end, the commitment of the Afghan, Pakistan,
British and French Governments to help bring together
the various sensitivities ofAfghan society in the context
of an inclusive dialogue should be welcomed.

The convening and holding of presidential
and provincial elections in a year's time remain
crucial elements in the political process under way
in Afghanistan. In December 2012, the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/907) noted a lack of
compromise between the two houses of the National
Assembly with respect to the appointment of a new
President and members of the Independent Election
Commission. Although the stalemate persists to this
day, we nevertheless note some positive signs, such
as the decision to begin the distribution of electronic
national identity cards, beginning on 21 March 2013,
and the active and continuous participation of political
parties and civil society in electoral activities.

Moreover, we welcome the ongoing support
of UNDP through the ELECT II electoral support
project aimed at strengthening the legal and electoral
capabilities ofAfghan institutions. We also welcome the
information exchange sessions aimed at harmonizing
the efforts of international stakeholders in the electoral
process. We also hope that the recommendations
made by the Electoral Assistance Division of the
Department of Political Affairs following the recent
assessment missions will enable the parameters for
electoral assistance on the part of the United Nations
to be defined. We call on the Afghan Government to
preserve the independence of electoral institutions, so
as to prevent a crisis that could undermine the political
process.

Security in Afghanistan continues to be a matter of
great concern, at a time when a progressive handover
of security responsibilities is taking place from the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to
Afghan security institutions, which will henceforth be
responsible for the security of almost all of the country.
Indeed, many incidents, in particular the attack against
the Jalalabad airfield in December 2012, the attack
against the National Directorate of Security and its
Director General, violence committed against civilians
and attacks on humanitarian personnel, are all sources
of concern. Togo nevertheless hopes that the capacity-
building programmes for the Afghan National Police
and National Army and the project to transform the
National Police, which is currently a security force, into
a law enforcement and neighbourhood police force will
help to bring the security situation under control.

We are equally concerned about the human rights
situation, in particular as it pertains to violence against
women. We note, by way of example, the assassination
in December 2012 of the Acting Director of the
Department of Women Affairs in Laghman Province,
which was the second assassination of the incumbent
there in less than five months. We also note a 20 per
cent increase in the number of women and girls killed
or wounded over the past year. Nevertheless, we
welcome the work of the United Nations Population
Fund, UN-Women and the World Health Organization.
Thanks to their support, an intake system has been
established for treating victims of sexual violence and
providing care for them.

With respect to the rights ofchildren, we are grateful
to the United Nations for having created the action
plan for the prevention of underage recruitment and its
annexes on the killing and maiming of children and on
sexual violence against children. We welcome the strong
support from the Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs
and his commitment to convene the Interministerial
Steering Committee and Technical Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also welcome the
decree by President Karzai on 16 February 2013 on
the implementation of recommendations pursuant to
the UNAMA findings regarding torture committed by
many State institutions.

In the curent difficult circumstances, the
humanitarian situation remains fragile, in spite
of efforts to stabilize it. Togo is pleased with the
initiatives undertaken to deal with those difficulties,
in particular the meeting of 23 January 2012 between
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic ofIran, Pakistan and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
on the implementation of the Solutions Strategy for
Afghan Refugees to Support Voluntary Repatriation,
Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host
Countries. Appropriate solutions must also be found to
the issue of internally displaced persons, as the number
of such individuals continues to grow.

The issue ofnarcotics in Afghanistan is a recurring
one. According to the preliminary results of the Opium
Risk Assessment 2013 for many areas of the country
by the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, poppy cultivation
has increased for the third consecutive year. Given the
alleged presence of jihadist and mujahideen elements
from Afghanistan and the region among terrorist and
drug-funded jihadist armed groups in the north of Mali,
we believe the Secretary-General should determine
whether illicit drugs produced in Afghanistan or
transiting through it are having any impact on the
region of the Sahel and West Africa.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
great gratitude to the neighbouring countries of
Afghanistan, UNAMA and the United Nations funds
and programmes for their unrelenting efforts, in a
most difficult context, to ensure a more promising
future for Afghanistan, given the withdrawal of
ISAF in December 2014. Clearly, with the announced
withdrawal of the international forces coming up next
year, many challenges remain in spite of the progress
made and the desire of the Afghan authorities to work
to reinstate full international sovereignty for their
country. Here, Togo welcomes the efforts undertaken by
the Afghan authorities to integrate Afghanistan into the
system of globalization through strategic agreements
with neighbouring countries and beyond. The support
of the international community must thus be untiring.
UNAMA's presence is also crucial, and no effort should
be spared to ensure that it is able to continue its work.

