Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Francois
Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, and Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), for their informative
briefings. We stress the important role that both are
playing in the region.

Bolivia commends and acknowledges the work
that the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) has been carrying out in the
areas of preventive diplomacy, elections assistance,
mediation and confidence-building measures, as well
as the support it provides to regional and subregional
organizations in order to contribute to the reduction
of tensions in the region. That work should not be
overlooked, but must continue to be deepened with
the cooperation of regional and subregional partners
under the principle of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of each of the
States where it implements its mandate.

Such efforts must be made to address the
remaining challenges in the areas of peace and security,
humanitarian assistance and economic development,
the complexity of which implies that they must be
addressed through a joint strategy between UNOCA,
the United Nations country teams and regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU), ECCAS, the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. It is alongside
those organizations that current and emerging threats
must be addressed in order to reduce their potential
impact on the stability of the subregion.

In that regard, we warmly welcome the consultative
meeting of the Heads of State of ECCAS within the
framework of the African Union Summit in Addis
Ababa, at which they agreed to convene a session of the
Assembly of Heads of State of the Council for Peace
and Security in Central Africa (COPAX). Similarly, we
commend the work conducted by the COPAX Council
of Ministers at its fifth ordinary session, at which it
adopted, inter alia, a strategy to prevent and combat
terrorism in Central Africa and another to combat
mercenary activities and transnational crime.

We also commend the ECCAS and the Economic
Community ofWest African States on their consultation
meeting in Lome. During that meeting, it was noted
that both organizations would organize a summit on
peace, security, radicalization and violent extremism
in July. We highlight the initiative of President Bongo
Odimba, who, in his capacity as ECCAS Chair,
visited several countries of the region for discussions
on security and regional integration. In that context,
we believe that, although the situation is different in
each country, conflicts in the region must be resolved
through mediation, preventive diplomacy and primarily
through constructive and inclusive political dialogue.

In line with previous remarks, we reiterate
that we must consider the possibility of replicating
the initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
Central Africa in order to address security challenges
and combat terrorism within an institutional and
regional cooperation and coordination framework.
In that context, we highlight the progress made by
the Multinational Joint Task Force and regional and
international partners in their fight against Boko
Haram in the Lake Chad basin. We also underscore the
efforts of the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, which, with the support of various United
Nations entities, resulted in a conference in N'Djamena
to develop a coordinated regional approach to find,
bring to trial, rehabilitate and reintegrate individuals
affiliated with Boko Haram and Da'esh, in line with
resolution 2349 (2017). We believe that in order to
address those challenges, countries of the region and
the international community as a whole must determine
the root causes of such challenges. One cause is the lack
of control over the use of natural resources, which are
used to finance the illegal activities of groups, such
as the Lord's Resistance Army - an armed group
that remains a threat to the security of civilians in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

We implore the international community to
consider the humanitarian situation in the subregion.
In the Lake Chad basin region alone, approximately
10 million people are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. Hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees are vulnerable to food
insecurity, diseases, such as Ebola in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the lack of basic services.
In addition, Bolivia notes that another factor that
fosters peacebuilding in the region is the increased
participation of women in the decision-making process.
We encourage UNOCA to continue its efforts in that
regard and in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Lastly, it is necessary and vital to continue to
redouble efforts to galvanize political, technical and
financial support in order to achieve peace, stability
and development in Central Africa. In that regard,
support for the work of UNOCA must continue. Its next
mandate will focus on preparing for the prevention
of elections-related violence and for other preventive
diplomacy, peace and security and mediation efforts.
We believe it is important to renew its mandate for
another three years.

