Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important meeting on
drug trafficking in the Sahel and West Africa. I also
wish to thank the Security Council for integrating the
fight against drug trafficking and organized crime
into the mandates of special political missions and
peacekeeping operations in West Africa. I further
congratulate the countries of West Africa and Sahel
that have demonstrated their firm resolve to meeting
the challenges posed by drugs and crime in the region,
as well as the international community for its important
contribution in this regard.

Today, illicit drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime threaten peace, security, the rule of
law and development in many parts of the world. West
Africa and the Sahel are particularly vulnerable because
of complex and interrelated problems relating in
particular to political instability, porous borders and the
vastness of the region. An assessment of threats posed
by transnational organized crime in West Africa was
presented by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) at the forty-second ordinary session
of the Authority of Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) early this year.

The assessment confirmed the ongoing threat
posed by cocaine trafficking from Latin America to
European markets. Nearly 33 tons of cocaine transited
through West Africa in 2010, including 18 tons transited
to Europe with a market value of approximately
$1.25 billion. This profit has provided criminals with
revenue far exceeding the national security budgets of
many countries of the region. Traffickers have been able
to defeat law enforcement detection and suppression
measures by adapting their operational procedures,
including by using including shipping and containers,
as well as commercial flights and private aircraft.

The UNODC World Drug Report 2013 confirms
that the global phenomenon of drugs is a source of
concern in West Africa. Heroin also passes through
the area en route to lucrative markets. It has also been
found that some of the methamphetamine seized in East
Asia comes from West Africa. It is further noted that
the prevalence in the region of fraudulent medicine,
which poses a serious threat to public health and safety,
remains a concern. Other scourges involved include
the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons, the
smuggling of firearms, cigarettes and gasoline, and
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

These threats and the enormous profits generated
have a detrimental impact on efforts to achieve security
and development in the region. They compromise good
governance, undermine legitimate economies and
fuel corruption. The funds generated allow criminal
organizations to support their operations and to support
terrorist activities in the region. Local drug use and the
resulting health problems are intensified, as evidenced
by the growing number of HIV infections attributable
to injecting drug use.

The countries of the region are fully aware of the
threats posed by these scourges, especially to national
security and stability and the credibility of institutions.
The international community has acknowledged the
urgency of the situation, particularly because of the
proliferation of arms in the Sahel and the ever-more
evident links between criminal organizations and
extremist and terrorist groups in the region.

The Secretary-General has called on several
occasions for greater support to West Africa so as to
meet the threats to its security. The Security Council
has also expressed its concern at the growing impact of
drug trafficking and organized crime on humanitarian
aid and peacebuilding efforts in the region, and has
repeatedly recalled the need for greater international
cooperation.

These concerns are presented in the report of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
transnational organized crime and illicit drug trafficking
in West Africa and the Sahel region (S/2013/359). As
noted in the report, a number of initiative to fight drug
trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse in West
Africa - such as the African Union Plan of Action
on Drug Control and Crime Prevention 2007-2012,
the ECOWAS Political Declaration and the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem
of Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime in
West Africa - have been launched in recent years to
address these threats in all their forms. It is on that
basis that ONUDC developed its Regional Programme
Regional Programme for West Africa 2012-2014, which
constitutes the main part of our technical assistance to
the countries of the region.

UNODC provides this support through a wide
range of regional, subregional and national projects,
including the West Africa Coast Initiative, the
Airport Communication Project, the Global Container
Control Programme, the Judicial Regional Platform
of the Sahel, the network of central authorities and
prosecutors in West Africa, and the initiative to
strengthen criminal justice systems in the Sahel. All our
initiatives are implemented in close consultation with
the Governments of the region and in cooperation with
our regional and international partners, including the
United Nations Office for West Africa, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of
Political Affairs, the World Customs Organization and
INTERPOL.

Together with ECOWAS and the United Nations
Office for West Africa, UNODC organized a regional
donors conference, held in Abidjan in October. The
conference made an urgent appeal for strengthening
regional cooperation and national capacities for
controlling land, sea and air borders, and for
strengthening criminal justice systems and promoting
judicial cooperation. Those who fund and commit acts
related to drug trafficking and other serious crimes must
be brought to justice in accordance with international
rules and standards. First and foremost, that requires
greater commitment and more resources, given the size
of the challenges facing the region and the difficulty of
intervening in unstable and post-conflict environments.
I would like to thank our partners and donors for their
support for UNODC activities, including our Regional
Programme for West Africa and the West Africa
Coast Initiative. Nonetheless, it is clear that additional
funding is needed to address those pressing threats.

As the Secretary-General's report emphasizes, the
fight against drug trafficking and crime in West Africa
and the Sahel should be integrated with larger-scale
efforts to address challenges such as governance and the
rule of law, poverty and youth unemployment. Today's
meeting is an excellent opportunity to assess priorities
and challenges, enhance synergies and decide on the
best strategies for responding to the situation. Even
considering the budgetary discipline prevailing in the
majority of countries around the world, I would like to
urge everyone here to reflect on our common and shared
responsibility to tackle the challenges posed by drug
trafficking, transnational organized crime, corruption,
money-laundering and terrorism in the region. For its
part, UNODC is ready to give its continued support to
the States of West Africa and the Sahel.

