Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Mr. President, I want to
welcome you to the Security Council and to thank you
in particular for having convened this seminal debate.

The protection of children is undoubtedly a moral
duty and a legal obligation for all States. We thank
the Secretary-General for his abiding commitment to
the cause of the protection of children. We wish also
to thank the bricfers for their insightful statements,
which have not only underlined the salient dimensions
of their achievements in the field but also highlighted
the challenges that we all face in our collective effort to
protect the world's children.

It is encouraging to note that since the adoption
of resolution 1998 (2011), efforts to protect students,
teachers and schools in situations of armed conflict
have gained considerable momentum. The monitoring
and reporting of attacks on schools and on the military
use of schools have also registered some improvement,
facilitating more concrete and effective responses to
heinous attacks on institutions of learning.

Our abiding concern derives from our consternation
at the events of the night of 14 April 2014, when 276
girls in the prime of their lives were viciously abducted
from the sanctuary of their dormitories in Chibok, in
the north-eastern part of Nigeria. Their dreams and
aspirations were rudely interrupted by the infamous
extremist group Boko Haram. It appears that we all
have reached our limits of tolerance for this kind of
impunity. Today we are encouraged that the proposals
designed to stem the spate of abductions of children
have received due attention universally.

A fundamental and enduring step forward is to make
deliberate and incremental efforts to institutionalize
these policies at both the regional and national levels
and, where possible, institute peer-review mechanisms
for effective monitoring. The African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child was instituted as a
tool for advancing children's rights. While it builds
on the same basic principles as the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the African
Union (AU) Children's Charter highlights issues of
special importance in the African context.

The fact that all States members of the AU have
acceded to the Children's Charter and all except seven
have ratified it underscores the critical importance ofthe
rights of children. This year, as Africa commemorates
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,
represents an opportunity for States parties to make a
renewed commitment to children's rights.

As a demonstration of our national commitment to
the well-being of children, Nigeria was among the first
group of States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration
in Oslo, Norway, on 29 May. The Declaration
complements and strengthens our existing national safe
schools initiative, established in 2014 as part of the
policy response of the federal Government to promote
safe zones for learning. The guidelines for protecting
schools and universities from military use during armed
conflict will serve as a compass to guide and reinforce
efforts towards the achievement of this objective. We
are committed to the dissemination of these guidelines
and to promoting their implementation. We are indeed
persuaded that this initiative will promote and protect
the right to education and prevent the discontinuities in
education inherent in situations of armed conflict.

We commend the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and acknowledge the importance
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism for grave
violations against children in armed conflict. We
emphasize the critical importance of resolutions 1998
(2011) and 2143 (2014), which in particular urge all
parties to armed conflict to refrain from actions that
impede children's access to education.

In advancing the cause of the protection of children
in armed conflict, the Council today is delivering a
message of hope and a signal of the strength of our
collective will. The adoption of resolution 2225 (2015)
today reinforces both our collective will and our shared
responsibility, for it is certainly within the Council's
capacity to protect the vulnerable from the ravages
of conflict and other blatant breaches of peace and
security.

Nigeria reiterates its commitment to working
assiduously with all people of goodwill to safeguard the
future of humankind: our children.

