Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 2327 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). Despite the
impediments we faced during the negotiating process,
the limited time the pen-holders made available for a
serious, substantive negotiation on the draft resolution
and our concerns over some of the resolution's
provisions, Egypt perceives that the real political benefit
achieved today was the Council's success in reaching a
minimum level of consensus on the contents of today's
resolution, after heeding the views and concerns of the
three African States that played the most important role
in reaching that consensus.

We were and remain firm believers in the vital
significance of a united political message from the
Council to the warring parties in South Sudan. Such
a united message would give momentum towards a
comprehensive peaceful settlement to the crisis on the
basis ofthe Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan.

Egypt would like to underscore that the policy
of adopting punitive and menacing approaches has
proved its ineffectiveness and failed to end the conflict
in South Sudan. We therefore believe in the need to
focus the efforts of the Council on reaching a political
breakthrough, promoting dialogue among the parties
to the conflict to address the root causes of the crisis,
ending the tensions and achieving comprehensive
reconciliation to support the creation of a strong
national identity for all South Sudanese. That would be
the sole and optimal way to protect civilians, put an end
to the violations of human rights and stop the human
suffering faced by the South Sudanese since 2013.

In parallel to the message addressed to the
international community and the Security Council,
we have a message of even greater importance to
convey to all of the parties in South Sudan. They all
bear the responsibility for alleviating the suffering
of their people and meet the aspirations that were
raised by the secession and formation of their young
State. Furthermore I reaffirm that the patience
and understanding of the international community
concerning the specific nature of the situation in the
South Sudan and the challenges it is facing must not
be interpreted as acceptance of the continued killing of
innocents and violations against civilians.

We wish to reaffirm once again our full support
for the work of UNMISS and our appreciationg for its
coordinated efforts to protect civilians and alleviate
their suffering. We do not accept any challenge or
impediment to the work or mandate of the Mission.
Egypt is ready to work as a mediator among the various
viewpoints inside the Council and to provide any
assistance necessary to South Sudan in overcoming its
current crisis.

