Mr. de Riviere (France) (spoke in French): This
was the last quarterly report of Ambassador Grauls as
chair of the 1737 Committee, and my delegation would
like, first of all, to pay tribute to the remarkable skill
with which he and his team discharged their difficult
duties.

The last two reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the situation in Iran are
particularly negative. In fact, they indicate that Iran is
continuing not to suspend its sensitive activities.
Indeed, it is continuing to step them up, unabated. Iran
is continuing to fail to implement the transparency
measures demanded of it. The IAEA finds of particular
concern the presumed studies on the militarization of
the Iranian programme.

The IAEA also regrets Iran's persistent refusal to
provide it with the necessary information and access to
shed light on this question at a time when the Iranian
reaction corroborate documents that originally Iran had
said were false. The Agency has concluded that, unless
there is progress on these points, it will not be in a
situation to guarantee the absence of undeclared
nuclear materials activity in Iran.

I would add that Iran has still not responded to
offers for dialogue with the E3+3 Governments,
despite the historic involvement of the United States,
nor has it responded to the E3+3 Governments' freeze-
for-freeze proposal. If Iran continues on this path, the
price will be intensified isolation and regional tension.

We are engaged on a dual-track approach
reaffirmed unanimously by the Security Council in its
resolution 1835 (2008). As long as Iran fails to meet
the demands of the international community, we must
demonstrate increasing firmness. To do this, we need to
begin by a rigorous application of the resolutions the
Council has already adopted.

I would like to briefly recall here measures
adopted by the European Union (EU) for the
implementation of resolution 1803 (2008), which
include the additional naming of individuals and
enterprises contained in resolution 1803 (2008), which
has been transferred in its entirety to the EU, an
3
additional complementary list of individuals and
enterprises was also adopted by the EU in June and the
designating process will continue for the individuals
and enterprises who participate in the proliferation
activities of Iran, in order to ensure the complete
implementation of Security Council resolutions.

At the same time, the embargo on dual-use goods
is fully in place in the EU. This has been supplemented
by an additional list of particularly sensitive goods that
are also under embargo. So as not to contribute
financially to proliferation activities of Iran, the EU is
showing restraint regarding the provision of loans and
credits for exports.

Regarding financial vigilance toward Iranian
banks, the EU has defined enhanced concrete
monitoring measures to avoid having financial flows
be redirected to proliferation activities. These measures
include the identification of clients, a register of the
operations in which Iranian banks are participating, the
making available by the authorities of all necessary
documentation and the declaration of suspicious cases
in case of dubious transactions and the publication of
lists of branches of Iranian banks. It has also frozen the
activities of the Melli Bank, which has shown itself to
be heavily implicated. It has also established a
monitoring regime for the activities of Bank Saderat
Iran. All of these financial measures provide a serious
and responsible set of mechanisms that conforms with
the recently adopted directives of the Financial Action
Task Force on Money Laundering.

Finally, regarding cargo inspections, the EU is
implementing the regime established under resolution 1803
(2008) and has established a system of a priori declarations
for Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines and Iran Air
Cargo.

This vigilance is critical to safeguarding the
security of all of us. We therefore urge all of our
partners to implement it fully. We will make all
information available to delegations that wish to learn
more on ways to implement their obligations. We also
hope to recall here that the Committee can still do a
great deal more to assist Member States in this area, as
the Ambassador of Burkina Faso requested a few
months ago. We hope that in the next few months we
will be working on that.

