Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish to
express our highly positive appreciation of the report
of the Secretary-General that the Security Council is
considering and to thank the Officer-in-Charge of the
Department for Disarmament Affairs for her
outstanding presentation of the report. I am pleased
now to take the floor on behalf of my country before
this Council to speak about an issue that is of particular
importance to Senegal, to Africa and to a number of
other regions throughout the world.

Indeed, small arms merit the sustained attention
of the international community in general and the
Security Council in particular, given that these
weapons have disastrous consequences for our
populations, our development and our security. This
ongoing attention is especially necessary inasmuch as
small arms are a common denominator of the
armaments process for all United Nations Member
States, because these weapons exist everywhere.

It was only a few weeks ago that delegations
noted, for the most part with regret, the bland
conclusions that were reached by the meeting of the
preparatory committee - which was held here in New
York from 9 to 20 January 2006 - for the review
conference for the United Nations Programme of
Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We hope that the review conference,
scheduled for 26 June to 7 July 2006, will allow
Member States to agree on the essential actions to be
undertaken at all levels specified in the Programme of
Action so as to ensure correct implementation. And
speaking of implementation, my country is pleased
with the invaluable contribution made by non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) in this area. It is
appropriate here to reiterate that a rightful place should
be given to NGOs, including during deliberations of
Member States.

Without going back over the different positions
held by Senegal on the question of small arms, which
have been widely publicized before this Council and in
other United Nations bodies, I would like to highlight a
few aspects that seem important to us. Senegal believes
that the instrument on marking and tracing small arms
must be promptly complemented by a legally binding
instrument, preferably on brokering. A group of
governmental experts on this matter should meet as
soon as possible.

Additionally, my country is of the view that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes should receive stepped-up attention,
particularly with respect to the reintegration
component. In fact, the DDR programme is a whole
and would not be productive if it focused only on
disarmament and demobilization to the detriment of the
reintegration of ex-combatants. These reintegration
programmes must be inclusive, and they must be
developed in collaboration with the affected
communities. They must take fully into account the
concerns of women and children, who are very often
the first victims of light weapons.

Senegal would also like to underscore the links
between the United Nations Programme of Action and
the Register of Conventional Arms. It appears that the
time has come for Member States to consider ways of
formally including light weapons on the Register with
a view to comprehensive and coherent international
management of the matter. The goal of the Programme
of Action is to prevent, combat and eliminate the illicit
trade in small arms, while the Register - as a tool to
promote transparency and trust - is concerned with
the licit transfer of weapons. Efficiently combining
those two mechanisms would make it possible better to
control the scourge by ensuring greater transparency of
and control over international transfers in light
weapons, especially as concerns non-State actors.

I cannot conclude without congratulating you,
Sir, on the exemplary and effective manner in which
you are presiding over the work of the Council this
month, as well as on your initiative to hold this debate.
I wish to thank all the members of the Council for the
opportunity given to my delegation to participate in
this important debate on light weapons.

