Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his briefing. Once again, we express our
support for his efforts.

We welcome the outcome of the sixth round of
peace talks, held in Geneva last week under the auspices
of the United Nations, on the four baskets of issues
referring to governance, constitution, elections and the
fight against terrorism. At the same time, we highlight
the willingness demonstrated by the parities involved.
Similarly, we commend the leadership shown by the
Special Envoy in establishing an additional mechanism
to strengthen the peace talk - meetings with experts on
legal and constitutional experts to foster and facilitate
the process of political dialogue in Syria.

We also highlight and praise the great step forward
taken by the guarantors of the ceasefire - Russia, Iran
and Turkey - during the Astana meeting on 4 May,
in which a memorandum to create four de-escalation
and safe zones was adopted with a view to preventing
incidents and putting an immediate end to any kind
of armed confrontation, as well as to improving the
unconditional deployment of humanitarian assistance
and to creating conditions favourable to progress toward
reaching a political solution to the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic. That achievement strengthened the
guidelines of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2336 (2016),
and was recognized by the Secretary-General in his
press statement of 4 May as an encouraging measure.

We note with great hope that the parties involved,
the regional actors and the ceasefire guarantors are
taking specific actions to strengthen the path towards
political dialogue and to maintain the ceasefire, which
has been the most long-lasting since the beginning of
the conflict and which, fortunately, has remained stable
as a result ofthe joint efforts of Russia, Turkey, Iran and
Kazakhstan. In that regard, we reiterate our call on the
parties to the conflict to lay down their weapons once
and for all and refrain from any belligerent behaviour,
because a political process is the only way to resolve
this conflict.

Despite that remarkable process, we see that
completely illegal, unilateral military actions are
still occurring, not only affecting the stability of the
political process and the agreements designed to
strengthen it, but also undermining the sovereignty and
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and Government
efforts to combat Da'esh. We reiterate and stress that
we must not allow unilateral actions that contravene the

principles of the Charter of the United Nations to be an
obstacle to reaching peace in Syria, to the detriment of
the lives of its inhabitants - all the more so when such
actions are taken by actors outside the process of the
political dialogue.

Lastly, we express our support for continued
dialogue, both in Geneva in June and in Astana in
July, and the result thereof, which would be a process
led by and for the Syrian people with respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
that country.

