Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her valuable
briefing earlier today.

We welcome the destruction of the last two
chemical facilities in Syria. The overall number of
chemical facilities that have been destroyed now stands
at 27. This is a very important step towards the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We also
welcome the reference Ms. Nakamitsu made in her
briefing to the signing of the Tripartite Agreement,
which allows the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to resume the work and
shoulder its responsibilities in Syria.

Despite the progress achieved, there remain
discrepancies in the details of the chemical programme
declared by the Syrian Government. We hope that the
answers provided by the Syrian Government in response
to the questions posed by the OPCW Director General
will contribute to resolving those discrepancies. We call

upon the relevant Syrian authorities to fully cooperate
with the OPCW.

The Security Council is unable to fulfil its
responsibilities pertaining to the Syrian chemical
programme because it lacks a mechanism, replacing the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
to identify those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. That is attributable to a division
among Council members. As a result, many Member
States, including Kuwait, have resorted to a different
international platform, the OPCW, to fill that vacuum.

A special session ofthe Conference of States Parties
to the Chemical Weapons Conventionwas held in The
Hague, at which it was decided that the OPCW would
take on the mandate of identifying the perpetrators of the
crime of the use of chemical weapons. We look forward
to the OPCW making the necessary arrangements in
order to shoulder this responsibility. In that regard,
we express our support for the Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM), and we commend its
work and professionalism. We stress that it is important
to cooperate with the FFM. and to protect its staff so that
they can work in a safe environment. We look forward
to the final findings of the FFM. soon, including the
investigations of the Douma incident in April.

I reiterate the principled and steadfast position of
the State of Kuwait in that regard. We condemn any
use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time and by
any party. That is a flagrant violation of international
law. We underscore the importance of holding those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons to
account, be they individuals, entities, non-State actors
or Governments.

Our meeting today comes at a critical time, as we
are seeing increasing reports and indications of an
imminent military escalation in the Idlib governorate,
home to nearly 3 million people, half of whom are
internally displaced persons. We are particularly
concerned about the possible recurrent use of chemical
weapons in Syria, and about the repetition in Idlib ofthe
crimes committed in Khan Shaykhun and elsewhere.

We join the Secretary-General in stressing that any
use of chemical weapons is absolutely unacceptable.
Over the past eight years, the Syrian people have
suffered the most brutal humanitarian violations,
including the use of chemical weapons against them.
That is why we must be united and rise above our
differences and divisions in order to prevent such
crimes against humanity and to peacefully resolve the
situations in Idlib and in Syria as a whole. Our aim is to
stop the bloodshed of our Syrian brethren.

In conclusion, we hope that the summit to be
held tomorrow by the Astana guarantors will prevent
a humanitarian disaster in Idlib, protect civilians and
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to the needy,
in compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law.

