Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets the outcome of the voting today. We thank
Egypt for the quality of the work it has carried out and
for its balanced approach.

This vote was a foregone conclusion for us for at
least five reasons, which I would like to refer to today.

First of all, draft resolution S/2017/106O confirms
an international consensus on Jerusalem that has been
built over decades and which is being translated into
international law today. The decisions announced by
the President of the United States, which we regret,
do not in any way modify the common foundation on
which all peace agreement must be based. As President
Macron has said, the status of Jerusalem concerns all
of the international community. It has been the subject
of several specific resolutions of the Security Council.
It is therefore normal for the Security Council to be
seized of this issue today and to reaffirm the principles
and framework it defined with regard to Jerusalem,
in particular through resolutions 476 (1980) and 478
(1980). That - no more no less - is what the text on
which we have just voted does.

Jerusalem's status must be examined by the parties
in the framework of a peace agreement. In the absence
of an agreement, and in accordance with the consensus
that has prevailed for 70 years within the international
community, France does not recognize any sovereignty
over Jerusalem. Also, following the June 1967
conflict, we did not recognize the annexation of East
Jerusalem, which is part of the occupied territories
under international law. Similarly, in 1980 we did not
recognize Israel's unilateral acts concerning Jerusalem.
Before and after Israel's Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital
of Israel, the Council adopted resolutions 476 (1980)
and 478 (1980), which put forth two principles that are
recalled in the draft resolution the Council has just
voted on.

All decisions and actions aimed at altering the status
of Jerusalem, as well as its geographical, demographic
and historical character, are null and void and must be
rescinded. All Member States that have established
diplomatic missions at Jerusalem must withdraw them
from the city. That is what happened following the
adoption of resolution 478 (1980), without exception.
What was at stake then was no less than what is at stake
today - not only the clear Jewish link with Jerusalem,
but also the legal framework and political parameters
for a settlement to the conflict.

The result of today's voting reflects the desire of
14 members of the Council to reaffirm their collective
commitment to international law, including the
resolutions of the Council, on the key issue of the final
status of Jerusalem. This is decisive for any prospect
for peace. It emphasizes the willingness of a very
large majority of Council members to not recognize
any decision that runs contrary to its resolutions, as
requested in the draft resolution put forward by the
delegation of Egypt.

With regard to the United States, its stance clearly
has a particular impact. It is incumbent upon the United
States to clarify the compatibility of President Trump's
announcement on 6 December with the international
consensus, without which no credible peace effort
can be made. That is because, and this is my second
point, without an agreement on Jerusalem, there will
be no peace agreement. France and its partners in the
European Union believe that Jerusalem is destined
to become the capital of two States - Israel and
Palestine - by means that must be defined through
negotiations. No unilateral decision can replace that.

We all know that there is no alternative to the
two-State solution. A one-State solution in which two
citizenship systems coexist is a fantasy that would mark
the ruin of the national aspirations of the Palestinians
and the democratic aspirations of the Israelis. Neither
the two parties nor the international community can
resign themselves to that. To go somewhat further,
and to be absolutely clear, there is no alternative to the
two-State solution, or to a two-State solution without
an agreement between the parties on Jerusalem,
or a possible agreement on Jerusalem outside the
internationally recognized parameters. We noted the
willingness expressed on 6 December by the President
of the United States to support the two-State solution.
We hope that that will pave the way for the United
States to return to the consensus framework of the
international community.

Thirdly, the issue of the status of Jerusalem must
take into account the concrete reality of that city,
as experienced on a daily basis by its inhabitants.
That is what the Security Council has done through
the resolutions it has adopted over the decades on
Jerusalem and it is reflected in the draft resolution
that we have voted on today. Jerusalem does not lend
itself to an unambiguous narrative. More than 300,000
Palestinians live there, representing approximately
40 per cent of the city's population. It is an Israeli city
and a Palestinian city. It will become the future capital
of two States, but it is already a city of two populations
that coexist there.

Fourthly, the historical and religious importance
of Jerusalem is key to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, but also to regional and international stability.
More than ever before, the need to preserve the status
quo at the holy sites ofJerusalem - specifically the 1967
mosque esplanade - must be reaffirmed. But beyond
that, any approach to the Jerusalem issue as a whole
must avoid crystallizing tensions over the city. The
risk that we must be wary of is transforming a political
conflict, which is itself susceptible to a compromise,
into an intractable religious conflict. Only the radicals
would be set to gain, at the expense of the moderates in
the region.

As to my fifth, and final, point, we are following
the situation on the ground with great concern. Ten
days of localized clashes have already left at least eight
people dead and hundreds wounded in Gaza, the West
Bank and several neighbourhoods in Jerusalem. The
resumption of regular rocket fire from Gaza, which we
strongly condemn, is also a worrying sign.

We must do everything possible to ward off the
escalation of risks existing on the ground. That is
why we continue to call on all parties to restrain
themselves and make every effort to restore calm.
Beyond that are the potentially negative repercussions
throughout the region that must be avoided, following
the announcement made on 6 December and its the
way it has been interpreted. In particular, we call on
all regional actors to contribute to easing the situation.

In the context of tensions on the ground and
regional crises, it is essential to recall our collective
commitment to preserving the agreed parameters on
the status of Jerusalem. Today's vote has given us that
opportunity, despite its predictable outcome. On the
issue of Jerusalem, both the preservation of the two-
State solution and the realization of the aspirations
of both parties are at stake, as well as respect for
international law, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the legitimacy of the Council itself.

Let me conclude by briefly underscoring three
points. Given its unparalleled symbolic significance,
Jerusalem is in many ways the key to peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Without an agreement
on Jerusalem, there will be no peace agreement. That
is why the fate of that spiritual city can be decided only
by the parties, with the support of the international
community, and not by a unilateral decision.

A body of international law and international
consensus on the two-State solution now exists, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States and based on
the outlines of a peace settlement. The Egyptian draft
resolution was simply intended to recall those different
elements. That is why France voted in favour of the draft
resolution. As a permanent member of the Security
Council and a friend to both Israel and Palestine,
France will spare no effort to bring the parties back
to the negotiating table and achieve an agreement in
accordance with the Council's resolutions.

There is no shortcut along this demanding path, and
France will continue to hold its promise to both parties
on this issue, which I once again emphasize is key to
peace and stability throughout the Middle East. That
is why it is essential to not give up and to pursue our
efforts so that the Security Council can come together
again and play its part on this crucial issue. The Council
can rest assured of France's commitment to that end.

