Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by recalling that article 2 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 sets forth a number
of fundamental rules with regard to its application.
First, its provisions are applicable to any armed conflict
that arises between two or more contracting parties.
Secondly, the provisions of the Convention are to be
applied in all cases of the complete or partial occupation
of a territory by one of the contracting parties. Thirdly,
it unequivocally states that, if one of the parties to the
conflict is not a party to the Convention, those parties
that are party to the Convention must abide by the
provisions in their mutual relations.
Those provisions clearly determine the international
Convention's vast scope of application, which was
designed to grant as much protection as possible to the
civilian population in the event of an armed conflict. It
is worth pointing out that no provision of the Geneva
Convention allows for an exception with regard to the
protection of a country's national security vis-a-vis its
real or imagined enemies, much less granting the State
the option of killing its own citizens or foreign citizens
under the pretext of preventive measures or precautions.

For their part, the second and third paragraphs of
the preamble to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court clearly state that throughout the last
century millions of children, women and men were
victims of atrocities that defy the imagination and that
profoundly move humankind. Such atrocities have
posed a threat to the peace, security and well-being
of humanity. Therefore, such crimes should not go
unpunished, regardless of who commits them.

On 21 February 2012, the Permanent Representative
of Brazil organized an informal discussion to analyse
the concept of the responsibility to protect, which
is designed to address the failure to protect. The
Brazilian proposition, to which my country attaches
great importance, is based on the three key principles
set forth in General Assembly resolution 60/1 of 2005.
First, the State has the main responsibility to protect its
people from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity and to prevent the incitement
of such crimes; secondly, the international community
has the reponsibility to encourage and help States in
the exercise of their responsibility; and thirdly, the
international community has the responsibility to use
diplomatic, humanitarian and other appropriate means
to help protect populations from those crimes.

In the Ecuadorian delegation's view, the contribution
of the Brazilian Mission consists in maintaining
those three singular principles intact; restricting the
interference of the international community to those
cases in which intervention is necessary, without
illegitimate or illegal invasions of sovereign States; and
ensuring that force will be used only as the last resort
to protect the civilian population and that force will not
be the first option exercised by those who believe that
they have the right to change a Government or impose
an ideology or any other form of political organization
that no one, no one, has requested.

We believe that it is essential to highlight that
important contribution from a country of my region to
an issue that impacts all of us. It is the international
community's responsibility as a whole to uphold those
principles. At this time, we believe that an important
questions arises we discuss the legal and moral value
of the policies of selective assassination. Do those
policies form part of the powers of any Government in
such a way that we can kill each other without those
acts having any legal or moral implications? To the
contrary, such selective assassinations are not only acts
of international terrorism, but they are also without any
moral legitimacy or legal foundation.

Ecuador attaches the greatest importance to the
protection of civilian populations throughout the
world, without discrimination of any kind and without
according any legitimacy to crimes committed in the
name of absurd and unsustainable interpretations of
the right to legitimate defence. The protection of the
civilian population should not be applied with double
standards, nor should political justifications be used
in order to protect some, while massacring others.
Likewise, the protection of the civilian population
should be a firm and rational commitment held by
the international community, based on international
principles and without making any distinctions between
victims or those who victimize. It should never be a
simple pretext to kill people in other countries and
deprive other countries of their independence and their
natural resources.

To that end, we believe that it is particularly
important to adhere to all of the Geneva Conventions
and the amending Protocols to those Conventions. All
of those instruments provide protection to victims
from the scourge of war and recognize the victims
as innocent. Moreover, Ecuador is persuaded that the
International Criminal Court is the only body that can
end the impunity with which criminal Governments
kill their own people or other people and can restore
the rights of victims after crimes have been committed
against them. We therefore insist that the Rome Statute
be ratified by all States Members ofthe United Nations.

I cannot conclude this statement without mentioning

substantial aspects in the debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. National sovereignty,

clearly stated in paragraph 1 of Article 2 of the Charter

of the United Nations, is an element that must be taken

into account in any case of the protection of civilians in

armed conflict. That element is a characteristic inherent

in the very existence of a State. The international

community's adherence to and respect for that aspect

is not subject to qualification or the unilateral decision
of any country.

Paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations provides with absolute clarity that no provision
of the Charter shall authorize the United Nations to
intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State. On thatbasis, the collective measures provided
for in Chapter VII and referred to in Article 2 should
be limited exclusively to what is stipulated in Article
39 of the Charter - namely, any threat to the peace,
breach of the peace, or act of aggression - in such a
way that the ideological orientation of any Government
or its sovereign decisions over its natural resources or
the legitimate use of technologies for peaceful purposes
cannot be sufficient grounds for a State or a group of
States to decide to use force to change that regime
or to force it to subject itself to the interests of other
Governments.

For those reasons, any action by the international
community to protect civilians in conflict situations
should strictly adhere to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including full
respect for the sovereignty of States. If the international
community decides to intervene to protect vulnerable
populations, its decision must be substantiated by fair
and legitimate grounds, not by broad and incorrect
interpretations of Security Council resolutions.

