Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to thank Greece for the important role it has
played.

I was happy to hear my friend the representative
of Israel say that they have agreed with the Palestinians
on holding direct talks. It is our hope that those talks
will lead to prompt results. I believe that words are
important but that deeds are more important.

At the outset, I would like to express my sincere
thanks to all the members of the Council for granting
the Arab request to hold this meeting to discuss the
question of peace in the Middle East in its various
dimensions. That question is not new to the Council,
the United Nations or to those working in international
relations at the bilateral, regional and international
levels.

That being the case, it is only logical to ask a
simple and central question: why has this matter
remained for almost 60 years without a solution that is
satisfactory to the parties concerned? Does the reason
lie in the lack of international resolutions that are an
embodiment of international law and that can ensure
that solution? Can the solution be achieved through the
implementation of such resolutions? Is the persistence
of the question dictated by the interests of one party or
another so that the continuing conflict can be used in
the service of ulterior motives? Are we and the
international community unable to provide a solution?

Providing exact answers to those questions and
others in a meeting such as this is no doubt important.
However, what is more important is that we recognize
some basic tenets that are binding on us all without
exception, because we find their essential justification
in our commitments under the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, which we
committed ourselves to comply with in our
international relations.

Since its inception, the Organization was
intended to achieve international peace and security
and to promote respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all peoples. Yet those
objectives have still not been achieved as regards the
situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine. With the passage of time, that has led to
catastrophic repercussions for all aspects of the
situation in the region. Occupation has been extended
to the territories of others, together with its attendant
human suffering for millions, which is rejected by both
legal and moral precepts. Arsenals grew, the problems
of human development worsened and enormous
financial resources were squandered on military
expenditures instead of being devoted to improving the
lives of peoples and giving them hope for a dignified
life.

Even more serious than all of that is the fact that
this situation has been conducive to the growth of
extremism, rancour and hatred, which has led to
violence and terrorism as a means of achieving rights,
without regard for the lives of Palestinians, Arabs,
Israelis and others whose countries and societies have
been plagued by terrorism perpetrated under various
pretexts. How could it be otherwise, when this
prolonged conflict has yet to be resolved, when
credibility has been lost and commitments have been
shirked?

It is not my intention to criticize, accuse or cast
aspersions. Rather, my concern is to underscore the
bare facts candidly and transparently. On the one hand,
it is not Israel alone that is entitled to the legitimate
right to live in peace and security in the region. The
Palestinian and Arab sides are also entitled to that. On
the other hand, the Palestinian and Arab sides have
affirmed for quite some time, through their positions
and conduct, that they desire and are vigorously
seeking the establishment of a just and comprehensive
peace so that everyone can live in dignity.

The problem at hand does not need a magic
solution and neither side can, in my opinion, come up
with an innovative solution because the solution is
known to all and sundry. It is the principle of land for
peace, which is based on the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, which President George Bush
referred to in his address to the General Assembly two
days ago and which is clearly established in the
resolutions and legitimate terms of reference, which
are binding on Israel, the Palestinians and the Arab side
in general. Those were endorsed by the Security
Council and provided the basis for the approach
adopted by the international parties, especially the
Quartet, with the support of the international
community.

Hence, just and fair solutions are not impossible
provided that there are good intentions and political
will based on sincere and earnest compliance by all
with the norms of international law. We also feel that it
is not possible to address the other political, security
and development problems in the region without first
achieving an honourable and satisfactory solution to
this question.

The peace that we seek must be sustainable and
there must therefore be an integrated approach that
embraces political reform, democratization and human
development. In that regard, the responsibility for
establishing a just and comprehensive peace falls not
exclusively on the parties directly concerned, but also
on the international community, especially those States
that are influential in international relations, foremost
among which are the five permanent members of the
Security Council. The responsibility is a shared one
because the interest in establishing peace is shared and
because we are all bound by the provisions of the
Charter.

In view of all that, we welcome the meeting of
the Quartet held yesterday and look forward to its
presenting specific ideas to develop effective and
purposeful mechanisms for a prompt resumption of the
direct negotiations among the parties and on all tracks
in order to achieve, within a specific time frame, a
comprehensive, just and permanent settlement on the
basis of international resolutions and legitimate terms
of reference, most prominent among which is the road
map. To that end, the momentum necessary for the
continuation of the peace process must be maintained
regardless of the prevailing political climate. We also
call upon the international community to support this
endeavour, to seek to overcome the obstacles that
impede the peace process, and to provide the required
guarantees, in addition to the necessary incentives, to
implement the agreements achieved.

I should like to note here the efforts of
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to form a
Government of national unity. We call on all to support
those endeavours.

From our perspective, dialogue is an essential
part of the peace process. We therefore participated in
the alliance of civilizations initiative and sponsored
meetings on dialogue among religions, including the
Jewish religion. We knew that we could be criticized
by some, but that did not stop us from acting because
we understand the importance of dialogue.

I should like to refer to an extremely important
point. Our serious resolve to make effective efforts for
the sake of peace must not be thwarted by any action
aimed at subverting our common effort. We are a

nation that seeks a just peace and not a violent one. All
fair-minded people can grasp that from our civilization
and our cultural and religious heritage. At the same
time, we are aware that a large majority in Israel shares
our desire for peace, irrespective of provocations and
sacrifices. I recall what Yitzhak Rabin said in the
Knesset in 1993: "We are destined to live together on
the same soil in the same land". I know that quoting
the words of Rabin will cause me to be criticized in my
country, but they are words of truth.

We have to realize that we cannot choose our
neighbours or our enemies. The question now is: Are
we ready to face the challenge of this issue with a
sense of responsibility in order to secure peace,
security, stability, justice and equity for the States and
the peoples of the Middle East, including Israel?
Success in achieving the desired peace is success for
everyone, and failure to do so honours no one. We
should no longer squander this opportunity as we have
in the past.

