Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like at the outset to express our
satisfaction that you and your delegation,
Mr. President, decided to hold this wrap-up meeting
and that you chose as its theme issues related to
carrying out the purposes of the United Nations by
establishing missions in conflict zones in various parts
of the world. Like previous speakers, I should like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you on the way in
which you, your team and Mr. Mekdad have conducted
the work of the Council this month. What had looked
like a tranquil month, in which most diplomatic and
other United Nations personnel would take a vacation,
in fact became a series of very intensive days of work
to keep the Security Council attentive, alert and active
in various parts of the world where the presence of the
United Nations did not allow vacations.

I should also like on this occasion to indicate that,
after a year and a half - or a bit more - of working
with you, Ambassador Wehbe, on the endeavours of the
Security Council, we have been able to appreciate your
great diplomatic skill and virtues and your personal
convictions. The collective decision-making process
involves not only defending the positions taken by each
of our countries, but also ability, understanding,
perception and sensitivity on the part of the diplomats
that advocate those positions so that they truly relate
closely to the events with respect to which we must act.
They must also be in line with our fundamental
obligation to take decisions as a collective body that
represents the interests of the entire international
community in the quest for peace and security.

With regard to all of this, Sir, you have left a
testimony and an example that this body will always
remember and appreciate. I wish you every success in
the task that you will face in your country's diplomatic
service, as you continue to work on these issues in the
United Nations in Geneva.

It is very important for the Security Council
regularly to reflect on its tasks and its missions.
Frequent review of the way in which the tasks of the
Council evolve in the area of United Nations
peacekeeping missions is necessary in the light of the
responsibilities that we bear and the new
responsibilities that the Organization will have to
shoulder in the future to address events around the
world.

International conflicts have not ceased to occur.
Perhaps the new issue is that now, more than any other
time in history, the international community is looking
to the United Nations for the leadership, capabilities,
impartiality, experience and resources needed to tackle
those conflicts. The United Nations thus has a growing
presence around the world - a dynamic and very
productive presence which is a tremendous resource for
peace-building. But that growing presence poses a
challenge that needs to be tackled with an increasingly
clear understanding of everything at stake in each
mission, of how better to organize them and of how to
set clearer priorities.

It is also a challenge because of the limited and
sometimes scarce resources of the Organization, and
because of the various methods whereby resources are
obtained. Those circumstances make it difficult
properly to define priorities, the scope of mandates,
and the use of United Nations capacities and resources
in a way that will ensure that objectives are matched
with the international community's investment in
attaining them.

For that reason, my delegation takes the view that
this exercise enables us to exchange views on how
better to organize United Nations missions around the
world, upon which hinge international peace and
security, the survival and well-being of large groups of
people and economic and social development - and
ultimately the prevention of conflict by attacking its
fundamental causes.

That thought process also means that we should
consider the Council's decision-making machinery. As
some delegations have noted, there is a lack of
symmetry in the capacity of the international
community and the Council to respond to challenges
arising in different parts of the world. On some
occasions, due to specific circumstances, we have the
ability to respond rapidly. In other circumstances, the
processes are protracted, the decision-making process
is often difficult - sometimes tortuous - and
conflicts develop, the numbers of victims rise and
humanitarian circumstances become acute, as has
recently been the case in Liberia. And the international
community has been unable to find a way to take
decisions as rapidly and resolutely as events warrant.

A whole series of recent experiences - the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the establishment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI), the case of Liberia, C6te d'Ivoire, the
circumstances of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the conditions
in which the Organization is fulfilling its mandate in
Afghanistan - are all experiences that should help to
set up a model or a programming mechanism, in which
we can take into account varied factors in designing,
planning and implementing our new missions.
In this regard, we need a very clear and precise
demarcation of the scope and extent of each mission.
We must therefore very clearly define the legitimate
objectives. Without question, the main motivation of
the United Nations in promoting peace and security is
to meet the needs of populations affected by conflict
and to build a basis for averting such crises in the
future. The United Nations needs to define clearly the
extent and scope of its task, and the scope of the task of
the countries in question and of their nationals, who
need to pursue such peace efforts to the ultimate end.

United Nations missions demonstrate the need for
increasingly flexible and supple methods of
coordination, better ways of establishing agreement
and understanding, with a view to engendering
partnership. We also need to strengthen our work with
the Economic and Social Council to explore the
fundamental causes underlying and motivating
conflicts that require the intervention of the Security
Council and the establishment of these operations.

We also need to work with the Bretton Woods
institutions, to coordinate with them and understand
how they work. We need to facilitate their coordinated
cooperation with the United Nations in tackling
situations that have very deep-rooted economic and
social causes. These require responses in the economic
and social field, which we cannot ignore if we are truly
to establish a secure underpinning for our peace efforts.

It is also very important, as yesterday's meeting
demonstrated, for the efforts of the Security Council to
be coordinated with those of the regional organizations.

Reference has been made today to the
involvement of troop-contributing countries in
peacekeeping operations. Many efforts are being made
by the international community, and not only in terms
of contributing troops to peacekeeping operations. In
many ways, Member States are present or active in
peace operations, carrying out very diverse tasks
ranging from sending contingents to serve as Blue
Helmets and working in multinational missions to
setting up hospitals, caring for refugees, preparing for
elections, institution-building, training, education,
health programmes and so forth.

We need to draw on and benefit from the
experience and professionalism these countries can
contribute for the design of our missions. The Security
Council should be more aggressive in seeking the
advice and counsel of countries, members of the
Security Council and members of the General
Assembly, who regularly, with many years of
experience, participate in these operations and have a
very clear understanding of the conditions and
challenges that arise and of the best way for the
international community to tackle those challenges.
That experience should be more systematically
incorporated into the design of the Council's missions.

We should also strive to involve more countries
in those missions. We should expand the scope of
participation so that the international community
enthusiastically takes up the work of peace-building.
Countries possess a wide range of capacities that can
complement one another. They can not only send
troops to peace operations but also participate in many
other ways compatible with their specific
characteristics, with their foreign policies and with
their political arrangements. Those countries can be
encouraged to participate more actively and to
contribute more dynamically - not only in a hesitant
way - in the development of the United Nations
efforts to build peace in the world.

In the light of all these experiences and factors,
we must create a much more dynamic process of
accumulative learning. Meetings such as ours today are
very important for that process. They enable us to
apprehend new ways of organizing United Nations
missions and to take better advantage of the existing
capacities of the Organization. We should put more
emphasis on new elements and on factors that we can
identify as contributions. They could be much more
effective and could make a meaningful contribution to
the deployment of United Nations capacities for peace-
building.

In that regard, my country believes that it is
especially important for the Organization and countries
to be increasingly receptive to the mainstreaming of
gender issues in United Nations peace missions. This
issue has been well studied, and there is testimony and
experience that the Organization understands well. The
contribution of women to the decision-making process
and to carrying out United Nations peace missions is
important not just in terms of quantity, but also of
quality. For that reason, we need to ensure that more
women, either already a part of the Organization or to
be recruited, are placed in leadership positions both in
the Secretariat and in the Organization's missions. It is
notable that there are very few women in leadership
positions in United Nations missions. The Organization
must make an extraordinary effort to take advantage of
their talents, skills and vision in peace building in the
world.
I would like to conclude by referring to an issue
that is of great importance and which has been
tragically demonstrated this month: the most
significant issue, that of security. It is added to the list
of concerns in designing United Nations peace
missions, in particular following the events of 19
August, which have left a profound mark on the United
Nations - the loss of human lives, the loss of United
Nations workers. Men and women who dedicated
themselves to peace-building efforts for many years
never imagined they would encounter such a tragic and
dramatic end as in what took place in Baghdad. In
particular, we should remember the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, who died in that event. In this very
Chamber, on various occasions, most recently as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Baghdad, he shared with the Council some very
important thoughts that should be the basis for our
understanding of the design of peace missions in the
future.

This matter has indeed underlined the importance
of carefully studying the ways to provide adequate
security for United Nations missions, without affecting
the image of the United Nations held by the nationals
of the countries where the Organization is active: the
image of the United Nations as a neutral actor open to
communication, close cooperation and working directly
with the local communities, and ready to offer them
assistance and help in the peace efforts, humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction. That image should not
change. It should be strengthened even as we seek to
implement security measures to protect humanitarian
personnel.

However, we should never underestimate the
conditions of insecurity and instability in conflict areas
in the world today. Mission personnel should not be
left unprotected due to discrete security measures. We
realize that it is not easy to find a balance among all
these factors, but we are certain that, with the
appropriate advice and assistance, it will be possible to
find measures that ensure the security of personnel and
that preserve the integrity of United Nations missions.
Security measures are particularly important in
composite missions involving unarmed civilian
personnel in charge of tasks such as the observation of
elections, reconstruction and humanitarian assistance.
In that regard, the experience of Baghdad should
provide a very instructive lesson.

The Security Council took an important step
yesterday when it strengthened the protection of
personnel by adopting resolution 1502 (2003) on the
protection of United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel in conflict
zones.

That is only a first step, which organizes already
existing mandates and underlines how important it is
for the Security Council in particular to place the
situation of humanitarian personnel on its agenda, to
always take it into consideration and to remain
attentive to the issue. The security of the humanitarian
workers is inherently essential to the work that they
carry out in conflict zones. It is also an essential
component of international peace and security.
Accordingly, ensuring the personal safety of
humanitarian workers and the security of their
organizations and their working systems is an
obligation that the Security Council must shoulder
under the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

As we have indicated, we have a clear
responsibility to provide protection to those working
on the ground and carrying out work in peace-building
in high-risk situations. That responsibility includes not
only both the States involved and the Organization
taking all the necessary preventive measures. It also
requires investigation, accountability and adopting
strict punitive measures in cases where attacks affect
personnel of the United Nations or other humanitarian
personnel. In effect, attacks on humanitarian workers in
conflict zones are war crimes, and all States must strive
to ensure that the authors are brought to justice and
punished accordingly.

It is now incumbent on the Security Council to
ensure that this resolution is fully implemented in all
situations and circumstances. The security issues of all
missions should be reviewed by the actors involved,
including the contributing countries. We must protect
our personnel: it is a key responsibility of the
Organization.

