The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Brazil, Indonesia,
Portugal and Timor-Leste, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Chief of Protocol to escort His
Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, President of
Timor-Leste, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmdo, President of
Timor-Leste, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the President of Timor-
Leste.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste and Head of Mission of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hasegawa to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/24, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2006/39, containing the text of a letter
dated 20 January 2006 from the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste addressed to the
Secretary-General.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste. I now give him the floor.


