Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. I
commend their tireless efforts in trying to push for new
developments despite the wide variety of difficulties.

In responding to the briefing, Indonesia would like
to underscore three points.

First, regarding the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement, we welcome the latest
joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee (RCC) to oversee the implementation
of the Agreement between the Government and the
Houthis to demilitarize the port city of Al-Hudaydah.
We also note the establishment of the joint operations
centre and the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) facility and its
activation. With the establishment of the centre, it is
hoped that both parties and the United Nations can
work on de-escalation and effectively address incidents
that occur in the field. We hope that this exercise will
also enhance confidence and trust between the parties.
I believe that any progress on the implementation of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement will always be welcomed by members of the
Security Council. We hope that more progress will be
delivered in the near future. Indonesia also welcomes
of the appointment of Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha
as RCC Chair and Head of UNMHA. Indonesia wishes
him success in carrying out the mandate given by the
Security Council.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation
in Yemen and the continuation of the peace process,
as we heard from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock,
the humanitarian situation is not getting better, and
the lack of funding may force the closure of some of
the relief programmes in Yemen. It is indeed very
concerning. In our opinion, the need for humanitarian
assistance will be greater, as will its cost, ifthe conflict
continues. The only way to reverse the situation is by
securing a wide-scale ceasefire and continuation of
the political process so as to end the conflict. In that
connection, we call on donors to fulfil their pledges and
for the resumption of the political process in Yemen.
While once again emphasizing the importance of the
Stockholm Agreement and urging parties to implement
it, Indonesia affirms that it is time to move forward into
a bigger and more comprehensive political process. We
reiterate our support for a negotiated political settlement
that engages all parties in an all-inclusive dialogue.

Thirdly, with respect to the security situation and
escalation of violence, we again express our concern
about the continuous attacks by the Houthis, in particular
the recent drone attack claimed by Ansar Allah against
two major oil facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Such attacks indeed provoke further escalation of the
violence and we strongly condemn them.

With regard to the situation in the south, we support
the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to hold a
dialogue in Jeddah to resolve the situation. We also call
for an end to all incidents of violence and encourage
the various parties to engage with the joint committee
to monitor and stabilize the situation. The new
confrontation in the south reaffirms the need to resume
the broader political process in Yemen. After all, peace
throughout Yemen is the end game for all parties.
