Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
this will be the last time that my delegation takes the
floor during the Russian presidency of the Security
Council, let me thank you, Sir, and your entire team for
guiding our work in a month that has been particularly
challenging. Allow me in particular to highlight your
careful and balanced work in the Security Council with
regard to the process of selecting the next Secretary-
General of the Organization.

I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ould Cheikh
Ahmed; Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien;
and Regional Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Muhannad Hadi, for their briefings.

Uruguay is deeply troubled by the worsening of
the conflict in Yemen in the light of the most heinous
violations and abuses of international humanitarian law
and human rights law taking place daily. The scarce
media coverage of the grave conflict in Yemen does not
absolve the perpetrators, the international community
or the Security Council of the responsibility they
shoulder. We are concerned about the ongoing violence
and the dismantling of institutions in the country as
a result of the increase in terrorist activity. Uruguay
regrets the repeated failures of the peace process,
including the most recent attempt to establish a 72-hour
ceasefire. In that regard, I support the resumption of the
negotiation process, which for many months has failed
to achieve tangible results, and which is now dependent
on the impact of a weakened road map.

Uruguay reiterates its appeal to the parties to
resume dialogue and to fully comply with their
commitment to ceasing hostilities to allow for the
conditions conducive to establishing peace. Actors in
the region must demonstrate their commitment to peace
and, in particular, those countries that have influence
with the parties must take vigorous steps to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the work conducted by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, and to express my delegation's support for his
continued efforts to find a solution to end the conflict.
We would also like to deeply thank all those involved
in lending humanitarian assistance in Yemen, for their
tireless and courageous work in bringing hope to the
suffering population.

Uruguay strongly condemns the repeated attacks
on civilian targets in Yemen - indiscriminate air
strikes, mortar and missile attacks that destroy
hospitals, schools, markets, residential buildings and
infrastructure, and cluster bombs, anti-personnel mines
and snipers, which all wreak havoc on the civilian
population. We also denounce the attacks launched
from within Yemen on holy sites in Saudi Arabia and
on shipping in the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait. All players
in Yemen are demonstrating a complete disregard for
the rules governing armed conflict and causing deep
suffering and disastrous consequences for the civilian
population trapped in the combat areas.

In both Yemen and Syria, we are witnessing
unprecedented levels of dehumanization. In that regard,
allow me to make special reference to the terrorist
attack - I repeat, the terrorist attack - carried out
on 8 October in Sana'a on a community centre where
a funeral was taking place and in which more than 650
people died and more than 500 were injured. I refer to it
as a terrorist attack because in this country, where I was
educated and have lived for many years, I was taught
that if it walks like a duck and talks like a duck, with
its distinctive quack, then we must acknowledge that it
is, in fact, a duck. The operation to which Ijust referred
was carried out using tactics that are usually employed
by terrorists. It was a surprise attack and timed to occur
when the highest number of people were in attendance.
There was one explosion, followed by a deliberate pause
for several minutes to allow first responders to arrive,
and then a second explosion. That is a typical terrorist
operation but, in this particular case, two explosions
occurred to ensure maximum destruction.

In the various cultures, societies and religions
represented within the Organization, we all have similar
traditions in order to pay tribute to life and death. We
celebrate births and we grieve when someone dies. I
wonder which of our societies, cultures, religions or
gods justifies a terrorist attack on people attending a
funeral. Who would feel so all-powerful to order such
barbarity? Who would feel that much above reproach to
carry out such an atrocity?

Furthermore, that attack was not carried out with
homemade weapons. No improvised explosive devices
were used. No conventional or barrel bombs were
used, nor were cars or trucks loaded with explosives
employed. The Panel of Experts on Yemen stated that,
in the ruins of the community centre, they found the
remnants of a clearly identified sophisticated guidance
system for a specific type of aerially launched bomb.
The type of bomb used has the unique feature of being
encased in a hard steel shell that allows the bomb to

penetrate a concrete structure and explode only after
it hits the ground. Although on a smaller scale, I think
that it is similar to the so-called bunker-busting bombs
that are being used liberally throughout Aleppo. There
is also information that that type of guidance system
is manufactured only by two companies in the world,
while the bomb that was used is manufactured by
only one company. It is clear that neither the guidance
system nor the bombs used can be acquired on the
black market. They can be sourced only through
Government-to-Government deals, and at very high
prices. In the Spanish language we say that weapons
are loaded by the devil, but weapons are fired by man
and the responsibility is borne by the person pressing
the launch button or pulling the trigger, as well as by
the individual who facilitates access to the weapon in
the first place.

It goes without saying that attempts to explain what
occurred have already begun, with claims that it was an
inadvertent mistake caused by inaccurate intelligence
and that extensive investigations are under way to
determine the facts of what occurred. I would point out
that in this case we are talking about two inadvertent
mistakes, as two attacks were carried out. In addition,
may I mention what extraordinary precision must
be required to repeat the same mistake on the same
community centre. I wonder if it was the same type of
mistake that led Medecins sans Frontieres to evacuate
six hospitals in Yemen on account of the repeated air
attacks it suffered, despite the fact that the geographic
coordinates of the exact location of those hospitals
were communicated and sent to all parties concerned.
It appears that someone continues to commit the same
mistakes. In those cases it was also said that extensive
investigations would be carried out to determine the
facts but, thus far, we have no information whatsoever
about who carried out the attacks or who supplied the
bombs that were used.

It should be pointed out that the Council has not
been able to issue even a statement condemning the
horrendous attack carried out on 8 October in Sana'a. It
seems that nothing can move the Council.

Neither excuses nor laments, be it because a
mistake was made or because of a claimed attack
against terrorists, will raise from the dead the hundreds
of children, women and elderly persons lying crushed
beneath the ruins in Sana'a and Aleppo. Uruguay
condemns all attacks against civilians, be it in Yemen,
Syria, Iraq or elsewhere, irrespective of whom the
victims are. We cannot condemn aerial attacks that kill
civilians in Syria but remain mute in the face of similar
ones in Yemen. There is no place for double standards
in this respect, as we are frequently reminded by our
colleague Rafael Ramirez Carrefio. Those responsible
for these appalling atrocities and their accomplices
must be held accountable for their crimes.

It is time for a cessation of hostilities and a return
to the negotiating table. We all know very well that
these conflicts have no military solution. The only way
of resolving them is through political agreements that
are negotiated directly between the parties.

At the risk of repeating myself, I wish to state once
again with total conviction that Colombia is providing
the world with an exemplary model of an unrelenting
quest for peace. But, of course, in order to do this, a
great deal of courage is required, not just the superficial
valour demonstrated by beating one's chest and the
arrogance of brandishing weapons, but, rather, the
deep-rooted courage to extend one's hand to the enemy,
clasping an olive branch as a sign of peace.

