Mr. Vieira (Brazil): The role of peacekeeping
operations has evolved dramatically over the years.
High expectations, coupled with greater resource
constraints, have accentuated the difficulties missions
face and have sometimes created frustration about the
ability of peacekeeping operations to achieve their
objectives. Brazil continues to believe in the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to contribute
significantly to the successful resolution of conflicts.
However, change is required. We therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and welcome
the Secretary-General's effort to renew dialogue on
peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping is a unique instrument for dealing
with conflicts. We hope that the reforms proposed by
the Secretary-General will be implemented in such a
way as to strengthen peacekeeping's integration with
other instruments in a coherent way, while recognizing
and preserving its distinctiveness.

The changes that we seek require action not only
by the Security Council, but also by other bodies
with responsibility for peacekeeping. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in particular,
offers a great opportunity for Member States to
reflect upon and help strengthen, in a democratic
setting, the fundamental political consensus that
underpins peacekeeping partnerships. It should take
responsibility for giving directions and not just reacting
to predetermined decisions. During this year's session,
the Special Committee requested the Secretariat to
develop an integrated performance policy framework
for mandate implementation, based on clear standards
for all relevant civilian and uniformed personnel. The
Special Committee has also encouraged the Secretariat
to develop a clear, comprehensive and transparent
procedure on caveats, in consultation with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Brazil welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts
to address the increasing number of fatalities in
peacekeeping operations, and we recognize the
important contribution of the Santos Cruz report. We
welcome its emphasis on the need to provide adequate
resources, equipment and training to peacekeepers,
particularly specialized training for specific threats.
We also agree that a sense of shared responsibility is
needed in the field. As highlighted by the Santos Cruz
report, some units deployed tend to operate in isolation
from others deployed in the same mission. By working
together, contingents will contribute to a more efficient
implementation of mandates and to decreasing the
number of fatalities suffered by peacekeepers.

Civilian leadership and personnel also need to
play a more active role in taking necessary preventive
measures to avoid casualties, including by promoting
greater situational awareness, achieving an appropriate
mission footprint and guaranteeing that logistic
decisions are needs-oriented.

The focus of the report on casualty reduction,
however, should not lead to an understanding that an
increase in the militarization of operations would be
the main way to make them more effective. Brazil
reiterates that the success of peacekeeping operations
will be determined not solely by the actions taken by
military components, but also by their capacity to
protect and sustain peace and to create an environment
conducive to long-term political solutions. The
success of peacekeeping missions also depends on
the existence of achievable mandates and, most
importantly, on the political will of regional actors and
the international community.

In our effort to improve peacekeeping, we must not
fail to recognize the contributions achieved through
that tool. The recent downsizing or closing of missions,
such as in the cases of Haiti, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia,
where missions have created conditions conducive for
peace and security, show the positive effect that United
Nations operations continue to have, bringing hope for
a better future to millions of people.

