Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, it is my pleasure to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing. We affirm our full
support for the Special Representative in shouldering
his responsibility, and for the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in its efforts to promote
security and stability in the country.

We welcome the great victories of the Iraqi forces in

the past few months to liberate Iraqi territories from the
control of heinous terrorist organizations. This could
not have happened without the coordination of all Iraqi
forces and their agreement to work hand in hand to put
an end to this scourge, which threatens the security and
stability of Iraq. We also value the efforts of the Iraqi
Government, which attaches importance to protecting
civilians during the current military operations to
liberate Mosul. We call on the Government to continue
to adopt this approach, especially as the fight moves
to highly populated areas, in order to put an end to
civilian casualties.

As the end ofthe fight to liberate Mosul approaches,
we reaffirm that eliminating terrorism, ensuring
sustainable peace and promoting stability in the country
requires adopting a comprehensive approach that goes
beyond military and security dimensions. It must also
include political, economic and social dimensions
as well. Egypt therefore welcomes the efforts of the
international community to consolidate stability in
Iraq, especially the work of the Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization.

We stress that achieving stability in the liberated
areas requires, in addition to basic development projects,
ensuring the safe and voluntary return of refugees to
their homes in a way that protects their dignity and does
not alter the demographic composition of the different
areas as it was before the conflict erupted. This will
ensure that no group is marginalized at the expense of
another. It is also important to adopt a comprehensive
approach to governing the liberated areas that meets
the aspirations of the citizens and promotes stability.

We must continue to support Iraq's economic reform
and development efforts, especially in the light of the
next phase, because rebuilding the liberated areas will
be a great burden on the Iraqi economy. We therefore
support holding a donor conference to mobilize the
necessary international support help Iraq at this turning
point. We would like to see efforts in Iraq aimed at
reaching comprehensive national reconciliation - in
which all Iraqi stakeholders are included and none are
marginalized - succeed. Throughout history, Iraq has
always drawn its strength and stability from diversity
and harmony. Therefore, we reaffirm that achieving
reconciliation through a genuine dialogue among all
Iraqi stakeholders to address the root causes of terrorist
ideologies is vital for ensuring lasting stability and
security in Iraq. We also highly value the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.

In conclusion, I would like the stress that Egypt
firmly believes that the strength and stability of Iraq
lie in its unity and sovereignty. We reject any foreign
interventions in Iraqi internal affairs, especially
interventions that fuel sectarian strife and division
among Iraqi stakeholders, as that breeds extremism and
terrorism and causes suffering for Iraqi people.

The people of the region have been paying a high
price for terrorism and extremism. In that connection,
Egypt condemns the Turkish air strikes on northern Iraq.
That is an unacceptable violation of Iraqi sovereignty
and cannot be justified under any circumstances. It will
only complicate the regional situation and thwart our
efforts to fight terrorism.

