Lieutenant General Singha: I wish to express
my gratitude to you, Madam President, and to the
members of the Security Council for having confidence
in peacekeeping in general and in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in particular.
A lot ofissues were raised; we will take the advice given
and work on it so as to ensure the safety and security of
the peacekeepers.

I will start with the question posed by the
representative of Argentina regarding the cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, or
the Secretariat, and the mission. It has been exemplary.
It has been real-time; we have been speaking to each
other when the actions have been taking place on the
ground, so one could not ask for more. As far as the
approach is concerned, it needs to be multipronged so
as to see the way ahead. I would like to tell the Council
right now that one high-level team from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has already visited the
mission and will be presenting other options, most
likely on 20 October.

In general, we need to continuously analyse the
situation on the ground, stay on top of the situation and
keep evolving along with the dynamically changing
environment. A lot of cross-cutting issues have come
up, and I will divide them basically into the achievement
of the mandate, in a modified manner; the security of
the peacekeepers; and capacity-building by harnessing
technology.

The question was asked, what can the Security
Council do? The Security Council has done a lot, and
we are grateful. We would request the Security Council
and the Member States that are supporting either side
in the Syrian strife to use their leverage to tell the
parties not to target the United Nations, and to reduce
the levels of violence in the area of separation, in fact,
make the area of separation free from any presence of
armed personnel.

For the achievement of the mandate, as I mentioned,
we continue to achieve it in a very modified manner.
Our main thrust is now on the ceasefire line, the Alpha
line. We would like to make new positions along the
Alpha line, so that our density along the Alpha line from
the A side is much greater than what we had earlier.
So as long as the ceasefire line is sealed, everything is
sealed, all violations from either side are observed and
reported, I think that we are achieving our mandate in
a modified manner.

The use of technology and new tools will also
enhance the fulfilment of the mandate. The rightsizing
of the force is under way and will be presented to
the Council by the team that had come to us. We are
studying all possible options, and they will be shared
with the Council.

Conerning the synergy between the inter-mission
cooperation, I think that we have excellent synergy
between UNDOF, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. As far as interaction with non-State
actors, our force encounters them while doing our tasks,
and our main aim is to just tell them about our mandate
and also stress our impartiality and our transparency
concerning the entire internal strife in Syria.

Capacity-building will be enhanced. Among other
things, we will now have more stress on liaison, for
which the capacity, as I had mentioned, has already
doubled, and we will be interacting with the parties,
as suggested by some members, more proactively. We
will continue to enhance our information-collection
capability, also using technology.

As far as the security ofpeacekeepers is concerned,
transferring our major effort onto the Alpha side gives
inherent security to the peacekeepers. But we will
continue to upgrade our mitigation measures in the
weeks to come and also have a smaller footprint, but as
much as operationally required in the area of separation.
We need to continue to move in the armoured vehicles
at least up to 2 to 3 kilometres from the Alpha line,
even if we are operating on the Alpha side. The use of
enablers and technology we have already discussed.

We will continue to build rapid-reaction capabilities
as we go on. In terms of capacity-building, while
harnessing technology, we are looking at battlefield
surveillance radars and thermal imaging equipment;
ground sensors; unarmed aerial vehicles, if the parties
allow us to employ them; satellite imagery; and the
introduction of technology, keeping in mind the
sensitivities of both the parties, as I mentioned, and
any other technology that is already being used in
peacekeeping.

