The President: I shall now make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

Like previous speakers, I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for
his comprehensive briefing. I congratulate him on his
appointment and wish him all the best in his
challenging tasks. I also thank Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Foreign Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxjah,
Foreign Minister of Kosovo, for their statements.

I start by expressing our deep concern about the
escalation of violence directed against United Nations-
mandated international forces in Kosovo, which has
resulted in a significant number of wounded, among
whom were 12 Portuguese soldiers, as mentioned by
Mr. Zarif. Portugal condemns, in the strongest terms,
those attacks and reiterates that all attempts to hamper,
by the use of force, the freedom of movement in
northern Kosovo are totally unacceptable and can only
worsen an already very tense situation. Portugal
appeals, in unequivocal terms, for restraint. It is
fundamental to deflate the present situation in order to
prevent an even more dangerous escalation of tensions,
further bloodshed and the worsening of the situation of
tens of thousands of civilians.

Strengthened political dialogue is, from our point
of view, the only way to achieve that goal. In that

regard, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has undertaken serious
efforts to bring together relevant political players in the
north of Kosovo and to supplement several failures in
fundamental supplies, thereby contributing importantly
to a safer and more secure environment. Those efforts
should be commended.

Also on the issue of political dialogue, we
welcome the resumption of the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on 21 November. The latest
agreement between the parties on the mutual
recognition of university diplomas is a welcome
development. Portugal believes that the European
perspective of Serbia and Kosovo must be a constant
reminder to both parties of the importance of
remaining constructively engaged in their negotiations.
While we are aware of the challenges ahead, we stress
that time is of the paramount importance on this issue.
We appeal to both parties to renew their efforts, both
internally and among each other, to make headway on
all fundamental issues.

We would like to underline the importance of
some of the issues mentioned in the UNMIK report
(S/2011/675). We welcome the fact that several
important Serbia Orthodox Church events took place in
Kosovo without incident. The freedom of worship is an
essential element of democratic conviviality and
respect for the rule of law, and must be protected.
Unfortunately, there was a worrying increase in
incidents affecting minority communities Kosovo-
wide. Indeed, progress in upholding minority rights is
fundamental to peace and security in Kosovo and in the
Western Balkans.

On the report of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), I would like to underline
that the Mission's essential role in promoting and
upholding the rule of law and law enforcement in
Kosovo should be duly appreciated. Portugal has
consistently been a strong promoter of the role that the
Rule of Law Mission plays in Kosovo. But Portugal
continues to believe that the Council would benefit
from hearing more directly about the work of EULEX
and its future perspectives on the investigations it has
undertaken in areas as diverse and as serious as human
organ trafficking, tax evasion, border control and the
fight against corruption.

My final words are to express my appreciation
for, and encouragement of, the work of the various

international presences in Kosovo. Winter is a
particularly challenging time in Kosovo, and may
prove to be the source of more instability. The
mandates of UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and EULEX,
among others, aim to correspond as much as possible
to guaranteeing peace, stability and justice to the
country. They will continue to do so under the Security
Council's oversight and with its help.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Mr. Jeremic' has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now call on him.

