Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to convey my gratitude to the delegation
of Spain for its leadership in the work of the Council
during the month of October. I also wish to congratulate
you, Sir and your country, the United Kingdom, for
directing our work this month. I would like to convey
my gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing.

The security situation and the political and human
rights situations in Libya remain alarming and continue
to deteriorate as a result of ongoing violence and of
serious violations of individual rights and freedoms.
We do understand and indeed we share the concerns
expressed in the report being considered - concerns
regarding acts of torture and other degrading treatment
of which a number of detainees have been victims. We
encourage further steps to be undertaken to clarify the

situation, with the assistance of the Libyan Government.
In that respect, we encourage efforts aimed at carrying
out investigations to put an end to those illegal practices
and to identify the perpetrators to ensure that they are
brought to justice. We also note with concern the death
sentences issued on 28 July, some in absentia, by the
Tripoli Court of Assize against a number of detainees,
including Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi.

While welcoming progress in terms of the
investigations conducted in regard to crimes committed
in Libya, we call upon the competent Libyan authorities
to fully cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to ensure that
the detainees enjoy a fair trial, one that respects
their right of defence. We take note of the initiative
of the Prosecutor to gather new information so as to
again consider the admissibility of the Al-Senussi
case and thus to possibly to render a judgement at the
International Criminal Court.

The insecurity sustained by the armed militias,
the development of terrorism, the fresh outbreak of
criminal activities, including human trafficking, and
the lack of prospects for a political solution not only
endanger the future of Libya, but also undermine all
the institutions of State, including the judiciary. That is
why we reiterate our call to all Libyan parties to make
the necessary concessions to form a Government of
national unity, one able to put an end to the conflict in
a decisive way and to restore the authority of the State.

The chaotic situation currently prevailing in Libya
is also marked by serious violations, including murders,
abductions, torture and sexual violence, as well as the
persecution of magistrates, politicians and other human
rights defenders. Thousands of individuals have been
caught up in violent fighting, and tens of thousands of
others have fled their homes to seek refuge. That has
been compounded by thousands of individuals detained
without a trial, including African immigrants who have
been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment
because of their race and their religion.

We energetically condemn all such violations
and demand that those responsible be identified and
brought to justice. To that end, the ICC, despite its
limited resources, should explore the ways and means
to be able to follow the situation closely, including by
launching investigations for possible prosecution. In
that respect, .the Security Council, which referred the
situation in Libya to the ICC through resolution 1970
(2011), must back the efforts of the Court. We also call
upon the States parties to the Rome Statute to do just
the same.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support to the work of the Prosecutor, and we wish to
convey our appreciation for her untiring efforts aimed
at discharging her mission.

