Mr. Bent: I thank the members of the Security
Council again for their kind remarks, their obvious
support for United Nations police and their concerns
about our operations within peacekeeping. I probably
will not be able to answer all the questions, but I will
try to.

At the outset of the conflict, intra-Mission
cooperation was very tenuous. We were engaged in
capacity-building, which was mostly unrestricted.
Everybody focused on his or her own area ofimportance,
and there was not much integration. When the conflict
started and forced us to all come together, making the
world a lot smaller, there appeared to be some stepping
on toes and some conflicts of interest in the cooperative
relationships among the different components. There
was a lack of clarity on the issue of primacy and
focus. One must remember that, during that interim
period, we had no adjusted mandate. During that gap,
United Nations police tried to push forward without
restrictions, with the knowledge that we needed to
maintain some type of policing and control of the
growing camps. During that time, we started to identify
our own inabilities, with a view to addressing, through
policy and procedure, exactly what we could and could
not do, and we learned how to tie it all together.

With regard to the rules of engagement, we knew
that we needed to focus internally and that the force
needed to focus externally. We had trouble securing
the porous perimeters of the sites because of a lack of
resources, inadequate fencing and an inadequate ability
to observe the perimeters day and night. Weapons
were being sneaked in - including machetes and
knives - and we therefore quickly had to combine with
the force contingent directly in order to handle some of
those situations.

With respect to protective gear, we asked for it
up-front in January 2014. And we pushed for it again,
because many police-contributing countries cannot
provide such equipment. We lacked it, so we were at
risk. We were trying to rely on the minimal formed
police units (FPUs) that we received in-mission and
on the force contingent. That is where the rules of
engagement began to become apparent. When FPUs
were unable to engage quickly to get into position in
the presence of an armed component that required
the use of higher force in a situation they could not
control - and in many such situations we have had
armed opponents with knives and machetes, throwing
rocks or beating us with sticks, which meant that we
were suffering injuries - we often had to withdraw. It
is not simply a matter of having 20 or 30 formed police
units armed with weapons that one thinks can defend
itself and control the situation. We are talking about
hundreds of civilians surrounding them with machetes,
knives, rocks and sticks, even jumping and biting. The
decision to use force to protect themselves becomes a
very critical issue because of why we are there in the
first place. Sometimes such escalation occurs just on a
whim. Anything can ignite them. As soon as you lay
hands on someone who is beating a woman and try to
pull him off, you can suddenly be surrounded by 20 or
30 of his supporters who want to know why you are
taking that person away.

Thus the rules of engagement became very critical.
We tried to address that through a standard operating
procedure in responding to such incidents. But we
found that the force contingent was correct in the View
that it should not engage the civilian population and
that its only capacity in most of its work with us was to
support us in containing an area of conflict and locking
it down. Most of what the force cotingent does is to
help us form a perimeter and shut down a site. It comes
in and extracts us from a perimeter whenever we have
an issue. IfI have a team that is cut off inside a site
and things get to the point where the team is suffering
injuries that require the use of deadly force 4 which
has happened, and deadly force has not been used - the
force contingent does not come in with a higher level
of escalation; they come back in with containment and
control. That leaves us vulnerable to an apparent abuse
of force.

We are not properly equipped. We do not have the
resources to go into a site such as Bentiu, which has
121,000 internally displaced persons, with 30 FPUs
to control a situation where 200 or 300 people may be
rioting. The dynamics of some of the content of the
mandates therefore become almost irrelevant.

We have been working intra-mission to coordinate.
But it is incredibly dynamic, in part due to the
institutional framework. Within a mandate, we can
have statement that says "by any and all means
necessary within your resources and capabilities in
areas of deployment". What exactly does that mean?
Is your area of deployment South Sudan? Is your area
of deployment the protection-of-civilians site you are
assigned to? Is your area of deployment the specific
purpose you came to the mission to perform? In the first
parse of that, we had people who came to the mission
for capacity-building. They were not there to carry out
any engagement with civilians. Yet for almost a year
we had to reassign them to do something with which
they were not comfortable and for which they were not
trained. Those things get very critical.

Resources and capability come into play too,
because the training is not as simple as training people
to come to a mission. You have to train them for the
environment they are in. And you have to train them,
within that environment, for what they are up against.
In the first stages, we realized that our induction
training was inadequate for when people came to the
mission. I am not saying that the external training was
inadequate, but we had to get them to understand what
they were going to be facing when they came to the
mission. We adjusted our induction training to focus on
the protection of civilians, women's protection, sexual
and gender-based violence and dealing with the locals
as separate ethnic groups.

Along with that, we also started to request more
females. We had always been in search of female police
officers, but we needed more because, as has been
pointed out by several members of the Council, women
have a unique advantage in those sites, where we are
dealing with a population that is primarily made up
of women and children. We had to have some way to
take advantage of that and leverage it, so we asked all
the police-contributing countries to provide as many
women as they could. We were at 20 per cent at one
time, but I believe our numbers are sliding down below
18 per cent now. That is not enough.

One point I would like to make in that regard is
that we also have to look at the fact that we are dealing
with a very harsh environment: people are working
outside in the elements, with a hostile group present
and females going unprotected. There are not enough
FPUs to work with the groups that focus on protecting
women and children. We put them in and expose them
to great danger, without giving them the protection they
need to comfortably do theirjobs. I think it may be for
that reason that some countries have started to reduce
their contributions. No one feels good about asking
people to volunteer for a mission and then putting them
in harm's way. And while we do have a gender focal
point, we also have to deal with rotations. Taking in
and training someone as a gender focal point and then
having her rotate out eight months later means that
there is no longevity.

We have been asking for team packages in order to
address some of those issues. We are short on resources
and personnel, and we need to make the most of the

limited resources we have available. That is what we
have been trying to do in restructuring the entire
mission, specifically United Nations police, so as to
put in place dedicated teams for the specific areas we
have to address. We have teams for public order, which
are made up of a combination of United Nations police
and FPUs. We have teams for community policing,
which do nothing but work with community watch
groups - nationals at the sites. And we have teams
on gender and child violence. We are working very
well with those teams, but the dynamics are immense.
I would therefore ask again that we look at this as a
package. We need to focus on what we absolutely need
to get done.

In a sense, capacity-building takes place from the
top and the bottom at the same time. Building from the
bottom up takes too long, but if we do not structure
it correctly it will collapse. In fact, it collapsed right
after the conflict began. We need to have clarity on this
matter, and we need to take the time to do it right as
we put the pieces together. Many of the missions I have
been involved in suffer from diluted potential because
we start to move too quickly. I believe we were doing
that prior to the conflict. That is what we are hoping
to do now in this case, and what we have been trying
to do through these regimented programmes that focus
on community-oriented policing and the protection of
civilians.

