Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for arranging
this meeting, which gives us the opportunity to
exchange views on the issue of small arms and light
weapons.

I also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his recent report to the Security
Council and Under-Secretary-General Abe for his
introduction.

In recent years, small arms and light weapons
have increasingly become the focus of international
attention. The illicit trafficking and excessive
accumulation of such weapons have worsened armed
conflicts in certain countries and regions and disrupted
peace processes and the smooth operation of post-
conflict reconstruction. They are also closely linked to
terrorism, organized crime, the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and child soldiers, causing political,
economic and social damage.

National Governments shoulder the primary
responsibilities in combating the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons. The root cause of that problem
can be removed only by reinforcing national legal
systems and control mechanisms and by imposing strict
controls on domestic production and trade in small
arms and light weapons. At the same time, as small
arms and light weapons have increasingly become a
global issue, the appropriate solution to the problem
cannot be sought without the joint efforts of the
international community. All countries must undertake
close cooperation at the national, regional and
international levels; tighten supervision and control of
the trade in small arms and light weapons; trace illicit
trafficking networks; pool information; and provide the
developing countries with the necessary financial and
technical assistance.

International efforts on small arms and light
weapons form a most active and productive component
part of the current multilateral arms control endeavour.
The United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
concluded in 2001, have established a policy and legal
foundation for the settlement of small arms and light
weapons issues, adding a new chapter to the
international combat against illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons.
The follow-up international efforts have enjoyed
gratifying progress. Countries have attached great
importance to the Programme of Action, earnestly
implemented various measures and accumulated
valuable experience. On that basis, the United Nations
First Biennial Meeting on the implementation of the
Programme of Action was held successfully in 2003,
vigorously enhancing the Programme's comprehensive
implementation. A wide spectrum of international and
regional seminars on small arms and light weapons has
also played an important role in increasing
international consensus and expanding the exchange of
information.

It is worth mentioning that, on the basis of the
work of the Group of Governmental Experts
established by the Secretary-General, the Open-ended
Working Group on an international instrument for the
timely and reliable identification and tracing of illicit
small arms and light weapons was set up last year and
two sessions have been held. The parties involved have
had an in-depth exchange of views on marking, record-
keeping and international tracing cooperation and have
reached wide consensus. We hope that the Working
Group will conclude the new international instruments
on schedule, which will contribute to a more effective
strike against the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.

In July this year, the United Nations Second
Biennial Meeting on the implementation of the
Programme of Action will be held, and the review
conference will take place next year. We hope that,
based on the previous work, the two important
meetings will comprehensively review the
implementation of the Programme of Action, exchange
views, jointly seek solutions to difficulties and
problems, and earnestly enhance national efforts to
implement various measures embodied in the
Programme step by step.

In recent years, the Security Council has often
held special deliberations on the issue of small arms
and light weapons, and emphasized the importance of
that issue in seeking solutions to regional conflicts. In
complement to the aforementioned international
efforts, the Security Council should, within the scope
of its mandate, continue to focus its attention on the
issue, earnestly monitor the implementation of the
relevant arms embargoes, and include disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in peacekeeping
operation authorizations. In addition, the Security
Council should strengthen coordination with the
General Assembly and other United Nations bodies in
that regard to achieve complementarity.

China fully supports the efforts being made
against the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and has played an active part in the relevant
international efforts. In recent years, China has
earnestly implemented the Programme of Action and
further improved its relevant legislations. China has
already signed the Firearms Protocol and is now
preparing to ratify and implement it, establishing a
national database on the production and possession of
and trade in small arms and light weapons, and
optimizing its marking system.

China supports the United Nations in playing a
lead role in international efforts to seek solutions to the
small arms and light weapons issue. We have taken an
active and constructive part in all the meetings of the
United Nations group of governmental experts on small
arms and light weapons, as well as the work of the
current Open-ended Working Group on the new
international instrument. In April this year, China,
Japan and Switzerland, together with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific, will jointly hold an international
workshop on small arms and light weapons in Beijing
to enhance the in-depth study of that issue, especially
in Central and South-East Asia. China is ready to join
with the rest of the international community in seeking
an early and appropriate global solution to the issue of
small arms and light weapons.

Before concluding, I should like to join my
colleagues in expressing support for and thanking the
Japanese delegation for drafting the presidential
statement to be adopted today.

