Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council, and I
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I would also like to
thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Sweden, for his able leadership of the Council
last month.

I also thank the United States delegation for paving
the way to unanimity today on resolution 2340 (2017),
on the annual renewal of the mandate laid down in
resolution 1591 (2005). I would like to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations, and I look forward to meeting with her
one on one in the near future.

I am grateful to the members of the Council for
the opportunity to discuss the content of today's
resolution, and for taking our views into consideration
and incorporating them into the text, despite the fact
that some of our recommendations were not taken into
account. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, in
your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the
Sudan, for your work in coordinating the unanimous
adoption of today's resolution.

Resolution 2340 (2017) considers the security,
humanitarian and political aspects of the situation in
Darfur, noting in the fifth preambular paragraph that
except in the Jebel Marra region, the conflict and the
forms it has taken have subsided. Jebel Marra, an
important region of our country, is in Central Darfur,
one of five Darfuri states. The drop in the level of
conflict in Darfur should have resulted in the lifting
of sanctions and organization of the exit of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

It has been 12 years since the Council's adoption
of resolution 1591 (2005). The Sudan saw periods of
respite and of escalation in the area up until 2011, when
the parties to the conflict reached a peaceful negotiated
settlement under the auspices of the United Nations,
the African Union, the League of Arab States, Qatar
and other peace partners. As the reports on the work
of UNAMID have noted, the situation in Darfur has
been gradually improving year by year, as members
of the Council past and present have acknowledged.
Resolution 2340 (2017) includes preambular and
operative paragraphs from previous resolutions. It is
time that this situation were rectified and an end put
to any mention of condemnation and contentious issues
that have nothing to do with the reality on the ground.
The report of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/22, annex) notes that the remaining armed groups are self-
funding through neighbouring countries by resorting to
mercenary acts, trafficking in persons, hostage-taking
and forced taxation. The Council's resolutions must
denounce such actions just as the international
community condemns them through its international
conventions and resolutions.

The confidential report of the Panel of Experts
was leaked before it was presented to the Sanctions
Committee and before it had been made public. We
notified the Committee of that dangerous incident in
April 2016. We do not yet know ifan entity to investigate
that issue has been established.

We are aware that the issue of access to Darfur's
various regions - Central Darfur in particular - has
been raised in previous reports issued on the situation
in Darfur. The Council knows that we have taken every
opportunity and made every effort to brief it on events
on the ground, while noting that, as stated by a high-
ranking UNAMID official last year and acknowledged
by other United Nations officials, access has now been
granted to all areas in Darfur. In that regard, we note
the joint mission carried out by United Nations entities
and representatives of the Government of the Sudan to
Central Darfur between 8 and 13 December 2016, along
with their first-hand accounts of events on the ground.

During the period under review, we issued a
national action plan to prevent the recruitment and use
ofchildren in armed conflict in March 2016. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict was present for the signing of the Plan.
The action plan has sought to complement the Darfur

peace process and to ensure the transition to peace. We
thank our partners, including United Nations entities
in New York and Khartoum, especially UNICEF and
its Executive Director, Mr. Anthony Lake, for focusing
especially on this issue and for commending our
efforts. We thank the Council for noting that important
development in resolution 2340 (2017). We expect the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as well
as the Secretary-General and the Secretariat, to make
every effort to defend the Darfur peace agreement that
was signed in July 2011 and stress its precedence.

We should not forget that the Justice and Equality
Movement chose to withdraw from negotiations from
the beginning. The Government of the Sudan has
agreed to the request of the United Nations, the African
Union and the League of Arab States to prevent the
Movement from returning to the negotiation table. From
a political, legal and technical perspective, the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur is one of the world's
most important peace agreements for addressing an
internal conflict. Attaining peace in Darfur should not
depend on any one party or individual. All individuals
who hinder peace should be held to the obligations of
international law. We hope that the Council will carry
out its responsibility in denouncing and punishing all
those who obstruct peace and prolong the suffering
of the people in Darfur, in particular the leader of the
Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction.

My country welcomes the Panel of Experts and
we stress our readiness to cooperate with it. We hope
that the Panel will abide by its mandate and uphold
transparency and impartiality. We hope that it will
rely on credible information and that its reports would
reflect the situation on the ground in Darfur in support
of the country's peace process.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
