Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): My delegation
welcomes this debate on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as an agenda item of the Council.

Nearly 60 years ago Europe and the rest of the
world were plunged into a cataclysmic war after one man,
Adolf Hitler, misjudged peace-loving Europe's attitude of
appeasement towards Germany, interpreting it as implying
that he could invade and annex his neighbours' territories
with impunity. It was only the unwavering resolve of the
Allied Powers to resist this madness that finally led to the
defeat of Hitlerism and that consigned it to the dustbin of
history.

But today, by a twist of fate, a doctrine akin to
fascism - but more pernicious - has reared its ugly
head in the Great Lakes region of Africa, where two
neighbours have decided to invade the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, purportedly in search of security.
The security thesis is an excuse for Uganda and Rwanda
to dismember the polity of the Democratic Republic of
Congo in an endeavour to establish a "Greater Rwanda".
Does this not smack of Hitler's expansionist policies in
search of Lebensranm - living space? Uganda and
Rwanda want, by force, to tear away the eastern parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to create a
State to be called "Ruwenzori". In blatant violation of the
national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the invaders have been
appointing "governors" and other officials, creating
artificial borders within the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by issuing and demanding visas
and by smuggling commodities such as timber, gold and
diamonds out of the Congo.

 

One of the local newspapers quoted one of the
invading countries' leaders as saying:

"What Hitler did to bring Germany together, we
should also do it here. Hitler was a smart guy, but I
think he went a bit too far by wanting to conquer the
world".

Here is a leader of a country who, first, admires what Hitler
did and, secondly, wants to replicate Hitler's strategy in our
subregion.

The establishment of the United Nations after the
Second World War was to ensure that expansionism that
sought to violate territorial integrity would not be tolerated
again, and for that reason territorial integrity was enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations as an inviolable
principle. In like manner, the charter of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) also embodied the principle of the
territorial integrity of member States, as well as the sanctity
of their colonial boundaries. Uganda and Rwanda, whose
membership of both the United Nations and the OAU binds
them to these cardinal principles of the United Nations
Charter, have - to the chagrin of other United Nations
Members - decided to violate international law, and it is
therefore the bounden duty of the United Nations to
condemn this wayward behaviour.

Zimbabwe - together with Angola, Namibia and
Chad - responding to a distress call by the legitimate
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is
now assisting that country to uphold its territorial integrity
and national sovereignty. The intervention of the allied
forces of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) is upheld by the inherent right to individual or
collective self-defense, in accordance with Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter.

I also want to take this opportunity to inform you that
at the meeting held in Cape Town, South Africa, in 1995,
the Inter-State Defense and Security Committee of the
SADC approved collective action in the event of attempts
to change the legitimate Governments of its member States
by military means. Furthermore, at its Harare summit in
1997, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) avowed
once and for all the change of legitimate Governments by
military force was not to be tolerated.

As a matter of principle and practice, the SADC
region does not and will not tolerate any extra-legal road
map to the corridors of power.

Just last year, the Security Council itself deliberated
a report (S/l998/318) submitted to it by the Secretary-
General, the title of which was "The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa". Indeed, one of the causes of
conflict in Africa is the lack of respect for other States'
boundaries, as this case demonstrates. Zimbabwe calls on
the Council to unequivocally oppose expansionism. To act
otherwise would send wrong signals to invading States,
similar to the policy of appeasement that emboldened
Hitler to pursue his expansionist dream.

Reports from the eastern parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which are occupied by the
invading States, indicate that many Congolese have
become internally displaced persons, while others are
being massacred, and that natural resources are being
pillaged by Uganda and Rwanda. Is it not surprising that
Uganda has become a gold-exporting country, although it
is well known that nature has not endowed it with that
precious metal? Is the silence of the international
community encouraging the invading States to think that
their aggression is supported?

The allied forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have no ulterior motives at all. They are ready to
pull out their forces when, first, a ceasefire has taken
effect and the invading States have withdrawn their forces
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
secondly, a United Nations peacekeeping force has been
placed along the common borders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the invading States.

The allied forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are sensitive to the security concerns of the
invading States and strongly believe that these concerns
can properly be addressed by mechanisms other than
violating other States' boundaries. That expansionist
philosophy will not address those security concerns.

Zimbabwe believes that all countries, big or small,
weak or strong, have a right to have their boundaries
respected. Any problems existing between States are
better dealt with through mechanisms that are at the
disposal of all nations, including those offered by the
United Nations. In that regard, the OAU and SADC have
worked to produce a basis for a ceasefire. We ask the
international community not only to uphold that
framework, but also to impress upon the invading States
the need to give peace a chance in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

 

My delegation therefore calls for the unconditional
withdrawal of the invading forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and appeals to the Security Council
and the international community to assist in the preservation
of the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo need to be left to
themselves to establish full peace and democracy, and
indeed to start the process of developing their country in a
state of tranquillity.

One of the major causes of armed conflict in the Great
Lakes region of Africa is the refugee-generating politics of
exclusion pursued by the invading States. My delegation
submits that an international conference on peace, security
and stability in the Great Lakes region should be convened
at the appropriate time and under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU. Such a conference would involve all
the Governments of the region and their respective parties
to the conflict.

The preservation of the national sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States lies at the very core of the
mandate of maintaining international peace and security.
For that reason, the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have invested their hope in the Security Council.

