Ms. Stener (Norway): I am speaking today on
behalf of Finland, Iceland, Denmark, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

Let me first thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/465), which shows a significant increase
in verified violations against children. That trend can
and must be reversed. First and foremost, parties to
conflict must respect international humanitarian law
and human rights.

I would also like to thank the Swedish presidency
of the Security Council for organizing today's debate
and for its work on resolution 2427 (2018), which the
Council just adopted with overwhelming support. The
resolution provides a comprehensive framework for
mainstreaming child protection, children's rights and
empowerment throughout the conflict cycle to prevent
conflict and sustain peace. The Nordic countries are
proud to co-sponsor this important resolution.

Protecting children and upholding their rights
in situations of armed conflict is closely linked
to the broader prevention agenda. It is crucial to
resolve conflicts and sustain peace. Not only do
violations against children during armed conflict
have immediate negative impacts on individuals and
their communities, but they also undermine longer-
term prospects for reconciliation, reintegration and
reconstruction. Children must be treated and protected
as children - legally and socially - regardless of
the context.

The Nordic countries are particularly concerned
about the continued silence and stigma related to
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, which leads to
underreporting and a lack of support for victims. We
are encouraged by the Secretary-General's firm stance
in that respect, including zero tolerance for violations
committed by military personnel and civilians in the
service of the United Nations.

It is important to strengthen the links connecting
child protection, the rights of the child and conflict
prevention. One of the issues that should be given
priority in that regard is education, especially girls'
education. In addition, more needs to be done to
provide and protect education during emergencies and
protracted crises. The Secretary-General's report calls
for the effective implementation of the Safe Schools
Declaration. With Djibouti's recent endorsement, 76
States have now endorsed the Declaration. Its main
purpose is to prevent the military use of schools and
reduce the number of attacks on education in armed
conflicts. We encourage all States to endorse and
implement the Safe Schools Declaration.

Let me reiterate our strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Ms. Gamba is playing an essential
role at the global, regional and national levels by
advocating for children's protection and rights and
providing practical guidance on how the agenda can
be brought forward. Colombia is a good example for
how child protection and children's rights, including
reintegration, can be integrated into peace processes.
We welcome the launch of a process to compile
practical guidance for mediators and peace negotiators,
as a way to operationalize today's resolution.
Children involved in armed conflict require not only
comprehensive support and care, but also justice.
Securing accountability for conflict-related crimes
involving children is of the utmost importance. In that
context, we would like to recognize the important work
of Justice Rapid Response.

Parties to conflict and the international community
can and must do more, both to protect the increasing
number of children and young people affected by
armed conflict and to ensure that they are included
in peacebuilding and development processes. That is
for the benefit of their communities and beyond. The
Nordic countries urge all United Nations Member
States to ensure that children in armed conflict receive
the attention and protection to which they are entitled.

