Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatoral Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to thank
Mr. Francois Fall, my brother, and the entire team of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) for the detailed and informative briefing
on the situation in that region, for which we express
our full support. We also welcome Mr. Ahmad Allam-
Mi, Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and thank him for his briefing.

We would like to begin our statement by condemning
in the strongest terms the 10 June attack perpetrated
against a patrol of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which resulted in the death of one member of
the peacekeeping contingent of Burundi and left another
injured. We convey our condolences in that regard.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/521). We believe that since 2011, the date on
which it assumed the functions of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
UNOCA has faced many challenges that undermine
peace, security and political stability in our subregion.

As I have said earlier, we support the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa in his decisive role in the prevention and

mitigation of election-related crises and the promotion
of inclusive political dialogue and reform processes in
several countries of our region.

Today, the international community again faces a
new outbreak of Ebola virus in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where there have already been more
than 20 deaths. That situation poses new challenges
and requires prompt coordination at a time when the
international community is focused on the electoral
process in the country. We hope that the outbreak can
be controlled very soon.

The political and security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic poses challenges to the subregion,
which, we believe, should be resolved through direct
national dialogue supported by the international
community and regional and subregional organizations
with measures to strengthen State authority and to
alleviate poverty, that is to say, political solutions
together with economic measures. At the same time,
synergies must be combined to combat negative trends,
such as the Lord's Resistance Army. The international
community must condemn any neglect of the situation
and not allow that group of mercenaries to become
more active and operational. In that regard, the African
Union continues to call for international assistance to
support the forces that are still fighting that armed
group, which has taken refuge on the borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.

My country's Government also continues to be
concerned about the terrorist activities of Boko Haram.
That group of religious fundamentalists has now
become a threat not only to the countries of the Lake
Chad Basin but to all West Africa. It is also a threat
to international peace and security. For more than
eight years, after spreading terror in Nigeria, Boko
Haram has increased its activities, in many cases using
children and young women in suicide attacks, affecting
countries of our subregion, such as Cameroon and Chad.
It is also necessary to point out that, while the Islamist
group has been weakened militarily since 2015 thanks
to the joint action of the armies of Nigeria, Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger, today the group has withdrawn to
Lake Chad, However, unfortunately, it is still a strong
destructive force. The international community must
continue to support the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the African Union in planning future
operations against that terrorist group.

We also urge the neighbouring States and other
States members of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region to ensure regional cooperation
to investigate and to combat the criminal networks
and armed groups involved in the illegal exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources, such as gold,
diamonds, poaching and trafficking in species of wild
fauna and flora. We hope that the region can soon
re-establish itself.

Urgent action by the international community on
implementing measures to deal with the humanitarian
situation in those countries, as well as with Boko
Haram's activities, is essential to ensuring that they can
continue to receive aid and enable them to cope with
their humanitarian crisis, one of the major consequences
of the problems affecting the area.

My Government has taken note of the statement
by President Pierre Nkunrunziza of Burundi regarding
his decision not to run for office in 2020, despite the
fact that the country's Constitution would enable him
to run again. Equatorial Guinea would like to take
this opportunity to call on the Burundian authorities
to consolidate their political process, which will be
crucial to the forthcoming elections. We also urge
them to resume inclusive dialogue under the auspices
of the countries of the region and in the spirit of the
Arusha Accords.

While some progress has been made in the region,
in general the situation remains volatile owing to a
resurgence in violence and the continuing activity
and presence of armed groups in the Central African
Republic and its neighbours, which are unfortunately
undermining State authority and whose effects have a
direct impact on neighbouring countries. That was in
fact the case with the failed attempt at a coup in my
country on 28 December 2017, in which a group of
foreign mercenaries infiltrated my country with the aim
of using violence to change our constitutional order.
That and other similar actions, which do nothing but
disturb regional peace, security and stability, have been
firmly rejected by the people of Equatorial Guinea,
who support respect for constitutional order and the
strengthening of their democratic institutions.

This is not the first time that my country has suffered
similar attempts, as we have repeatedly pointed out in
this Chamber. We realize that our regional mechanisms
for preventing conflict should be strengthened.
Otherwise we could see even more serious situations
arise that would certainly not help to bring peace to
an already very complex region. One possible measure
for preventing conflict, as Mr. Fall mentioned, is the
conference on the Central African Convention on the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons. We know
that trafficking in small arms and light weapons helps
to expand and prolong conflicts in the region, and it is
therefore an issue that should be given major attention.

This situation of instability and insecurity in the
Gulfoquinea emphasizes the importance oforganizing
an international conference on combating mercenaries.
In that connection, the international community should
become increasingly involved in preventing conflicts
in the region by cooperating and supporting the efforts
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, essentially by
focusing on maritime protection of the Gulf and on
preventing and combating crime on the high seas in
order to help avoid conflict and maintain peace in the
region. Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is definitely one of
my Government's concerns, and in fact there will be an
Arria Formula meeting on the subject this afternoon.

We support the continued strengthening of the
cooperation framework signed in June 2016 between
UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). We stress the importance
of closely monitoring the tripartite agreement signed
on 23 May 2011 in Khartoum by Chad, the Central
African Republic and the Sudan to enhance security
in their common border areas, and we urge the main
stakeholders - the United Nations, ECCAS, the African
Union and the European Union - to redouble their
efforts to resolve conflicts, consolidate State authority,
protect civilians and arrive at negotiated solutions to
the conflicts in the region while maintaining respect for
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of the countries concerned.

We believe that UNOCA should continue to work
hard to create synergies with the purpose of promoting
bilateral cooperation among neighbouring countries
and strengthening cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the area of peace and
security, particularly the African Union, ECCAS, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. We welcome
the announcement of the upcoming summit between
ECCAS and the Economic Community of West African
States. As a country of the subregion covered by those
regional and subregional communities and as a member
of the subregional Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, Equatorial Guinea encourages all the
Governments and political stakeholders involved to
continue to maintain an inclusive internal dialogue
with close regional and subregional cooperation, in the
understanding that overcoming our challenges in the
subregion in particular, and in Africa in general, will
enable us to ultimately achieve the goals of the African
Union's Agenda 2063.

These and other realities have led my Government
to convene our sixth national political dialogue round
table at the initiative of His Excellency President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, to be held in July, and to
which we have invited all of Equatorial Guinea's
political parties, whether legalized or not, as well as
all Equatorial Guinean stakeholders and political
activists both inside and outside the country. We will
use the round table to discuss important issues such as
economic prospects, human rights, democratization and
the ongoing strengthening of national cohesion as an
element that contributes to proactive national progress.
These issues mark the guidelines that we have been
outlining during our Council membership, defined as
the peaceful settlement of conflict through dialogue.
We want to reiterate our support to UNOCA once again.
It is crucial to the efforts to stabilize our region.
