Ms. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to start by expressing the gratitude of the United
Kingdom to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for being here
today with members of her team and for presenting to
the Security Council her fourteenth report and update
on the activities ofher Office with regard to the situation
in Libya. The United Kingdom fully supports the work
of the Office of the Prosecutor, and the ICC as a whole,
to bring to account those responsible for serious crimes
of international concern in Libya and elsewhere.

The situation in Libya remains extremely serious
and a cause for grave concern. It is deeply troubling
that violations and abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law continue
to happen with impunity on a daily basis across Libya,
including against migrants and refugees. We condemn
the October air strikes in Derna. The United Kingdom,
along with France, Italy and the United States, is closely
monitoring ongoing acts of conflict in Libya. Those
suspected of committing, ordering or failing to prevent
summary executions and torture on all sides must be
fully investigated and, if found guilty, held accountable
for their actions. Reports of incidents of extrajudicial
killings of detained combatants, including at the Brak
Al-Shati air base, and clashes in areas such as Benghazi
and Misrata, resulting in civilian casualties, are also
very disturbing.

While we fully support Libya in its fight against
terrorism, such operations have a detrimental
humanitarian impact on the civilian population, and the
relevant rules of domestic and international law must
be complied with. It is also imperative that, as progress
is made towards a political solution, security structures
are reformed so as to ensure accountable chains of
command and that the judicial system is strengthened
to ensure that it is robust, impartial and independent.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the ICC's
ongoing efforts to investigate the alleged crimes despite
the challenges presented by the ongoing security
situation and political instability in Libya. We note that
the Office of the Prosecutor is determined to resume
investigative activities on the ground in Libya as soon
as possible, and we welcome the steps that it is taking
to achieve that goal. We note the Prosecutor's update on
the cases against SaifAl-Islam Gaddafi and Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled. We fully support the Court's call for
cooperation from members of the Council, Libya and
other States to provide information that could facilitate
the arrest and surrender of those men to the ICC so that
they can be tried for the alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Libya in 2011.

Those responsible for war crimes and other
serious crimes in Libya must not escape justice. In
that connection we recall that the United Kingdom,
along with two other members of the Council, publicly
expressed our welcome in August for the fact that
the Libyan National Army was apparently willing to
investigate reports of the unlawful killings in Benghazi
and to recognize the arrest warrant issued by the ICC
for Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, a member of the Libyan
National Army. We hope to see progress in that case in
the very near future.

We note that the Office of the Prosecutor has
continued to collect and analyse information and
evidence related to alleged criminal acts against
migrants in Libya. We encourage all States, including
neighbouring States to Libya, to cooperate with the
Court, and where relevant, to provide it with reliable
information on human trafficking and smuggling
networks. It is important that the alleged perpetrators
of those crimes, like other serious crimes of concern in
Libya, be held accountable for their actions.

The lack of improvement in the situation reinforces
the need for all sides to reach a political solution.
The United Kingdom fully supports the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, in that regard and urges all parties
in Libya to engage with him constructively. The United
Kingdom would also like to reaffirm its support for the
Government of National Accord.

The United Kingdom commends the continued
engagement of the Libyan Prosecutor-General and the
Libyan representatives to the ICC and encourages States
and relevant international and regional organizations to
assist the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build the
rule of law in Libya.

Finally, the United Kingdom believes that the
Court must have the resources necessary to do its
work, but it is important that those resources be used as
efficiently as possible. We welcome the steps that the
Court has taken in that area and encourage the Court to
continue to strive for efficiency. Once again, the United
Kingdom would like to thank the Prosecutor of the ICC
for presenting her report to the Council today.

