The Secretary-General (spoke in French):
Today's meeting of the Security Council shows the
steady determination of the international community to
address the scourge of terrorism. Your presence here at
the ministerial level is a sign of the importance that the
world places on dealing effectively with this global
threat.

Terrorism is a menace that requires a global
response. Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September
2001 on New York and Washington, the world has
focused unprecedented attention on terrorism and on
the means of countering it. The tragic loss of life in
terrorist attacks such as those in Moscow, Bali and
Mombasa is a dramatic reminder that success in
countering this threat remains elusive. Despite
enhanced attention and more concerted action, the
problem of terrorism will require sustained, long-term
action if it is to be addressed successfully.

(spoke in English)

The United Nations must play an increasing role
in dissuading would-be perpetrators of terror by setting
effective international norms and by issuing a clear
message on the unacceptability of acts of violence
targeting civilians.

The United Nations must also do whatever it can
to deny terrorists the opportunity to commit their
appalling crimes. The Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) will continue to have a
key role to play in this area, as will our common efforts
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

Greater efforts are needed to ensure universality,
verification and full implementation of the key treaties
relating to weapons of mass destruction, to tighten
national export controls over the items needed to
produce them, and to criminalize the acquisition or use
of such weapons by non-State groups.

Because of its responsibility in ensuring the
implementation of international anti-terrorism
conventions and standards, the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee will continue to be at
the centre of global efforts to fight terrorism.

Finally, it will be necessary to sustain broad
international cooperation by clearly articulating the
work of various international, regional and subregional
organizations in this effort. In that regard, I would like
to welcome the CTC's initiative to hold a meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
early March of this year. I trust that that meeting will
constitute an important step towards the goal of
sustained international cooperation in counter-
terrorism. I am also proposing that counter-terrorism be
a major agenda item at the meeting that I will convene
with regional organizations later this year.

We face a grave and growing threat from
international terrorism. Terrorism is a global scourge
with global effects; its methods are murder and
mayhem, but its consequences affect every aspect of
the work of the United Nations - from development to
peace to human rights and the rule of law.
The United Nations has an indispensable role to
play in providing the legal and organizational
framework within which the international campaign
against terrorism can unfold. But we must never lose
sight of the fact that any sacrifice of freedom or the
rule of law within States - or any generation of new
tensions between States in the name of anti-
terrorism- will hand the terrorists a victory that no
act of theirs alone could possibly bring.

Even as many are rightly praising the unity and
the resolve of the international community in this crucial
struggle, important and urgent questions are being asked
about what might be called the "collateral damage" of the
war on terrorism: damage to the presumption of
innocence, to precious human rights, to the rule of law
and to the very fabric of democratic governance.

Domestically, the danger is that, in pursuit of
security, we will end up sacrificing crucial liberties,
thereby weakening our common security, not
strengthening it, and thereby corroding the vessel of
democratic government from within. Whether the
question involves the treatment of minorities here in
the West, or the rights of migrants and asylum seekers,
or the presumption of innocence or the right to due
process under the law, vigilance must be exercised by
all thoughtful citizens to ensure that entire groups in
our societies are not tarred with one broad brush and
punished for the reprehensible behaviour of a few.

Internationally, we are also seeing an increasing
use of what I call the "T word" - terrorism - to
demonize political opponents, to throttle freedom of
speech and the press and to delegitimize legitimate
political grievances. We are seeing too many cases where
States living in tension with their neighbours make
opportunistic use of the fight against terrorism to threaten
or justify new military action on long-running disputes.

Similarly, States fighting various forms of unrest
or insurgency are finding it tempting to abandon the
slow, difficult but sometimes necessary processes of
political negotiation for the deceptively easy option of
military action.

Just as terrorism must never be excused, so must
genuine grievances never be ignored. True, it tarnishes
a cause when a few wicked men commit murder in its
name. But it does not make it any less urgent that the
cause be addressed, the grievance heard and the wrong
put right. Otherwise, we risk losing the contest for the
hearts and minds of much of mankind.

We must act with determination to address -
indeed, solve - the political disputes and long-
standing conflicts that underlie, fuel and generate
support for terrorism. To do so is not to reward
terrorism or its perpetrators; it is to diminish their
ability to find refuge or recruits in any cause or any
country.

In its efforts to address the problem of terrorism,
the United Nations and its Members must not lose sight
of the broader international agenda. While there is an
urgent and compelling need to prevent acts of terror,
there is a no less compelling need to pursue the goals
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. To the extent
that the Organization succeeds in fighting poverty,
injustice, suffering and war, it is also likely to help end
the conditions that serve as justification for those who
would commit acts of terror.

