Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing and for his forty-sixth report
on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/777, annex). We have
carefully studied the report and taken due note of the
main issues contained therein.

On the general elections of 12 October, we note the
preliminary assessment of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights that a lack of shared
vision for the country's future and of cooperation
among the three main communities has hindered efforts
to fully ensure democratic elections. In that regard, we
urge the communities to set aside their differences and
work together to strengthen the democratic process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Now that the election results have been confirmed,
the next critical step in the political process will be the
formation of a federal Government. We would recall
that it took more than a year for the parties to form
a Government after the elections of 2010. It is our
hope that all parties will work to avoid a repeat of that

experience and form a federal Government without
delay. Tackling the country's socioeconomic challenges
requires that a Government be in place to lead the way.

The continued presence of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and NATO is essential to
overseeing the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The extension of EUFOR's mandate for a further
l2-month period will, we believe, foster stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is a necessary condition
for development. The international community
must continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
reconstruction of civil society, the attainment of
economic progress and the return of refugees. The
primary responsibility for implementing the Peace
Agreement lies nevertheless with the Government and
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On the five objectives and two conditions set
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council as prerequisites for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, we share the concerns of
the High Representative over the lack of progress on
the outstanding objectives and criteria. We urge the
authorities to demonstrate commitment to the reform
process in order to facilitate its full implementation.

We once again call on political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from nationalistic and
separatist rhetoric that threatens the peace and
stability of the country and escalates tensions in the
region. Political leaders, especially at the state level,
must bear in mind that the Constitution precludes the
possibility of secession. All parties must demonstrate
unwavering respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. They must also
support efforts to strengthen the State at the national
level, while preserving the rights and prerogatives of
all communities.

