Ms. Foo (Singapore): First of all, we hope that
the Chinese delegation will convey our delegation's
tribute and best wishes to Ambassador Shen.

Let me also congratulate Mauritius for its very
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. Successful presidencies are not accidental; they
are the result of painstaking preparations and unceasing
efforts behind the scenes. An example of Mauritius's
prompt preparations was the circulation of its
provisional programme of work, together with a set of
explanatory notes and a list of the objectives of its
presidency, on 21 December last year. This allowed
Council members, especially the incoming members, to
gear up for the month and for the new year.

Looking ahead and projecting into the future is
important. At the same time, it is equally important to
look back and examine whether we have actually
achieved the objectives we set out. Such wrap-up
sessions are intended as an opportunity for us to take a
step back to look at our successes and failures and to
examine longer-term trends that could guide our
intermediate steps, as well as an opportunity to find
concrete ways of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Council.

In an attempt to improve the transparency of the
Council's deliberations, Council members decided that
such an analytical and critical examination of its own
work in a public meeting could help non-members
better appreciate the thinking and considerations that
went into the outcome produced by the Council.
Unfortunately, the last couple of public wrap-up
sessions have not attracted much interest in the rest of
the United Nations community. This session is not
much better.

One consolation is that some non-Council
members indicated that they had watched the
proceedings on television instead of coming to the
Council Chamber, since their physical presence was
not needed. This, in fact, is effective transparency,
combining technology with the will of the Council to
conduct as much of its work in public as possible.
Somewhat similar are the daily summaries of
consultations provided by the presidency on its own
web site, a practice that we support and hope will be
continued by future presidencies.

Another consolation, perhaps, is that the public
meetings have verbatim records. This allows all who
are interested to have full access to the discussion. In
fact, we would recommend all United Nations members
to read the verbatim records of the last wrap-up
session, held on 21 December, during which Council
members made use of the opportunity to review and
wrap up their work, not just for the month but for the
entire year. The five outgoing members also took the
opportunity to give their valedictory statements on
their two-year Council term. On our part, we sought to
provide a year-end report card on the key issues
handled by the Council. We categorized five
successful, five unsuccessful and five moderately
successful files.

Turning to this month's programme, we find that
there are clearly a number of successes. One clear
success of Mauritius's presidency is its strong focus on
Africa, devoting time to almost all the African issues
on the Council's agenda, putting into practice the
Council's oft-repeated call for preventive action in the
well-timed issuance of a press statement on the
situation in Madagascar, and the highly successful and
well-attended open meeting on the situation in Africa
on 29 and 30 January, which was, of course, also
webcast live on the United Nations web site.

Africa is a continent that needs and deserves the
Council's attention and resources, even as we take on
the challenge of combating international terrorism. We
are therefore thankful for the useful discussions we had
on several African issues and the outcomes we
adopted, including the presidential statement earlier
today.

The open debate on East Timor was successful in
reinforcing the need for a continued significant United
Nations presence in post-independence East Timor.
There was wide support for the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the successful peacekeeping
operation the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), even as the
Council and the wider United Nations membership
look forward to further specific proposals from the
Secretary-General on the follow-on United Nations
mission. It was recognized that the Organization must
stay the course to make East Timor a success story.

We are particularly grateful to Mauritius for
chairing several meetings, both informal and formal, of
the Working Group on Documentation and Procedures.
We are pleased to announce that Council members are
very close to agreement on a note by the President
laying down a new format for the annual report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly. We hope
that, once agreed upon, the new format will be seen to
be responsive to the views of Member States and that it
will significantly improve the relationship between the
two organs. As the Secretariat will need quick guidance
in order to prepare for this year's report, we are pleased
to hear that the Mexican presidency next month will
give the matter an extra push, which should allow us to
finalize this matter on time.

Another achievement of the Mauritian presidency
was the appointment of the Permanent Representative
of Cameroon as the new Chairman of the Working
Group on sanctions rather than letting the Working
Group fall by the wayside. We hope that under that
representative's able leadership we will soon be able to
reach some conclusions on the outcome of the Working
Group.

There were two important achievements on the
counter-terrorism front. First, Council members
restructured the sanctions targeted against members of
the Al Qaeda organization and of the Taliban and
against other individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with them. Resolution 1390 (2002)
takes into account the changed and new circumstances
in Afghanistan, while recognizing that the Al Qaeda
network and other related terrorist groups continue to
pose a grave threat to international peace and security.
While resolution 1390 (2002) now has global
application, it none the less provides some continuity
and retains mechanisms such as the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), the consolidated list issued by the Committee,
and the Monitoring Group established by resolution
1363 (2001).

Secondly, on the counter-terrorism front, the
interest and the level of participation in the public
meeting on counter-terrorism demonstrated that the
international community remains seized of the effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Apart from
enabling Ambassador Greenstock to brief United
Nations Members on progress in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, it also allowed Member
States to have an interactive exchange with
Ambassador Greenstock. The small innovation of
toggling between speakers and responses by
Ambassador Greenstock could be repeated in future
meetings when appropriate.

Another significant achievement was the adoption
of the note by the President, document S/2002/56, of
14 January, which agreed to an additional mechanism
in the convening of joint meetings of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and troop-contributing countries on specific
peacekeeping operations. Sustained efforts to
strengthen the triangular relationship among the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat will go a long way towards ensuring the
success and implementation of Council decisions on
United Nations peacekeeping operations. For example,
an earlier step forward was made with the
establishment of private meetings with troop-
contributing countries as a new mechanism under
resolution 1353 (2001) in June last year.

However, we believe that it is not always
necessary to convene private meetings of the Security
Council with troop-contributing countries. In fact, in
section 5 (d) of the assessment contained in the last
report submitted by the Working Group (S/2001/ 1335),
the Group concluded that consultation meetings chaired
by the President of the Council should be used as the
principal means of consultation with troop-contributing
countries, and that public or private meetings should be
convened for a full and high-level consideration of
issues of critical importance to a specific peacekeeping
operation. We would suggest that, in order to
implement both the letter and the spirit of resolution
1353 (2001), future presidencies could consider
holding consultation meetings rather than private
meetings with troop-contributing countries for routine
renewal of peacekeeping operations. Instead of
generating a genuine and interactive dialogue with
troop-contributing countries, the formal atmosphere of
a private meeting may in fact sometimes stifle
discussion.

It was also unfortunate that there was no
discussion whatsoever at the public meeting on Kosovo
of two issues that Singapore raised: first, a regular
review mechanism and, secondly, an exit strategy for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We maintain that with the
impending transfer of authority from UNMIK to the
Kosovo self-government authorities, this is the right
time to address those issues.

Council members also devoted some time this
month to discussing how wrap-up meetings could be
improved. Owing to time constraints, we could not
implement the very useful suggestion made by
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte to engage in and
generate better interaction with interested non-
members of the Council. Although the proposal did not
find unanimous support within the Council and may
still need to be fine-tuned, we are confident that the
Mexican presidency will build on the very useful
exchanges we had this month. We hope that we will be
able to reach agreement on a format early next month
so that all of us can start disseminating the message
early to the general United Nations membership in
order to encourage their participation.

Finally, apart from focusing the wrap-up meetings
on one or two topics, we also believe that one
important way of concretely demonstrating the
importance of wrap-ups is to follow up on some of the
issues raised. Although there will be a verbatim record
of today's debate, it might be useful for the Mauritian
presidency to consider tabulating some of the key
outstanding issues and new proposals; the list could be
passed on to the Mexican presidency or circulated to
all Council members so that we can monitor the
necessary follow-up.

