Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to pay a well-deserved tribute to Mrs. Ogata
and to express our gratitude for her activities while
heading the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). We pay tribute
to her personal commitment to the service of refugees
and her unflagging will to engage in constructive
dialogue with all States, a dialogue illustrated by her
presence at the Council table 12 times. We also hail her
energy in leading her organization and in adapting it
well to reality and current needs.

Unfortunately, the 1990s were a decade marked
by considerable refugee flows, sometimes massive
flows in very short periods. The UNHCR was sorely
tested, but every time Mrs. Ogata demonstrated her
determination and her tireless energy. Mrs. Ogata, you
have provided the best possible image of the United
Nations, and we thank you for having done so.

I shall not repeat matters in my statement to the
General Assembly a few days ago on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to restrict myself to a
few comments on the subject Mrs. Ogata has just dealt
with: the link between conflicts and refugees. That is
the heart of the problem, which we must deal with in
this Chamber.

More than ever, unfortunately, conflicts cannot be
dealt with without dealing directly with the plight of
refugees. The events in Rwanda, followed by those in
the eastern part of the former Zaire, which we
discussed a few days ago, show the close and often
deadly linkage between conflicts and refugees. Even
more concerning, these events have shown the effects
of failure to act, or of inappropriate action, on the part
of the international community.

Several problems arise. Refugees not only fall
victim to conflicts, but are sometimes used by the
warring parties to pursue their political and military
objectives. Two examples illustrate this phenomenon.

The first example is that fighters blend in with
genuine civilian refugees to hide themselves and to use
the refugees as shields, while the combatants pursue
their armed activities. This is what happened in eastern
Zaire between 1994 and 1997 with the ex-FAR and the
interahamwe. These are particularly well-known cases.
It is the duty of the international community to
separate, as we say in French, the grain from the chaff.
Otherwise, the refugees bear the cost of reprisals
against the fighters, as was the case in a massive way
in eastern Zaire.

There are several possibilities, including the
intermediate solutions suggested several times by
Mrs. Ogata, such as the establishment of observers or
the use of international police. We would be very
grateful to Mrs. Ogata for any additional comments she
might make on the subject, which seems to us
particularly important.

The second example is of fighters keeping
refugees under their control to prevent stabilization of
the situation and national reconciliation. They do this
for political ends. Here, I think particularly of the
situation in West Timor, where the pro-integration
militia rule the refugee camps. It is up to the host
country, with the international community's assistance
if necessary, to prevent armed factions from using the
refugees as their instruments, at the refugees' expense
and at the expense of peace. The Security Council
mission that has just left for Timor has no other
objective than to assist the Indonesian authorities so
that they can bring a rapid and final solution to this
problem in West Timor.

In the light of these two observations, the issue of
the location of refugee camps arises. It is a
fundamental issue. The closer the camps are to borders,
the more vulnerable they are to attacks and reprisals,
and the more they can be manipulated by political-
military factions. The refugee situation in Tanzania and
Guinea today shows how drastic and serious these
problems are.

Refugees are a very heavy burden on the host
countries. Their presence can create or trigger
destabilizing effects on ethnic balances or be a
considerable drain on natural resources. We have seen
this in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We see
it now in Guinea and in the Congo (Brazzaville). I note
in particular that the burden carried by Guinea is, in
terms of the proportion of refugees to the total
population, the heaviest in the entire African continent.

The international community has not sufficiently
demonstrated, or quickly enough, its solidarity with the
host countries. It is not really interested in their plight
when the situation seriously deteriorates. Preventive
action is essential. Unfortunately, all too often it is
inadequate.

I will now address the return of refugees, which is
an important criterion of the genuine success of a peace
process and the return to normality. An example is the
situation in the western Balkans. Progress has been
made. Unfortunately, it is still highly inadequate. The
number and pace of return of refugees, particularly to
minority areas, remain below what we had hoped for.
This shows that peaceful coexistence and the taking
root of multi-ethnic democracy have not yet reached
the point at which all refugees can return safely to their
homes. Need we recall that there are still almost
500,000 Serb refugees in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia? The return of the Serb refugees to Kosovo,
in particular, would certainly be a tangible sign of the
durable abating of tensions and attainment of the entire
international community's objective of building a
peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. Let us
hope that the political changes in Belgrade will make it
possible to speed up the return to normalcy in this
region of Europe, which has been so badly battered.

My last comment relates to the safety of
humanitarian personnel. Like Ambassador
Cunningham, I should like to emphasize the
importance that France attaches to this issue. Given the
nature of the conflicts and the fact that refugees are
turned into the instruments of conflict, all too often
humanitarian personnel become targets, because
humanitarian action is simply viewed by the belligerent
parties as thwarting their political and military
objectives. The murder of three staff members of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in West Timor in September, and
that of one UNHCR worker in Guinea, are a new and
brutal illustration of this.

The international community's determination to
oppose these crimes must be total. The guilty must by
tracked down and punished by the local authorities,
when they are willing and able, or by other,
international means, which will include, in the future,
the International Criminal Court.

