Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to join others
in congratulating you and your delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. You can of
course count on our full support in what will certainly
be a successful effort.

We are grateful for the briefing by the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
She has our full support in the work entrusted to her.
We acknowledge that the work carried out by the Court
since 2011 is very sensitive and requires the cooperation
of all stakeholders in Libya in order to be able to fulfil
its mandate. That is all the more so when it is the Court's
Prosecutor herself who has warned us ofthe possibility
that the crisis in the country may worsen. In that
regard, we call on the Government of National Accord
and the parties involved to do their utmost and facilitate
the use of the appropriate channels of communication
so that the Office of the Prosecutor can move forward
with investigations. Similarly, we urge the countries in
the region to fully support, and collaborate with, the
work of the bodies of the International Criminal Court.
We do hope that when the next report is submitted we
will see qualitative improvements in terms of the cases
under investigation.

We take note of the reports that were submitted by
the Office of the Prosecutor on possible violations of
human rights and international law during the capture
of the district of Ganfouda in Benghazi in March. We
are deeply concerned about the reports of extrajudicial
killings, assassinations, arbitrary detention, arbitrary
trials and desecration of corpses in the course of the
progress achieved as a result of the political transition
and an internationally recognized Government. We
urgently and categorically appeal to all parties and
armed actors to stop all acts of violence, and we urge
them to meet their obligations under international law.
Likewise, we call for an investigation into those events
and the identification of those responsible so that they
may be brought to justice.

Likewise, we are very concerned that the situation
of migrants has seriously worsened. According to the
28 April report of the International Organization for
Migration, there are more than 381,463 migrants of
more than 30 nationalities in Libya. Many of those
migrants are passing through Libya to reach Europe in
attempts to escape the insecurity afflicting the region.
Many of them are becoming victims of abuse, torture
and acts of sexual violence, in flagrant violation of
their fundamental rights. According to the report
submitted during the thirty-fourth session of the
Human Rights Council on 22 March by the Deputy
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Kate
Gilmore, migrants continue to be held arbitrarily in
Libya for indefinite periods without any due process,
legal assistance or review. Often, they face inhumane
conditions and horrendous abuse. Frequently, that is
at the hands of armed groups that have either direct
or indirect control over detention centres, including
official holding centres. That means that there is not
really any effective protection against abuse.

We call upon the Office of the Prosecutor to
investigate those criminal acts and, as highlighed by
her report, whether or not there is a slave market in
migrants in Libya, and whether or not that is related to
transnational organized crime groups that directly or
indirectly finance such activity - as well as to ensure,
that being the case, that those persons are brought
to justice and account for their actions. For its part,
the Security Council should take the necessary steps
to ensure that the Office of the Prosecutor and the
International Criminal Court itself have the necessary
financial resources to deal with the cases referred to it.

Finally, we would like to recall that, unfortunatley,
the tragic situation being experienced by Libya is a
direct consequence of regime-change policies, which
result in disastrous circumstances for millions of
innocent people. We call upon on all States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to
ensure its universality and put an end to impunity for
these acts of violence, which are a threat to the welfare
of humankind.

