Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I,
too, would like to thank you, Mr. President, most
warmly for having convened a meeting devoted to
working methods of the Security Council, I also wish
to congratulate you on your distinguished leadership in
presiding over the work of the Council for this month.
Placing yourself at the end of today's list of speakers is
a gracious gesture that is deeply appreciated.

I wish to use my following intervention in this
thematic debate not to repeat what the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland has offered in the way of
thoughts governing the position of the group of five
small nations (8-5), which, naturally, we support fully,
but to focus on the two paragraphs 18 and 19 of the S-5
draft resolution, which cover the use, or threat of use,
of the veto. I will attempt to explain why we have
inserted them into our draft resolution, given that they
are of direct relevance to the work of the Security
Council and, in particular, to the permanent members.

The Security Council derives its rights and
obligations from the United Nations Charter. Its
functions and powers are spelled out broadly in Article
24 of the Charter, including, inter alia, its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and its obligation to act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter in the discharge of its
functions.

While Article 24, paragraph 1, appears to be clear
in its ordinary meaning, over the past 65 years, our
predecessors have argued - and often - over whether
or not "primary" is equal in meaning to "exclusive".
That discussion has not found consensus between the
permanent members and the rest of the membership,
and I will not dwell on it today. What was also missing
in our previous discussions was a common
understanding over the ordinary meaning of the word
"responsibility", which has, unfortunately, been
regarded by some as conferring rights, without due
regard being equally paid to the implied duties flowing
from that responsibility.

What I would, therefore, like to fix our attention
on today is the next paragraph in Article 24 -
paragraph 2. I would also like to invite members to
read that important provision together with Article 1,
paragraph 1, which we believe we are required to
undertake for a correct reading of the Charter.

Article 24, paragraph 2, states:

"In discharging these duties the Security
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations".

It reads "shall act". It does not read may act, or should
act. It reads "shall act". In other words, there is no
discretion here. What we find instead is an obligation.
It is also worth noting that, like Article 24, paragraph
2, the Council's powers pursuant to Chapter VII, set
out in Article 39, are similarly couched in obligatory
language: shall determine and shall make
recommendations, or decide.

The second part of paragraph 2 of Article 24 then
explains where, in the relevant chapters of the Charter,
the specific powers of the Council are laid down, and
yet all of it rests - must rest, as I noted a few minutes
ago - on the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.

Among the purposes of the United Nations, as
defined in Chapter I, Article 1, of the Charter, and of
greatest relevance to the responsibility of the Security
Council and our discussion today is the purpose
elaborated in the first paragraph of Article 1, which
reads:

"To maintain international peace and
security, and to that end: to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace, and for the
suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law".

That last phrase "and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law" was inserted by
Senator Arthur Vandenberg of the United States, on
2 May 1945, and accepted immediately by the "Big
Four", and, subsequently, by the rest of the
representatives in San Francisco, without argument and
by consensus.

So, when considered together, Article 24,
paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1, in very
abbreviated form, read: in discharging its duties the
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and,
therefore- my addition - in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law.

Now, we must understand two issues. The Charter
confers those powers on the whole Council and does
not specify what each individual member of the
Council should do. That much is undeniable. If,
however, the use or threat of use of a veto by a
permanent member prevents the Council, by virtue of
the majority required in Article 27, paragraph 3, from
acting to deter, prevent or dismantle alleged serious
Violations of the sort that not only threaten
international peace and security, but also create an
obligation erga omnes on all Member States to address
it, the question arises as to whether that exercise by
one permanent member subverts the Council's ability
to fulfil its responsibilities under Article 24 and to
uphold the principles of justice and international law,
in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 1.

Should we continue, therefore, to read Article 27,
paragraph 3, in a manner in which it effectively
eclipses the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibilities of the Security Council? Are we not
entitled, or even obliged, to look towards an
understanding that reconciles those provisions?

We may be able to continue as we are when
dealing with lesser crimes but, when faced with the
worst systematic abominations of human cruelty that
often threaten international peace and security, such
questions become increasingly difficult to ignore, for
there is little that is common between normal
criminality and the outer extremity of human
misconduct.
I would ask the Council to consider, for example,
the description provided by the Nuremberg Tribunal in
its 1947 judgment, following the main proceedings
prosecuted by Ben Ferencz in the trial of the
Einsatzgruppen. The Tribunal found:

"If what the Prosecution maintains is true, we
have here participation in a crime of such
unprecedented brutality and of such
inconceivable savagery that the mind rebels
against its own thought image and the
imagination staggers in the contemplation of a
human degradation beyond the power of language
to adequately portray."

And this is the second point we need to
understand. However we interpret the principles of
justice, when there are serious allegations of crimes
being committed - crimes of a gravity approximating
the description found in the aforementioned judgment,
and which threaten international peace and security -
any member of the Council, and particularly if it is a
permanent member, voting against measures otherwise
agreed upon by a majority of the Security Council
should at least explain how its position is consistent
with the Charter - that is, with the purposes and
principles of justice - and international law.

The 8-5 is aware of the foundational and historic
role played by the permanent members. Whatever we
may say about some of the Council's performances in
the past, the permanent members must be given due
credit for having prevented, in a nuclear age, the
recurrence of the sort of war that devastated very large
portions of the Earth twice in the twentieth century.
And we are not calling, as the 8-5, for a Charter
amendment to have the veto abolished or even
restricted. The veto does have an important role. But
that role should now be reconciled with Articles 24 (2)
and 1 (l) i Articles that should no longer simply be
overlooked. And this could best be achieved through
the forging of a new understanding.
We therefore suggest to the permanent members,
and we do so most respectfully, to consider refraining,
voluntarily, from the use or threat of use of the veto
altogether in situations where there are serious
allegations of genocide, crimes against humanity and
grave breaches of international humanitarian law. The
8-5, in offering the content of paragraphs 18 and 19 of
its draft resolution, to be presented in due course to the
General Assembly pending final consultations, is
basing these recommendations on the right accorded to
the General Assembly under Article 10 of the United
Nations Charter.

