Ms. Grcie Polie (Croatia): I thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this exchange of views. We
sincerely hope that today's deliberations will help us
better understand, and therefore refine, the existing
methods or conceptualize new methods of maintaining or
restoring international peace and security. The current
situation in Iraq represents another poignant reminder that
thorough discussions on how to maintain peace and
security are needed. There are just too many open, even
controversial, questions concerning the role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in relation to the role of
regional organizations, which have to be resolved.

It is a well-known fact that the world is becoming
ever more interdependent. A crisis in today's day and
age - be it financial, humanitarian or other - embodies
a potential to affect entire regions, and beyond. The most
recent examples include the Asian financial crisis, where
the collapse of markets in Indonesia and Korea was felt
from Japan and Australia to Europe and the United States,
and the Rwandan conflict, which, though its intensity
waned many years ago, has now affected much of Central
Africa.

Experience teaches us that any crisis can be better
handled in its early stages. In this regard, one might ask
whether optimal use of potentials following the fall of the
so-called Iron Curtain and the democratization of Central
and Eastern Europe has been achieved. Could we have
moved more quickly to help countries in transition push
through reforms? And what kind of assistance could have
been earmarked to do so? Could the early identification
of, and reaction to, problems faced by countries in
transition have a positive effect on their later
development, and what would ignoring the signs mean in
the long run?

In essence, when does a conflict end? Is it with the
cessation of active hostilities, or with the resolution of its
underlying causes? Croatia believes that identifying and
addressing the root causes of a problem which can have
regional or global repercussions is the most important
factor in securing international peace and security. Just
patching up a situation and not resolving fundamental
antagonisms in a society can have the effect of leaving a
wound to fester. This is equally important before, as it is
after, a conflict or crisis has arisen: before, because it can

 

help avoid a conflict, and after, because it can help cure
open wounds.

Let me remind the Council of a negative example.
Seven years after the dissolution of the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the aggression against
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the succession issue
of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
yet to be resolved and the new Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia still refuses to accept existing borders and the
equality of all successor States.

The next phase - post-conflict peace-building - is
just as important as bringing a conflict or crisis to an end.
A post-conflict society is usually weak. Its infrastructure is
destroyed or damaged, its people are needy, resources are
scarce, human rights are not efficiently protected and
painful memories are still fresh. In addressing these issues,
Croatia supports the views presented by Secretary-General
in his report (A/51/950) entitled "Renewing the United
Nations: a programme for reform". In that report the
Secretary-General obliquely stated that successful
peace-building requires a mutually reinforcing political
strategy and assistance programme, incorporating human
rights considerations and humanitarian and development
programmes. The importance of mutual reaffirmation of
these two approaches to peace-building cannot be
overemphasized.

Building peace, as in the case of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has required not only the rebuilding and
strengthening of civilian government and civil institutions
and infrastructure, but also stimulating investment and
restarting the economy through financial donors. The
complete recovery and creation of a self-sustaining society,
however, will occur only when root causes have been
adequately addressed and resolved. Although it should be
reiterated that the parties themselves must bear the primary
responsibility in sustaining the achievements of the
international community, continued support, especially from
countries in the region concerned, will be an important
element in assisting States such as Bosnia and Herzegovina
to fulfil their obligations.

The post-war reconstruction and reconciliation
processes which are taking place in Croatia are processes,
or phenomena, that necessarily take time, but that can be
accelerated through international support. Conditions for the
return of displaced persons and refugees have been
established, even though the economic and social situation
in war-affected areas remains difficult. There is a
significant shortage of capital for new investment, job
creation and specific projects, such as demining.
Therefore, the political, human and financial resources of
the international community already invested in Croatia
should be coupled with development assistance if the
desired results are to be achieved. Investment in peace,
followed by investment in development, is part of the
same continuum. Accordingly, we hope that the
conference on development held in Zagreb this month
will have a successful follow-up.

The establishment of truth about a conflict and the
punishment of perpetrators of grave conflict-related
breaches of humanitarian law is another prerequisite for
the re-establishment of peace and security. On the global
level, the establishment of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) should serve to aid and expedite the healing
and reconciliation process. However, one must take heed
of a serious warning: if we intend to develop the ICC into
a credible institution, we must avoid the traps and
shortfalls discovered in the practice of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The Security Council
cannot afford to allow the lack of cooperation of any
State or entity - in this case the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska entity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - to distort the true picture of the conflict
and thereby betray the fundamental objectives for which
the Tribunal was founded. The process of reconciliation
hinges upon bringing people like Sljivancanin, Mrksic,
Radio, Martic, Karazdic and Mladic to justice.

