Mr. Bebars (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me say that it is a great honour, on behalf of
the Arab Republic of Egypt, to extend to your country
and to you personally, Sir, our sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like also to take this
opportunity to convey to the Permanent Representative
of the People's Republic of China our profound thanks
for the efforts made during China's presidency of the
Security Council last month. We would like also to
emphasize the importance that we attach to the
inclusion of the issue of small arms and light weapons
on the agenda of the Security Council following the
recent United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We wish also to extend our thanks to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the statement he made at
the beginning of this meeting. We would like also to
point out the objectives that we hope to achieve in
today's meeting, which are contained in your letter, Mr.
President, addressed to the previous President of the
Security Council.

Egypt would like to associate itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan on behalf of the Arab Group. Egypt considers
illicit trafficking in small arms to be one of the most
important problems affecting specific regions of the
world. Because of the illicit and speedy proliferation of
small weapons and its links with many ethnic, cultural,
political and economic problems, this matter requires a
solution that takes into account the specific conditions
and circumstances in the affected areas. The
proliferation of small arms and light weapons should
be seen not as a cause of conflict, but rather as a tool
for fomenting and fuelling ongoing conflicts, which
find their root causes in a number of economic, social
and ethnic factors that have accumulated and become
complex.

To effectively put an end to this problem, we have
to work through two parallel approaches. The first
approach gives us a conception of the social and
economic factors involved in this problem as the real
root causes of the conflicts that lead to the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
long and medium terms. The second approach
emphasizes confronting the problem of illicit trade and
circulation of small arms and light weapons in the short
term.

At the national level, Egypt has witnessed a
period of stability in respect of small arms and light
weapons. This stability is due to our strict legislation
and regulations in this area, which go back to the
19505. Our legislation controls all forms of trade,
manufacture and possession of such weapons,
criminalizes illegal activities and establishes national
mechanisms to make laws and to implement them. At
the regional level, Egypt is working in cooperation
with its African neighbours through the exchange of
experts and technical information in order to find
definitive solutions to limit the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons on the African continent,
which is the continent suffering most from armed
conflicts.

The Bamako Declaration issued by the African
ministerial meeting on small arms and light weapons,
which was held in Mali in November 2000, is a
pioneering regional initiative that reflects a joint
African decision to work together against the illicit
proliferation, circulation and trade of small arms and
light weapons. During that meeting, in a spirit of
cooperation, Egypt and its African brothers searched
for a solution that takes into account the specific nature
of this problem for some countries of the African
continent.

At the international level, Egypt has actively and
positively participated in the work of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons, which produced an ambitious
political Programme of Action aimed at combating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and
criminalizing other related illicit activities. It also
aimed at safeguarding the control of national
authorities over legal activities in order to prevent the
use of such weapons in any illegal activities, at
enhancing regional and international mechanisms to
deal with the root causes of the problem of illicit
trafficking and at limiting its adverse impacts in terms
of poverty, the slow pace of social and economic
development and ethnic conflicts in the affected
countries.

In this connection, we would like to stress,
absolutely and clearly, that dealing with this issue is
linked to the non-infringement of a number of rights.
Prominent among them is the right of peoples to self-
determination and self-defence, particularly those
peoples under the yoke of foreign occupation.

Moreover, the State has the right to carry out all
legal activities in this area, to control its own territorial
integrity, to monitor the small arms and light weapons
it manufactures and to stipulate legislation to combat
illicit trafficking in those weapons and to prevent their
use and circulation in such illicit activities as terrorism
and crime.

Addressing this issue in no way undermines the
priorities of the international community in the field of
disarmament, which are clearly defined in the Final
Document of the first special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1978, in which
nuclear disarmament enjoyed the highest priority,
followed by other weapons of mass destruction and,
finally, by conventional weapons.

Because of the exacerbation of the problem of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
close relationship between the smuggling of these
weapons and international peace and security, the
Programme of Action adopted by the Conference
clearly identifies the international community's sphere
of activity, especially that of the Security Council. The
Programme, in paragraph 38 of section II, encourages
the Security Council

"to consider, on a case-by-case basis, the
inclusion, where applicable, of relevant
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations".

The Programme of Action also emphasizes in
other areas the importance of the cooperation,
commitment and total compliance of States with
Security Council resolutions imposing arms embargoes
in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, it calls on all States to take all
appropriate measures, including all legal and
administrative means, against any activity violating a
Security Council arms embargo.

Finally, it is important to emphasize that the
Programme of Action is considered to be the sole
instrument for contending with problems related to the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. It
identifies in a comprehensive manner the priorities,
commitments and national, regional and international
standards in this area. If we adhere to the goals and
measures set out in the Programme, we will reap the
fruits of all the international community's efforts to
combat the dangerous proliferation and trade in small
arms and light weapons.

