Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Griffiths;
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock; and the Executive Director of the
World Food Programme, Mr. David Beasley, for their
briefings. We wish to express our full support for the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Yemen and to
commend him on all the efforts that he is undertaking
to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen.

We further urge all parties involved in the war in
Yemen to cease hostilities. Progress on the political
process is hampered by the continued fighting, which
is not conducive to building trust as the first step
in creating a negotiated settlement. My delegation
would like to address the following three points in its
intervention today, namely, the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, the humanitarian situation and
the impact of the conflict on women, and particularly
children, in Yemen.

First, on the Stockholm Agreement, we believe
that, in order to achieve sustainable peace in Yemen,
differences among the parties cannot be solved
militarily and will only be further aggravated by
military activities. In that regard, we call on all parties
to carry out their respective obligations as per their
undertakings under the Stockholm Agreement. The
implementation of the Agreement is of paramount
importance, as it would assist in building confidence
among the parties and improve the chances of reaching
a broader political agreement. It is vital that both sides
withdraw their forces from Al-Hudaydah and enforce
the Stockholm Agreement. The steps that have already
been taken in that regard are encouraging.

Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, South
Africa calls for the full implementation of resolution
2451 (2018), which deals with the need for the unhindered
flow of humanitarian supplies and humanitarian
personnel into and across the country. It also addresses
the need for all parties to the conflict to comply with
applicable international law and fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including to
respect and protect medical facilities and personnel and
allow and facilitate the safe, rapid and unhindered access
of humanitarian and medical personnel to all those in
need. To assist in alleviating the humanitarian plight of
the Yemini people, it is important for the international
community to pledge adequate funding for the United
Nation's Yemen humanitarian response programme.

South Africa wishes to reiterate that it is critical
that the United Nation Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement be fully capacitated and its
mandate conducted swiftly. We also note with concern
that many Yemenis do not receive the aid that they so
desperately need, as it remains very difficult for aid
organizations and actors to get permission to provide
humanitarian assistance in some areas. In that regard,
we support the World Food Programme's efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to those affected by
the conflict.

Thirdly, on the impact of the conflict on women
and children, we note with regret the escalation of
violence over the past few weeks, which is imperilling
the Stockholm Agreement. We continue to call on all
the parties to refrain from the excessive use of force
in civilian areas and to spare the lives of women and
children. Recent reports paint a bleak picture of the
humanitarian situation in the country. The rate of
deaths and injuries caused by land mines has doubled,
with the average number of civilians wounded or being
killed each day rising by one third, which totals more
than 500 people killed.

The Council must support Yemen to ensure that it
is safe to inhabit again when the conflict is resolved.
Statistics from the Office of the United Nations High
Commission for Refugees indicate that Yemen is one
of the worst humanitarian catastrophes in the world,
with 3 million people having been forced to flee
their homes because of the increased violence in the
country and more than 20 million vulnerable Yemenis
being in immediate need of humanitarian assistance,
as Mr. Beasley indicated in his briefing. Those figures
include women and children as those who are mostly
affected by the conflict.

We call on the parties to sign and implement
a time-bound action plan to end and prevent grave
violations, pursuant to resolution 1460 (2003), as the
formal and only path for de-listing from the annexes
to the Secretary-General's annual report on children
and armed conflict. Furthermore, we encourage the
Secretary-General to list all parties based on credible and
United Nations-verified patterns of relevant violations
in section A of the annexes to his annual report.

In conclusion, South Africa continues to call for a
cessation of hostilities and the de-escalation oftensions,
which will bring lasting peace and stability to Yemen
and the broader region.

