The President: I thank the representative of Canada
for the kind words he addressed to my country and to me
personally.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia.

On the eve of the new millennium, we can look back
on this century, which witnessed two world wars, the
invention and use of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons, and a record number of atrocities, especially the
killing of civilians in armed hostilities. The most recent
means of warfare has been the heinous targeting of
civilians, particularly women and children. And even more
atrocious is the ever more prevalent practice of including
children in regional conflicts not as mere victims but as
perpetrators.

We celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the relevant
Geneva Conventions on 12 August 1999. But, obviously, it
was not a joyous occasion - the world has witnessed just
too much suffering. The important thing, however, is that
this situation cannot be ignored any longer.

The Geneva Conventions embody the norms and
standards set forth for all warfare, starting first of all with
legal protection for prisoners of war, as set out in 1929
and then again in 1977. Thus, the international
community, having learned the lessons of inter-State,
colonial and civil wars, elaborated and signed the two
Additional Protocols to the Conventions, which are
applicable to those conflicts and provide greater
protection for civilians during hostilities.

Sadly, the numerous conflicts that have been waged
around the world in the 1990s have been marked by
perpetual violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law rather than by their observance. New
ways have to be found and efforts have to be intensified
to keep the worst horrors at bay and to ensure that
victims of such conflicts can preserve their dignity and
enjoy protection. There is also a need for internationally
accepted norms and standards concerning the human
rights instruments that should be complied with by
everyone involved in today's conflicts.

One such effort is today's meeting of the Security
Council devoted to children and armed conflict. Namibia
felt compelled to have this debate under its presidency
this month as a demonstration of my country's
commitment to helping address this serious situation.
Personally, it also provides a fitting prelude to my
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
its fifty-fourth session, during which I trust that this
matter and others relating to children will receive the
prominence they deserve. I have made a personal pledge
that I will endeavour to ensure that this is the case.

Our continent, Africa, has been ravaged by armed
conflicts and many millions of children are affected and
dying as a result. We therefore felt duty-bound yet again
to call the attention of the Security Council and the
international community at large to this critical situation.
The Security Council has a very important role to play in
this respect, as it is mandated by the Charter to maintain
international peace and security.

I expect that an appropriate resolution will be
adopted, building on last year's presidential statement
aimed at strengthening the protection of children. I would
like to thank all the members of the Council for their
cooperation and valuable contributions and support in this
endeavour.

My appreciation is also extended to my brother and
dear friend, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, for having

 

accepted our invitation to address the Council on this issue
and for his most outstanding and informative contribution.
Yes, we remember Mrs. Graca Machel for her remarkable
dedication and pioneering work on behalf of the world's
children. Mr. Otunnu can count on the continued support of
Namibia to carry out his very important responsibility to
keep high on the international peace agenda the rights,
protection and welfare of children affected by armed
conflicts.

Much of what has been said here today by many
speakers Namibia agrees with fully, so I will not belabour
these points. However, there is added value to highlighting
a few salient points.

Namibia, having itself experienced a long and bitter
struggle for liberation, holds peace as being vital and
sacrosanct. We maintain that children have no role as
perpetrators in armed conflicts at any time. Therefore,
Namibia subscribes to the call that children be treated as
zones of peace. They are our future and we need to ensure
that they develop their fullest potential. It is therefore our
collective obligation to unreservedly condemn the use of
child soldiers and all other atrocities perpetrated against
children by adults in war zones.

To this end, the international community must take
effective measures to turn the situation around by putting an
end to armed conflicts and their root causes, thereby
eliminating the suffering of children, including their
suffering as sexual slaves. Chief among these causes are the
unacceptable levels of poverty, hunger and socio-economic
backwardness in developing countries. In addition to these
development woes, we now have ethnic and religious wars,
as well as organized crime, with most devastating
consequences. The international community as a whole,
Governments, industry, civil society and the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, have a moral
obligation urgently and resolutely to seek effective ways of
removing these causes of armed conflict.

The impact of armed conflicts on children is
exacerbated by international arms dealers who fuel
internecine conflicts through the flow of arms and other
military hardware, especially small arms, which are light
enough for children to handle in theatres of armed conflict.
We must take concerted action to identify the sources of
small arms and light weapons, on the side both of
producers and users, and to stop their illicit production and
trafficking, as well as their availability to children.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
Member States, through regional mechanisms in conflict
prevention, management and resolution, as well as during
the post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction phase,
must be enhanced, encouraged and fully supported.

Earlier commitments made by Member States to the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other international agencies dealing with
children affected by war, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) are of particular
importance in terms of the mobilization of resources to
implement the existing programmes.

The Security Council must take appropriate action
within its scope of responsibility to reinforce all efforts
aimed at getting the warring parties to observe the
accepted rules concerning the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, as well as the recent
International Labour Organization Convention concerning
the Prohibition and Immediate Elimination of the Worst
Forms of Child Labour have given us additional
ammunition to wage this struggle.

As members of the international community, we
must continue to insist on a measure of rationality and
equity in our response to victims of armed conflicts, in
particular children. We, as one human family, are
demeaned and diminished when the response to the
humanitarian needs of Victims does not measure up to the
gravity of the situation as regards the plight of children.

In Africa, the impact of armed conflict on children
has been particularly harmful, unceasing and widespread.
No region of the continent has been spared the scourge of
armed conflict. I wish to appeal to States Members of the
United Nations to provide adequate humanitarian
assistance to the lead agencies to facilitate the
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of child
soldiers into society.

The Namibian delegation has consistently supported
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict since
its establishment by the General Assembly in 1996. We
commend the Special Representative not only for the
ground-breaking work he has done so far but also for the
resolute manner in which he is executing his mandate. I

 

would like to commend the Secretary-General for giving
him the support and encouragement he needs.

We believe that the protection of children affected by
armed conflict requires coordination among all the relevant
agencies of the United Nations and its allied collaborators,
and we call upon all the principal actors on behalf of
children to continue to see this as a joint endeavour.

Namibia agrees as well that it is necessary for the
international community to increase the minimum age for
recruitment and participation in armed conflicts to 18 years.
Namibia adheres to the minimum age of 18 years for
recruitment into the military. In this regard, it is our hope
that the current deadlock of the Working Group on the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child will be resolved in accordance with our common
commitment made in 1990 - the "first call for children".

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) Heads of
State or Government, at their last summit of this
millennium, held in Algiers, reaffirmed their determination
to "work relentlessly towards the promotion of the rights
and welfare of the child" and their "commitment to combat
all forms of child exploitation, and in particular put an end
to the phenomenon of child soldiers". Namibia is
committed to this undertaking. In Africa this year we had
two very important meetings, both held in Maputo,
Mozambique, on the issue of children and armed conflict
and anti-personnel landmines.

We call upon all United Nations agencies and others,
particularly the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
to increase their ongoing efforts to provide all necessary
assistance in this regard. UNICEF, as the principal agency
mandated with the protection of children, should be
provided with additional resources if it is to give full
attention to the protection of children everywhere. Strong
and persistent effort by all principal actors is required if we
are to achieve a world where children will be allowed to be
children only. The challenges we are faced with are
enormous and require each and everyone to work in a
holistic, collaborative and dedicated manner to ensure that
the standards which we have accepted are fully enjoyed by
their ultimate beneficiaries, the children, who are the
leaders of tomorrow.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

