Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): We thank all the briefers for sharing their views today. We particularly value the direct experiences shared by Ms. Mayaki. We also express our gratitude to the Niger for drawing the Security Council's attention to this topic, including its excellent work, with Belgium, in finding an agreement on the presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/8) adopted by the Council. We strongly support the statement and hope that it mobilizes further efforts to protect schools by the Council, Member States, the United Nations system and international and regional organizations, as well as civil society. Estonia strongly condemns all violations of international law, including attacks against schools. We are alarmed by attacks on schools and hospitals in the Syrian Arab Republic, the occupied Palestinian territory, Afghanistan and Somalia. We share the deep concern about the sharp increase in the number of schools forced to close, including due to insecurity, with almost 650,000 children affected in the Sahel since 2017. We call on parties to armed conflict to immediately cease attacks and threats of attacks against schools and other educational facilities, as well as on students, teachers and other persons entitled to protection. I want to particularly highlight the following points in that regard. We need to continue to improve the monitoring and reporting of attacks on education, including by disaggregating data by gender. We also need to strengthen accountability for these attacks. In addition to the national level, the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism plays a key role in detecting attacks against schools and related personnel, as well as engaging with parties to address and prevent them. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/525) serves as a tool for early warning and the basis for engagement with parties, but also as a step towards ensuring accountability for grave violations against children. The mechanism needs sufficient human and financial resources. We continue to strongly support ensuring continued dedicated child protection capacity in United Nations missions. In the broader context, we welcome all initiatives at the national, regional and international levels that aim to strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict, including from attacks against schools. Estonia has endorsed the Paris Principles and the Paris Commitments, as well as the Vancouver Principles, and joined the group of over 100 countries endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration earlier this year. There is a need for the better protection of women and girls. Girls attending, or on their way to, school are often targeted because of their gender, and they face specific consequences of attacks, including rape and other forms of sexual violence, such as forced marriage, pregnancy as well as the subsequent stigmatization, further undermining their access to education. With specific attention needed for children in vulnerable situations, Estonia continues to support access to education and psychosocial services to refugee children in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and East Africa, as well as internally displaced persons in eastern Ukraine. Access to safe, quality education for children affected by armed conflict has an important role in their reintegration and in breaking the cycle of recruitment and violence. The number of verified attacks against schools remains high and continues to increase. As_ the evidence shows, the attacks have not decreased in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, while the vulnerability of schools and students has been compounded by it. School closures heighten the risk of child recruitment, sexual violence, child and forced marriage and child labour. We underline the importance of reopening schools where it is possible, safe and secure, in dialogue with all parties, communities and children. We agree with you, Mr. President, and all speakers today that there are clear steps that we can, and should, take to protect schools, students and teachers. Grave violations against children are unacceptable. But it is also one of the most effective ways by which we can address sources fuelling conflict and violence and ensure peace and security in the long term.
