Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank you, Sir, for convening today's
meeting. I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and I
take this opportunity to voice support for his efforts.
I also thank Ms. Sima Samar, Chair of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, and His
Excellency Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for their briefings.

I would like to thank you in particular, Sir, for that
moment of silence because it reminds us that at times
silence is more eloquent than words. In that regard,
we reiterate our full commitment to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Afghanistan,
as well as to supporting its Government.

We acknowledge the ongoing resilience and
commitment of the Afghan Government at this
difficult time. We support the Government and people
of Afghanistan in their fight against terrorism. We
recognize that terrorism is a global threat and that
the fight of various peoples - including the people
of Afghanistan - against terrorism is everyone's
fight. My delegation reiterates its firm support for the
reconciliation and reintegration efforts undertaken by
the Government of Afghanistan out of respect for its
Constitution, non-violence and respect for the human
rights ofthe Afghan people. We would also like to show
our support for the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, which continues to provide information
on the situation and fulfil its mandate, in spite of the
recurring political, security and economic challenges.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/189), the Afghan Government continues to
face serious challenges. The report also underscores
the ongoing gravity of the situation. The ongoing
deterioration of the security situation is of concern. The
number of security incidents stood at a record 23,702 in
2016. That figure, which is alarmingly high, translates
to approximately 65 incidents per day or almost three
per hour. Armed clashes between the security forces
and the Taliban accounted for 63 per cent of the security
incidents. We voice our concern about the presence and
potential increase in the number of Da'esh affiliates in
Afghanistan who are a serious threat to the security of
Afghanistan and of countries in the region, including
those in Central Asia. We also reaffirm our support for
the efforts of the Afghan national security and defence
forces as they seek to combat these threats, as well as
our support to the international partners of Afghanistan.

We are troubled by the continuous terrorist
activity in the region. On 8 March a terrorist attack
perpetrated by local affiliates of Da'esh took place in
Kabul, resulting in more than 120 victims - including
the dead and the injured. Already in 2017 we have had
the 10 January attack in Kabul, which also resulted in
more than 120 dead or injured, and the suicide attack
in Helmand, in which over 13 people were killed. That
is in addition to the 7 February attack on the Supreme
Court in Kabul, which resulted in at least 21 dead and
more than 40 wounded.

We are also concerned about the plight of civilian
victims, in particular children and women. There have
been reports of a 24 per cent increase - in comparison
to 2016 - with regard to violence against children.
Moreover, violence against women is still frequent,
as seen in the attacks against women in their places of
work. The humanitarian situation, as pointed out in the
report, is quite troubling. We call upon the international
media to refrain from either ignoring this or engaging
in double standards when talking about the havoc
wrought by terrorism. The world must be aware and
continually reminded of the sacrifices of the Afghan
people in combating these global threats.

The commitments of the international community
made during various conferences to provide assistance
in terms of security and development to the people and
Government of Afghanistan, including the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan and the recent Ministerial
Conference of the Heart of Asia - Istanbul Process,
transformed political will into concrete initiatives
intended to promote the stabilization and reform efforts
incorporated in the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework.

We express our support for the efforts of the
Afghan Government to combat drug trafficking, which
continues to serve as a significant source of financing
for terrorist groups. In that regard, the international
community needs to take more decisive action with
respect to tax havens, which serve as a means to
introduce money from drug trafficking into the
international financial system.

We welcome the 21 January launch by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations of
the humanitarian response plan for $550 million, with
a view to meeting the critical humanitarian needs of
5.7 million people.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
need to promote greater socioeconomic development
as a necessity to the achievement of lasting peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan. In that vein,
we welcome initiatives aimed at promoting close
cooperation between Afghanistan, regional associations
and the international community. Lastly, we remain
convinced that the United Nations, with full respect
for the sovereignty of Afghanistan, will continue to
play a key role, contributing to the realization of the
aspirations of Afghanistan to achieve national unity
and lasting stability.

