Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his substantive and useful report on
the causes of conflict and ways to overcome conflict in
Africa. We note the relevance of this serious,
comprehensive and highly intelligent document, prepared at
the request of the Security Council at its ministerial
meeting on 25 September 1997.

This is also an important contribution of the Secretary-
General to the efforts of the international community to
promote durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa. The report contains a sober and comprehensive
analysis of the causes of the emergence and persistence of
numerous armed conflicts and crisis situations in Africa,
which undermine the political and economic stability of
entire regions, entail enormous suffering and loss of life
and obstruct the fulfilment of Africans' aspirations to peace
and progress.

Of particular significance of the report is that it
proposes a wide range of both short- and long-term
measures aimed at preventing and settling armed conflicts
and humanitarian disasters and at strengthening peace and
stability on the continent. We fully share the Secretary-
General's View that a solution to this most important task
can be achieved only through carefully considered and
coordinated efforts by the international community as a
whole and through the mobilization of the political will of
all interested States, both in Africa and beyond its
borders. The Russian Federation is prepared for
constructive interaction in this area. We support the
Secretary-General's conclusion regarding the need to step
up efforts to prevent and settle conflict situations on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations, one of its most
important principles being the peaceful resolution of
disputes.

We note that the fundamental role and
responsibilities of the Security Council are being realized
in the implementation of numerous United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa. Simultaneously, there
is a need to strengthen the Security Council's capacity to
monitor the authorized activities of regional and
subregional organizations and coalitions in the field of
peacekeeping.

We attach the greatest importance to the conclusions
regarding the priority role of Africans themselves in
preventing and eliminating conflicts on the continent, the
effective use of preventive political diplomatic action, the
strengthening of Africa's peacekeeping potential and the
development of close interaction between the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the African subregional organizations on these issues.

The report gives pride of place to the question of the
attitude towards sanctions, with emphasis on a cautious,
selective approach, taking into account humanitarian
limits to the use of this weapon by the international
community. We support this position and are prepared to
work on concrete steps to develop it. There is also the
need for a more rigorous attitude towards compliance
with the arms embargoes introduced by the Security
Council.

Regarding the weapons trade, including the
proliferation of small arms, there is a need for a clear
distinction between the legitimate right of all countries to
ensure their own security, on the one hand, and illegal
flows of weapons, on the other; the Secretary-General
rightly points out the need to combat the latter.

It is obvious that the recommendations contained in
such a complex and multifaceted report require further
careful consideration, and many of these
recommendations do not lie within the direct competence
of the Security Council. In particular this involves
specific measures in the economic area, including, for
example, the recommendations regarding immediate steps
to convert unliquidated debt obligations into grants. We

 

assume that the competent forums will thoroughly study
such an idea.

We deem it worthwhile to continue in the Security
Council, and in other United Nations bodies to whom the
report is addressed, intensive work and analysis of this
document, in order to prepare relevant, practical proposals
to implement its recommendations.

Such an approach, taking into account the division of
labour and responsibility between the various components
of the entire United Nations system, will promote the
enhancement of the effectiveness of actions of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole in the
sphere of preventing and settling conflicts in Africa.

