Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.

It has been six months since the conflict in Gaza.
While there has not been any major outbreak of
violence since then, neither has there been any political
breakthrough towards lasting peace. We believe that
the current situation of no peace, no war is not
sustainable. We must do everything possible to realize
real peace.

We cannot overstate the importance of the two-
State solution. This can only be achieved through
negotiation, and violence has no place in the process.
Japan strongly supports a comprehensive solution on
the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1850
(2008), the Madrid principles, including land for peace,
and the Road Map.

In this regard, we reiterate our call on both the
Israelis and the Palestinians to fulfil their obligations
under the Road Map and refrain from any action that
might prejudge the outcome of negotiations. We urge
the Israelis to freeze their settlement activities,
including so-called natural growth in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. In this regard, we are concerned
about the project of the construction of Jewish
residences in East Jerusalem.

Improving the humanitarian conditions in Gaza
continues to be an important priority. We call on the
Israelis to further cooperate with the international
efforts in that regard by keeping the crossings open
continuously to secure the smooth movement of the
relevant people and goods. We also call on all parties
to fully implement Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) to resolve the issues surrounding Gaza. To
increase this momentum, Japan has been making
efforts to alleviate the devastated humanitarian
conditions. This month, we have decided to provide a
total of $10 million in assistance, including food aid
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World
Food Programme and the project for prevention of
infectious diseases through UNICEF.

We take note of the removal of some of the
restrictions on movement and access in the West Bank
by the Government of Prime Minister Netanyahu. We
encourage the Israelis and the Palestinians to
strengthen their security cooperation, which will enable
further relaxation of restrictions on movement and
access.

Palestinian reconciliation is essential. We support
Palestinian unity under the leadership of President
Abbas and call on the Palestinians to work vigorously
to achieve it. In this context, we hope that the Fatah
Congress will be a success. We fully support Egypt's
efforts and ask that any country in the region with
influence cooperate in this endeavour.

Japan has consistently provided assistance to the
Palestinians since the Oslo Accord of 1993. Building a
viable economy for the Palestinians is an indispensable
component of a future Palestinian State. Japan will
continue to do as much as possible in that regard.

We welcome and support the renewed and
intensified efforts of the Obama Administration of the
United States to achieve comprehensive peace in the
region. The serious efforts of the United States are
creating an opportunity, which we have not seen in
some time, to realize the long-sought goal of achieving
comprehensive peace among all parties in the region,
including Syria and Lebanon. However, we cannot let
the United States alone shoulder all of the
responsibilities. The parties themselves, as well as the
international community, must also shoulder their
responsibilities if we are to achieve peace.

We fully support the Arab Peace Initiative, which
can be a basis for a comprehensive peace in the region,
and believe that all the Arab States can play a more
active role in ameliorating the atmosphere surrounding
the peace talks. We hope that they will take tangible
steps towards that end.

People in the region have seen various peace
initiatives come and go. We must not let the people feel
apathetic towards these renewed efforts. We should
seize this opportunity as if it were our last. Japan is
determined to help both parties reinvigorate the peace
process. Ambassador Yutaka Iimura, the newly
appointed Special Envoy of the Government of Japan
for the Middle East peace process, will work with the
parties to achieve a comprehensive peace in the region.

