Mr. Djokic: Let me begin by expressing regret that
previous speakers have once again used a meeting of the
Security Council to advance untrue and malicious
allegations against my country, which we categorically
reject.

The situation in the former Yugoslavia is far too
serious for the Council to be manipulated in order to satisfy
the domestic and political propaganda needs of certain
countries. The delegations that have again chosen to voice
such allegations have thus shown that they are not striving
for the attainment of a just and lasting peaceful solution.

Two hundred and seventy-five days have passed since
the Security Council first decided to suspend a very limited
and virtually symbolic number of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In these nine months the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia have regularly
submitted reports to the Council in which they stated that
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was fully living up to
its commitment to close its border with the Bosnian Serbs
and that its decision to break off political and economic
links with the Bosnian Serb leadership was being
continually respected.

This was, of course, a unilateral decision by my
Government, which was adopted with the aim of
influencing the Bosnian Serb leadership to accept the
Contact Group peace plan as a starting point for further
negotiations in the search for a political solution to the
Bosnian crisis.

Despite the evident constructive and peace-oriented
policy of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - which has
been increasingly acknowledged and appreciated - and the
fact that it has fulfilled absolutely all the conditions set
forth by the resolutions by which the sanctions were
introduced, the Security Council has not been able to
muster the political will to lift the sanctions unconditionally
and, in so doing, to achieve a significant breakthrough in
the status quo and a substantial step towards peace.

Instead, the Council is continuing to pursue a
stubborn and myopic policy by collectively punishing the
peoples of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
causing enormous damage to overall economic and social
development in Yugoslavia, as well as in neighbouring
countries. The policy of sanctions is having a very serious
detrimental and destabilizing effect on the whole of south-
east Europe. Traditional trading patterns have been
severed, regular transit routes disrupted and the inclusion
of this region within European integration processes
postponed.

Even the very limited suspension of sanctions has
been fraught with many problems, due primarily to the
unwillingness of some States to implement relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. For instance, it is still
impossible to buy or reserve an aeroplane ticket from the
territory of the United States to Belgrade. Because of the
short time-frame of the sanctions relief, it has also been
very difficult for Yugoslav sportsmen and teams to take
part in many international competitions which are
scheduled for periods longer than 75 days. Cultural
cooperation has also been hampered for the same reasons.

As a policy instrument, the sanctions have been an
outright failure. They have not stopped the bloodshed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, nor it can be hoped that they
will ever do so. They have served only to conceal, like a
fig leaf, the failure of the policies of the international
community in its attempt to resolve the crisis in the
former Yugoslavia.

Historically, sanctions have proved to be a blunt and
ineffective instrument. They cause tremendous
humanitarian suffering among the civilian population,
where children, the weak and the elderly are as a rule the
hardest hit, and they very seldom fundamentally influence
the policy of target countries. On the contrary: they tend
to stiffen resolve and promote a general feeling of
conspiracy among the people against which they are
implemented.

What is taking place in Bosnia is a civil war based
on century-old animosities. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, as has been repeatedly stated in the reports of
the Secretary-General, is not a party to this war and is, on
the contrary, investing great efforts to facilitate a
negotiated settlement. Recently, for example, the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia helped

 

in resolving the hostage crisis. Criticism has now arisen that
since the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia managed to
broker the release of the hostages, it is evident that its
influence over the Bosnian Serbs is still overwhelming. On
the other hand, had the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia not
acted in such a way and if the hostages were still being
held, it would have been condemned for not having done
enough to ensure their release. Whatever the outcome, it
seems that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia does not get
the benefit of the doubt or the credit that it is due.

Reports of alleged cooperation of the Yugoslav army
with the Bosnian Serbs are absolutely not true and are
regularly portrayed as false by the reports of the Co-
Chairmen. It is indeed indicative that no Government has
submitted official information on such violations to the Co-
Chairmen, yet these concerns are raised within the Security
Council. We can only interpret such blatant fabrications as
a form of extracting even more concessions from the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and particularly its early
recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the other hand,
the Security Council turns a blind eye to the flagrant
breaches of the arms embargo by the Bosnian Muslim and
Croatian Governments, as well as to the presence of the
regular army of Croatia in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is prepared to
recognize the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina once the
political problems affecting its nations are on the way to
being resolved. Also, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
insists that the sanctions first be lifted before any
recognition moves are made.

The perpetuation of the sanctions, and the setting of
more unjustified conditions for their lifting, is absolutely
absurd. There were never any justified reasons for
introducing the sanctions in the first place. Their
maintenance is all the more untenable now, when the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is investing major efforts
to contribute to the search for a just and peaceful settlement
of the crisis. Those who continue to insist that they remain
in place obviously have other goals in mind and are not
motivated by a sincere wish to find a political solution to
the crisis.

Only negotiations, and not the use of force, the lifting
of the arms embargo or the deployment of new troops, can
be conducive to such an outcome.

If the Security Council wishes truly to open the road
towards peace in the former Yugoslavia, it must have the
courage to make a resolute move and lift the sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia altogether.
That would undermine the position of extremists in all
camps who see the sanctions as a pretext for pursuing the
war option. The view that by lifting the sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia the international
community would lose its leverage and influence on the
policies of Belgrade is absolutely false. The sanctions
only foster resistance and set limits within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on greater cooperation with the
international community. If they were lifted, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia would become a full and equal
partner in the peace process and could even more
effectively contribute to the attainment of a just and
lasting settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We would like to believe that the Security Council
will soon summon the strength - and the wisdom, in
particular - to take this step.

