Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me thank the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda, Judge Fausto Pocar and Judge Dennis Byron,
as well as Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte and Prosecutor
Hassan Bubacar Jallow, for their briefings to the
Council.

I would like to take this opportunity, of course, to
congratulate Judge Dennis Byron on his assumption of
his very important post, as well as to pay tribute to
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for her
work to date, and to wish her all the best for the future.

Once again, I would like to reassure the Council
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's strong commitment to
fully cooperate with the ICTY. As I reiterated at the
meeting in December 2006, our authorities at the State
and entity levels have undertaken every possible effort
to locate and arrest those indicted war criminals who
are still at large. Furthermore, additional efforts have
been made to strengthen cooperation with the
authorities of neighbouring Serbia for the sake of better
tracing any possible links and networks responsible for
hiding those fugitives.

I would like to mention, as the most recent result
of all those efforts, the arrest of General Zdravko
Tolimir on 31 May 2007 at the border with
neighbouring Serbia by our authorities and his
immediate transfer to The Hague. Thus, since the arrest
of General Vlastimir Djordjevic in Montenegro, the
number of indictees that remain at large is now 4 out of
a total of 161 indicted by the Tribunal.

During the past six months, our authorities at all
levels have continued to strengthen logistics in order to
trace the remaining fugitives. Numerous activities have
been developed on the ground which we believe have
further diminished the manoeuvring space of those who
may try to help them from our territory. Ultimately, it
must be underlined that, to date, international and
domestic intelligence has not provided any reliable
traces within the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that could lead us to the whereabouts of those who
remain at large.

I would like to take this opportunity to stress that
the authorities of my country will continue to
undertake every possible measure to ensure that all
perpetrators of war crimes on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, if found in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, will be brought to justice, either before
the Tribunal or, with the consent of the ICTY, before
our national courts.
As is well known, in 2006 Bosnia and
Herzegovina completed its judicial framework
regarding war crimes as an important part of our
national judicial system. The War Crimes Chamber of
the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to
process the significant number of cases referred by the
ICTY, as well as those raised by the Prosecutor of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Regarding the case of Radovan Stankovic and his
escape from Foca prison three weeks ago, I have to
stress, on behalf of the authorities of my country, that
all measures have been undertaken to ensure that such
an unfortunate event will never happen again.
Furthermore, every possible effort is being made, in
cooperation with the police of neighbouring Serbia, to
trace and find Radovan Stankovic and to bring him
back into custody and to investigate and punish those
responsible for his escape.

I would like to express appreciation and
satisfaction concerning the remarks made by the
Prosecutor, Ms. Del Ponte, that Bosnia and
Herzegovina's cooperation with her Office is now at a
generally satisfactory level, as well as her recognition
of the important role played by Bosnia and
Herzegovina and, in particular, Republika Srpska, in
the arrest and transfer to The Hague of General
Zdravko Tolimir.

Finally, I would like to emphasize once again the
strong position and commitment of our highest
authorities in support of the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, underlining the
utmost importance of bringing all indicted war
criminals to justice. We would therefore like to call
upon this body, and the international community in
general, to continue to support the Tribunal until its
agenda has been exhausted.

