Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I thank the briefers, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Mohammed and Mr. Dieye, for their valuable interventions. I am delivering this statement on behalf of the three African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. At the outset, we would like to thank China for choosing to focus on the fight against terrorism and violent extremism in Africa during its current presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5 on this issue, which constitutes a testimony of the unified efforts of the Council to address and combat this scourge. Terrorism and violent extremism remain among the most serious threats to Africa's stability and development. The threat is manifesting itself in both small- to large-scale attacks on civilians and infrastructure. In many instances, it evolves into open armed confrontations, unprecedented in terms of scale and impact, between terrorist groups and State security institutions, leaving hundreds killed or maimed, thousands displaced and living in poor humanitarian conditions, disrupting economic activity in the affected areas, instilling fear among populations, creating confusion and, most of all, exhausting the already limited capacities of State institutions and forces. It is important to note that terrorist groups in Africa, while driven primarily by a local agenda, have colluded with groups that existed beyond the continent, as evidenced by the emergence of Al-Qaida and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) local affiliates to carry out their agendas in Africa. These dynamics are having serious ramifications on the continent with ISIL's attempts to resurface on African territory, particularly the Sahel region, while being driven out of Iraq and Syria. In fact, foreign terrorist fighters are increasingly relocating into the continent. They are mainly attracted to conflict zones and territories where Government presence is weak, particularly along the porous borders. They exploit local grievances, poverty, lack of public services and security. They resort to the use of barbaric force against populations and engage in cross-border criminal activities. In short, terrorist groups in Africa have become a key factor of instability, exacerbating conflicts and increasing their complexity, seriously challenging State authority and threatening regional and international peace and security. Certain Al-Qaida and Islamic State groups appear to be working together and coordinating attacks to grab large swaths of territory. The ongoing war in Libya, fuelled by foreign players who keep sending weapons and fighters, is feeding this terrorist dynamic on the continent and continues to reinforce terrorist groups and to affect the situation in Africa, especially in the Sahel region. We call on concerned States to respect their obligations and to refrain from violating the Security Council arms embargo imposed on Libya. Likewise, we call on the Security Council to take up its responsibility to ensure full compliance with its related resolutions. Similarly, the recurrent attacks suffered today by the populations of the Sahel countries, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa must challenge us all and encourage us to take measures to maintain international peace and security before it is too late. No later than last Sunday, a terrorist group attacked the villages of Dinguila and Barga, in northern Burkina Faso, killing 43 people and wounding many others. We condemn in the strongest terms this terrorist attack. We extend our deepest condolences and sympathy to the families of the victims and to the people of Burkina Faso and express our solidarity and full support to the Government of Burkina Faso in its efforts to fight terrorism. African States and communities have shown great resilience and courage in standing in the face of terrorism and violent extremism. However, the situation urgently calls for the international community to strengthen its active and coordinated action in support of these efforts. In this regard, we would like to highlight the need for further action in the following areas. First, it is crucial to detect, disrupt and prosecute all means of support for terrorism in Africa, including providing financial resources to terrorist groups, supplying them with weapons, including small arms and lights weapons, facilitating the return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones, as well as the exploitation of religion to radicalize and recruit young people and to justify the use of violence. Capacity-building programmes need to be reinforced to counter terrorist narratives and the use of information and communication technologies to spread the terrorist propaganda. Secondly, we must address the root causes and conditions conducive to terrorism in Africa. Terrorism and violence find a particularly conducive breeding ground in negative national or regional circumstances such as poor socioeconomic conditions, marginalization, lack of education, unemployment, gender inequality, human rights violations, political instability, social unrest and armed conflict. It is therefore important that States adopt comprehensive and integrated strategies to counter terrorism by promoting sustainable development, tackling poverty and inequality, protecting and promoting human rights, improving governance, including in the security sector, cracking down on corruption and bolstering the participation and leadership of youth and women at all decision-making levels. These strategies need to adopt a whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach, including through public-private partnerships and cooperation with civil-society organizations in the development, implementation and assessment of counter-terrorism measures. Thirdly, itis vital to address the existing and evolving interlinkages between transnational organized crime and terrorism. The operational efficiency of terrorist groups in the region is enhanced by de-confliction and collaboration between them and criminal groups, as both use similar smuggling routes and invest in lucrative illicit activities, including trafficking in arms, drugs, cultural property and natural resources, as well as through kidnapping for ransom, extortion, money- laundering and robbery. Fourthly, we must strengthen the capacity of States to mitigate attacks on soft targets by establishing effective means to develop and further implement contingency and response plans in order to protect, investigate, respond to and recover from damage from terrorist attacks against soft targets. Finally, we must enhance inter-agency, bilateral and regional coordination and information-sharing, particularly in the fields of border security and management, criminal justice, travel information and police and intelligence cooperation. In this regard, we reiterate the importance of the efforts and initiatives of the African Union, including the "Silencing the Guns" campaign, aiming to achieve a conflict-free Africa, prevent genocide, make peace a reality for all and rid the continent of wars, violent conflicts, human rights violations and humanitarian disasters. We also welcome the cooperation with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in the organization of the African Regional High-Level Conference on Counter Terrorism and Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism, held in Nairobi in July 2019. We seize this opportunity to call for stronger and more coordinated international cooperation to implementcounter-terrorism measures and initiatives in the region, particularly with regard to the implementation of the international coalition for the Sahel.In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to spare no effort in combating terrorism and violent extremism on our continent and to renew our will to do so, in accordance with the goals and principles of the United Nations Charter and with respect for our obligations under international law, including human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law. We stand ready to cooperate with our partners and all relevant stakeholders to achieve an Africa free from terrorism and violent extremism.
