Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mrs. Ameerah Haq, for her
briefing and her efforts as head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to
strengthen peace, security and stability and to assist the
Government and people of Timor-Leste in building
their national institutions. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste for her
statement.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/522)
reflects recent positive developments in Timor-Leste
that are the result of the sincere desire of all political
parties, in the Government and in opposition, to steer
their country towards stability and prosperity after long
years of suffering. There is no doubt that UNMIT,
which was established after the events of 2006, has
been a success story for the international community. It
has contributed, along with other United Nations
entities, to strengthening the democratic process and
building the State's institutions.

There are still a number of challenges, however,
requiring a two-track approach. The first is to
consolidate the important achievements that have been
made so far in the areas of political stability and
security, completing the building of security
institutions and the judicial sector, strengthening the
rule of law and inculcating a democratic culture. The
second track is to work for socio-economic
development in a manner consonant with the
Millennium Development Goals, in order to remove
Timor-Leste from the list of the world's least
developed countries and onto that of middle-income
States.

Lebanon reaffirms its full support for UNMIT in
its work to fulfil its four major responsibilities:
reviewing and reforming the security sector,
strengthening the rule of law, achieving
socio-economic development, and consolidating a
culture of dialogue and democratic rule. In this regard,
I wish to make the following remarks.
First, building security institutions is a
prerequisite for lasting peace, and we commend the
role that UNMIT police have played in training and
supporting the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste to
assume responsibility for security throughout Timor-
Leste. In that regard, we welcome the assessment
contained in the Secretary-General's report that the
security situation remains stable, with no serious
incidents or increase in violent crime reported.

Secondly, we welcome the fact that President
Ramos-Horta has issued regulations and instructions
regarding the security sector, in addition to a
comprehensive strategy for judicial reform.

Thirdly, strengthening the rule of law and
accountability and combating impunity is fundamental
to lasting security and an issue of principle for my
delegation. We support President Ramos-Horta's
initiative aimed establishing peace and national unity
and at inculcating a culture of dialogue and democracy
in all sectors of society. In that context, we welcome
the closing of the last remaining transitional shelter for
internally displaced persons.

In the area of socio-economic development, we
welcome the positive economic statistics included in
the report, which indicate that the country's economic
growth is projected to exceed 10 per cent in 2010. We
believe, however, that the steep growth in the
unemployment rate, especially among young people, is
a potential social time-bomb that may lead to serious
security problems in future if it is not addressed. This
is particularly true given that more than 60 per cent of
the population is under 25, as noted by the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste. In this regard, we
welcome the technical assistance that the International
Labour Organization is providing to the Secretariat of
State for Vocational Training and Employment.

Fourthly, the elections to be held in 2012 will be
an important milestone in the democratic approach
taken by Timor-Leste, and we urge all political parties
to participate actively in preparing for them. We also
call on the international community to provide the
Government of Timor-Leste with all necessary
assistance in this area. We welcome Ms. Haq's mention
of the initiative to establish a joint high-level
mechanism between UNMIT and the Timor-Leste
authorities during the transitional period. We
encourage all parties concerned to take maximum
advantage of UNMIT's expertise, and on that basis to
continue the cooperation between the United Nations
and Timor-Leste's Government.

In conclusion, we wish to emphasize the need for
the international community to continue to provide
support to Timor-Leste. We welcome the improvement
in the country's relations with its neighbouring States.
We believe that it is high time for this nascent State to
play a larger role in its region.

