Mr. Obasanjo: On my own behalf and on behalf
of my co-facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former
President of Tanzania, I thank the Council for receiving
me today.

It has been precisely one year and two days since
the Secretary-General first introduced me as his
Special Envoy to the heads of State of the Great Lakes
region in Nairobi. As members may recall, when we
gathered in Nairobi on 7 November 2008, Laurent
Nkunda's Congres national pour la defense du peuple
(CNDP) was threatening to take over Goma. The
2
humanitarian situation in the Kivus had reached
alarming proportions. At the Nairobi summit, it became
clear to all how fractured relationships in the region
had again become. In particular, Presidents Kagame
and Kabila would neither shake hands nor speak to one
another.

Today, a year after President Mkapa and I took up
the challenge of helping the parties and the region to
find solutions, the situation has been dramatically
transformed. The humanitarian situation has greatly
improved. Many internally displaced persons (IDPs)
are now returning to their homes. The CNDP no longer
exists as a politico-military organization. The threat to
regional peace posed by the armed groups, in particular
the Forces de'mocratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), has been considerably reduced, and there has
been a notable warming in regional relationships.

As members of the Council will recall,
immediately after the Nairobi summit we began
concerted rounds of consultation with regional heads of
State. Indeed, over the course of my mandate, I have
made a total of 30 visits to 10 heads of State in the
region. Here, I would like to thank the Nigerian
Government, and in particular President Yar'Adua, for
making available to me aircraft from the presidential
air fleet for all my travels in the Great Lakes region. I
could not have accomplished my task without that
special support.

Our first discussions with President Dos Santos
provided the backdrop for my activities. At that
meeting, I gained some useful insights into the
underlying causes of the Congolese conflict from a
leader close to the scene. From the moment of our first
meetings with Presidents Kabila and Kagame, I carried
messages designed to build detente and increase
mutual confidence. Soon thereafter, the two Presidents
renewed contact and began taking steps towards the
rapprochement that we see and welcome today. The
international facilitators complemented our efforts in
building confidence between the two leaders.

Recognizing the urgency of peacemaking, on
15 November 2008 I also met for the first time with
Laurent Nkunda. Soon, we had won the confidence and
approval of all to organize direct dialogue between the
CNDP and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in Nairobi. That dialogue was,
at first, frustratingly slow, but in time it proved useful
in opening direct channels of communication between
09-59863
the Congolese Government and the CNDP and laid the
groundwork for the peace agreements between the
Government, the CNDP and the other armed groups on
23 March 2009.

In parallel, we continued to make regular rounds
of consultation with the region. With some rapidity, the
rapprochement we were encouraging began to bear
fruit. It culminated in the historic decision of both
countries to take decisive joint military action against
one of the key sources of friction between them - the
persistence of the FDLR on Congolese soil. In the
course of those operations, the CNDP moved to rid
itself of Laurent Nkunda. The new CNDP leadership
proved more amenable to a negotiated solution. The
fruit of that negotiation, again, was the 23 March
agreement, the signature of which President Mkapa and
I witnessed in Goma.

Since the last time I had the opportunity to
address the Council members during their visit to
Addis Ababa last June, I have divided my time between
two dimensions of my mandate - first, encouraging
the parties to accelerate the implementation of the
provisions of the 23 March agreement; and secondly,
enjoining the two heads of State, Presidents Kabila and
Kagame, and their Governments to deepen and
consolidate their rapprochement. On both fronts, I
believe I can report solid success.

With respect to the 23 March agreements, there
has been substantial, if not comprehensive progress.
The following provisions have been or are about to be
implemented. The amnesty law has been promulgated.
The CNDP is now officially registered as a political
party. However, other armed groups have yet to
register, mainly as a result of internal disputes over
leadership positions and weaknesses in their structures.
Most political prisoners in Kinshasa have been released
and transferred back to their regions of origin.
However, delays in the liberation of prisoners persist in
North Kivu.

The Congolese authorities are working closely
with the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
establish stabilization and reconstruction programmes
within the framework of the programme for the
stabilization and rebuilding of former conflict zones,
which was launched last July. In most cases, the
appointment of Government administrators to replace
former rebel structures has taken place. However, those
09-5986}

officials continue to lack the necessary means and
support that would enable them to safely and
effectively exercise their authority. MONUC and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have established a mechanism to look after orphans
and the war wounded, but it has yet to become
functional because ofa lack of resources.

Slow and partial army integration remains an
issue. It is one of the root causes of instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Without concerted
international support, there is little chance that military
integration will be effective in the near future. That
may bring back the era of warlordism.

The structured return of refugees and IDPs also
remains an issue, although spontaneous returns have
already increased significantly. The process leading to
the return of refugees from neighbouring countries will
have to be managed carefully to avoid a resumption of
hostilities between communities in the Kivus.

By contrast, some important provisions of the
23 March agreement still remain unimplemented.
Those include the establishment of a national
reconciliation mechanism, including local reconciliation
committees in the Kivus, the creation of a proximity
police force, reforms to electoral law, reforms in the
area of good governance and the proper control of
natural resources, and the identification of means to
foster the more direct participation of elements of
former armed groups in the political life of the nation.

A further concern relates to recent rumours of
splits within the CNDP. My team and I have continued
to monitor the situation closely. We are aware of
ongoing and recurring disputes over positions among
the CNDP leadership. I have urged the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to accelerate
meeting its commitments to the armed groups under
the 23 March agreement, precisely so as to prevent
dissent and discontent emerging within former armed
groups.

Let me now turn to the regional level. The
success that has been recorded has been due in very
large part to the coming together of the heads of State
of the region and to the resolve of Presidents Kagame
and Kabila to improve their relationship. If anything
gives me hope for the future it is the rapprochement
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. The fruits of that rapprochement have been
seen in the joint operation against the FDLR, the
3
historic meeting at Goma in August of this year
between Presidents Kabila and Kagama, the economic
cooperation on joint energy generation from butane gas
in Lake Kivu, and the restoration of diplomatic
relations and exchange of ambassadors, which took
place within the past two weeks.

With regard to the FDLR, I believe that Operation
Kimia II is achieving reasonable success. In South
Kivu, for example, we found widespread support for
the continuation of the Operation, which most people
recognize to have helped in weakening the FDLR.
While we should not downplay the humanitarian
consequences of those operations, it is important that
we continue to support the Congolese Government in
its resolve to rid the Kivus of the FDLR, while
stressing the need for the Forces armees de la
Republique de'mocratique du Congo to remain mindful
of the protection of civilians. International action
against FDLR supporters and leaders abroad is also
helpful.

In my recent meetings with Presidents Kabila and
Kagame, they separately reassured me that they are
very much on speaking terms. But only they will know
how deep the relationship really is. I believe that the
restoration of full trust between the peoples of the two
countries will take some time longer. Once broken,
confidence takes time to mend.

In sum, I believe that we have done much to
somewhat alter the dynamic at both the national and
the regional levels, but a further concern remains. But
what we have successfully treated were mainly the
symptoms. Most of the underlying ailments that have
led to repeated crises in the region still need to be
addressed. Without dealing effectively with the
underlying issues, peace can neither be durable nor
irreversible. One of those ailments is the continued
weakness of governance institutions, and the armed
forces in particular.

As the Council has heard me say on a previous
occasion, in 1960 I served in eastern Congo as a young
officer in what was the first United Nations
peacekeeping operation there - the United Nations
Operation in the Congo. Many of the difficulties that
called a young Nigerian officer to the newly
independent Congo persist, alas, nearly 50 years later. I
am deeply conscious that, while President Benjamin
Mkapa and I may have made a marked contribution, no
one person, or two for that matter, can help fix the
problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
alone. Moreover, mediators should be mindful not to
become irritants or unwelcome guests to their hosts.
The Congolese must be encouraged and empowered to
be the architects of their own future. Undue
interference by neighbours and by the international
community can only be counterproductive, and is not
helpful.

During our meeting on 17 October, President
Kabila assured President Mkapa and myself that his
Government remained committed to the full
implementation of the 23 March agreement. He also
spoke confidently of the steadily improving relations
with Rwanda and Uganda, and of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's good relationship with
Burundi and Angola. On that last point, he reassured us
that the recent difficulties over expulsions of
Congolese citizens from Angola were the result of a
misunderstanding between local authorities, and that
the issue had been quickly addressed between the two
countries.

President Mkapa and I informed President Kabila
of our intention to wind down and take a step back
from an active role in the peace process in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region while national and regional leaders
implement measures to strengthen national peace and
harmony and regional cooperation, development and
solidarity. We reassured him - as we assured
President Dos Santos in a subsequent meeting, on 27
October, and President Kagame on 28 October - that
we remain on alert should the region need to call on
our good offices again. On that basis, I therefore
propose the following exit steps.

First, since our meeting, I have again written to
President Kabila, urging his action to accelerate the
implementation of the 23 March agreement. In a month
or so from now, my team will travel to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to make a further assessment.
That assessment will be reported to me and President
Mkapa to see if there is any marked change either way
from the situation that prevails today.

Secondly, at the end of January, President Mkapa
and I will submit a final report based on our most
recent assessment to the African Union leaders at their
regular summit. On the margins of that summit, we
hope that leaders of the Great Lakes countries will give
us an opportunity to brief them also.
09-59863
Thirdly, in order to provide assistance in case a
new crisis should start to loom, I am working with the
United Nations to consider re-tooling my existing
support office in Nairobi as a very small, dedicated
post, which would continue to liaise with the
secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and assess the implementation of the
23 March agreement, monitor efforts to counter the
violence of the various residual foreign armed groups
at large in the broader region, and monitor the
consolidation of the regional rapprochement and
actions to sustain peace and make it irreversible.

Fourthly, I have stressed the urgency of
addressing the underlying causes of recurring crisis.
With this in mind, I recommend an umbrella approach
bringing together the United Nations, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and international development partners in a
09-59863
concerted effort to strengthen governance institutions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In closing, I must thank the Security Council, the
United Nations and its Secretary-General, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the heads of Governments of the region and
MONUC for their vital support in all that has been
accomplished. I also wish to recognize many individual
Governments, particularly those of Japan, Nigeria, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United Kingdom,
for their material support to my mediation efforts.

