Ms. Rasi: I would like to thank the Security
Council President for the initiative to bring to light the
important role that the civil society can play in post-
conflict societies. I am very pleased to take part in this
debate in my capacity as President of the Economic
and Social Council.

There are different perspectives on the role of the
civil society, whether we refer to non-governmental
stakeholders, whose efforts complement the work of
international organizations and of Governments, or
whether we analyse the contribution of local actors,
which contribute to the peace-building process. All
these dimensions are very well reflected in the concept
paper provided by the President. I can touch upon only
some of the questions from the perspective of the
Economic and Social Council and in terms of
development concerns.

If we take a look at certain areas to which the
United Nations and the Security Council itself have
attached importance in their activities, we find that
civil society organizations (NGOs) are increasingly an
indispensable partner. I could mention rehabilitation
and reintegration at the local level, human rights, the
rule of law, health and other social programmes,
physical infrastructure, and the environment. The non-
governmental organizations help to implement
demobilization programmes, protect children from
involvement in armed conflict, and confront problems
caused by landmines.

United Nations agencies and other multilateral
organizations are often called upon to assume wide
responsibilities in relation to international cooperation
for relief and development assistance. NGOs are
significant actors in crisis and post-crisis situations.
Their number, diverse mandates and varying
operational capacities make coordination essential to
ensure the coherence and impact of their combined
efforts. Many donors rely on NGOs as channels for
their assistance, and, in that function, they are expected
to follow agreed policies and standards of behaviour. In
violent conflicts, NGOs are the principal delivery
vehicles, and other agencies, including the United
Nations, rely on them as implementing partners.

NGOs thus face particular challenges, and
international organizations and Governments should
support them in their efforts. Necessary coordination
between the actors can be improved through
information exchange, regular consultations and joint
needs assessments in the field. Transition from relief
work towards post-conflict reconstruction and
rehabilitation requires a shared understanding of the
longer-term commitments.

Conflict networks between external governmental
and non-governmental partners working on conflict-
related issues facilitate the sharing of knowledge and
experiences so as to enable them to act together in a
more effective way. Donor coordination is a constant
theme of Economic and Social Council deliberations.

Civil society institutions play a vital function in
the reconciliation process and in building national
consensus, and, through them, key social, religious,
professional and political interest groups are included.
A space is needed for civil society actors to participate
and to play a peace-building role. The media can serve
as a social educator to defuse potential conflicts. The
protection of human rights is vital in a vulnerable post-
conflict society. A diversified civil society means
reducing destabilization and bolstering support for
State institutions, so that peace-building efforts and
economic and social development can progress.

Lack of resources and capacity hinders
reconstruction efforts, and adequate assistance is
required for post-conflict needs, including fostering
civil society. Effective local capacity-building should
be supported across sectors and communities as well as
a wide range of civil society organizations. External
donor strategies always need to keep in perspective the
broader context and the specificity of a post-conflict
situation and the appropriate roles of the various
actors.

The importance of civil society in preventing
conflicts should also be part of our discussion, as it is
another dimension of the conflict-related work of the
United Nations. Early understanding of a potential
outbreak of conflict requires that we understand its
signals. Again, we should encourage networks with the
capacity to analyse, monitor and share information.
Collaboration among Governments, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
would enhance the ability to create an early response.
To that end, assisting in the development of regional
civil society networks is therefore worth considering.
However, the deeper causes of conflicts require a long-
term preventive focus and addressing the basic
conditions of socio-economic development and
poverty.

Transition and development are receiving greater
attention in the activities of the Economic and Social
Council. Recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction
are regularly discussed with the humanitarian and
operative agencies. The Economic and Social Council
is uniquely placed to interact and consult with civil
society at the United Nations. Likewise, the Council's
various subsidiary bodies - the functional
commissions - have established close contacts with
non-governmental organizations and with other private
entities to hear their views on the topics that the
intergovernmental bodies are addressing. Earlier this
year, for instance, the Commission on the Status of
Women adopted conclusions on women's equal
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peace-building, which is
undoubtedly relevant to today's topic.

As a concrete example, the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on Guinea-Bissau
and on Burundi have engaged with civil society
organizations in their efforts to consolidate peace-
building with international support in the societies of
those countries. A dialogue with civil society has been
introduced to United Nations development activities as
a basic principle. In addition, the World Bank, in its
evolving post-conflict agenda, recognizes that the
dynamics of civil society in countries affected by
conflict pose a particular challenge.

Once again, Madam President, I welcome your
initiative to have this exchange of views to find
synergies among the main bodies of the United
Nations. Creating conditions for sustainable
development and for protecting the vulnerable who
suffer from violent conflicts are our common tasks.
Neither the United Nations nor Governments can
accomplish them alone.

