The President: Following consultations among
Council members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls the statements
by its President of 21 February 2007
(S/PRST/2007/3) and 12 May 2008
(S/PRST/2008/14), and the report of the
Secretary-General entitled 'Securing peace and
development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform', of 23 January
2008 (S/2008/39), and emphasizes that the
establishment of an effective, professional and
accountable security sector is the cornerstone of
peace and sustainable development. Equally,
security sector reform (SSR) underscores that

effectiveness, accountability and good
governance are mutually reinforcing elements of
security.

"The Security Council notes that the bulk of
the international community's assistance in the
area of security sector reform takes place in and
is directed to countries in Africa. At the same
time, a number of African countries are becoming
important providers of such assistance. The
Security Council welcomes this intra-African
collaboration and emphasizes that there is a need
to expand the consideration given to African
perspectives on security sector reform. This
includes enhancing cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as sharing
knowledge and experience with women and
members of civil society. Focusing security sector
reform efforts on the needs and priorities of
populations in post-conflict countries will
considerably enhance the legitimacy, viability
and sustainability of such support.
"The Security Council recognizes that
security sector reform is a long-term process and
reiterates the sovereign right and primary
responsibility of the country concerned to
determine its national approach and priorities for
security sector reform. It should be a nationally
owned process that is rooted in the particular
needs and conditions of the country in question.
The successful coordination of security sector
reform efforts must be based on national
consensus and driven by political leadership and
political will to progress reform. In this regard,
the Security Council underlines the responsibility
of States to coordinate security sector reform
support, including, but not limited to, establishing
a strategic vision and the parameters for reform,
identifying gaps and needs, prioritizing areas for
technical support, and avoiding duplication of
donor efforts.

"The Security Council encourages
reforming States, while taking into account their
capacity constraints, to strive to allocate national
resources to security sector reform efforts to
ensure the long-term sustainability and viability
of such reform. In this context, the Security
Council emphasizes the importance of improving
women's participation in discussions pertinent to
prevention and resolution of conflict, the
maintenance of peace and security and
encourages women to participate in the national
armed and security forces in accordance with
relevant international law. In this regard, the
Security Council encourages the development of
a security sector that is accessible and responsive
to all, including women and other vulnerable
groups.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of regional frameworks as a
foundation for multilateral security sector reform
efforts. In this regard, the Security Council
welcomes the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in developing a
continental security sector reform policy
framework for its implementation. The Security
Council encourages other regions to consider
establishing such partnerships in order to better
facilitate the exchange of lessons learned and best
practices, as well as develop regional frameworks
for security sector reform support, reflecting the
participation of regional and subregional
organizations. The Security Council also
recognizes the support provided by bilateral
actors, as well as regional actors, including the
European Union, to security sector reform efforts
in Africa and other initiatives in the area of
security sector reform in Africa carried out by
organizations such as the Economic Community
of West African States and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

"The Security Council recalls its previous
presidential statements concerning the need for
early and adequate support in priority areas of

peacebuilding, including reform of the security
sector, as well as the importance of security
sector reform programmes for conflict
prevention. In light of ongoing conflict in Africa,
the Security Council reiterates the link between
security sector reform and socio-economic
development, and underlines that such reform
efforts should be situated within the broader and
more comprehensive spectrum of peacebuilding.
In this regard, the Security Council emphasizes
the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund in
supporting SSR, including in African countries.
The Security Council encourages the
Peacebuilding Commission to continue to
promote coordination among and between the
national and external actors involved in security
sector reform in the countries on its agenda.

"The Security Council underlines that
United Nations support to security sector reform
must take place within a broad framework of the
rule of law and should contribute to the overall
strengthening of the United Nations rule of law
activities as well as wider reconstruction and
development efforts. This will require continued
coordination with relevant United Nations actors
to ensure an increasingly coherent approach. In
this context, the Security Council stresses the
need for security sector reform efforts to be
cognizant of the issue of impunity.

"The Security Council notes that
peacekeeping has evolved significantly over the
past decades from primarily monitoring
ceasefires to complex multidimensional
operations which seek to undertake peacebuilding
tasks and underlying causes of conflict. In this
regard, the Security Council notes that an
increasing number of peacekeeping and special
political missions are mandated to support
national security sector reform programmes,
including those in Africa, through strategic
assistance to develop security sector frameworks
and capacity-building of the security and law
enforcement institutions in key areas, including
training in human rights, child protection and
protection from sexual and gender-based
violence. The Security Council stresses the need
to continue to include, as appropriate, security

the
sector reform aspects as an integral part of
planning of United Nations operations.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role that the United Nations has played
in supporting national efforts to build sustainable
security institutions, and commends the efforts of
the United Nations, in particular the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, including the
Security Sector Reform Unit and the United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Reform
Task Force, in further strengthening a
comprehensive United Nations approach to
security sector reform, through the development
of guidance and civilian capacities, coordination
mechanisms and collaboration with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit, by early 2013, an
assessment of the United Nations support for
SSR, including those efforts in Africa, and make
recommendations on how best to strengthen the
United Nations comprehensive approach to SSR,
taking into account the linkages between United
Nations assistance and conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, and also taking into consideration
the views of relevant United Nations organs and
actors."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2011/19.

I now give the floor to Mr. Anto'nio.

