Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin lnzko, for his briefing.

Twenty years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Accords, Bosnia and Herzegovina has pursued its efforts
to consolidate peace and stability at both the national
and regional levels, although some challenges still need
to be overcome ifthe full and effective reconciliation of
all dynamic forces of its society is to be achieved.

Venezuela reaffirms its full support for respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and believes
that the international community must continue to
support the country in implementing the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace as a way to contribute
to the peaceful settlement of disputes between the
actors concerned. In this context, we reaffirm that it
is up to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to lead
the efforts related to the fate of their country, in which
process the various ethnic groups must resolutely
work, through dialogue, for peace, human rights,
cooperation and economic and social development.
For this reason, we urge that the work of the High
Representative in support of those efforts be fair,
transparent and constructive. Moreover, such efforts
should seek common denominators and be conducted in
an impartial, balanced and prudent manner that reflects
the opinions and views of all stakeholders.

The European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) Operation Althea has carried out its work
under the mandate that has been given, in collaboration
with the authorities, in order to ensure a safe environment
for all ethnic communities. We therefore welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2247 (2015), which
renews EUFOR Althea's mandate for 12 months.

In another vein, we are concerned about the violence
that took place between April and October 2015, and we
condemn it, in particular the terrorist act perpetrated
against a police station in the town of Zvornik in the
Republika Srpska, as well as attacks against citizens
presumably on ethnic grounds. In this regard, we
appreciate the efforts of senior authorities to prevent
these unfortunate events from happening again and we
call for dialogue and reconciliation in the interests of
peace and stability. Moreover, we welcome the adoption
of the border treaty between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Montenegro in Vienna in August, which emphasizes
once again that dialogue and negotiation between the
parties are the only way to peacefully resolve disputes.
We hope that the ratification process for the agreement
signed by both countries will end with success.

We reiterate our solidarity with and support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina in its firm commitment to
peace and stability in the country for the benefit of its
citizens. With regard to violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed during the
armed conflict in the territories that belonged to the
former Yugoslavia, we support the work being done
by the International Criminal Tribunal charged with
trying those responsible for such atrocities.

Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts with renewed political will and courage to build
confidence and joint work within the framework of
international law, which are aspects necessary for ajust
and durable solution in the best interests of the parties
and the entire region.

