Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, Ambassador Jose Luis
Guterres. We congratulate him on the assumption of his
new post, and we wish him all the best in his future
tasks. I would like to assure Mr. Guterres that
Argentina will continue to support Timor-Leste as it
strives to achieve its fullest potential, as we have done
since 1999.
06-46776

I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the

Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Mr. Ian Martin, for

his briefing, as well as for his efforts over recent
months to resolve the crisis in that country.

The report of the Secretary-General,
(S/2006/628), introduced by Mr. Martin, offers a
comprehensive and precise account of the situation in
Timor-Leste and contains detailed proposals on a
United Nations future presence there with which my
country, in general, agrees. Argentina fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and
endorses the establishment of a multidimensional
integrated United Nations mission in Timor-Leste for
the period of one year, with the mandate, concept of
operations and structure proposed in the report.

We welcome the fact that those recommendations
adequately reflect the request made by the Dili
Government, through Prime Minister Ramos-Horta in
his letter of 4 August (S/2006/620, annex). The United
Nations presence should fully respect the sovereignty
of Timor-Leste and the specificities of that country. It
is essential that the entire process be led by the
Timorese people themselves.

The fact that we are considering the
establishment of a new mission in Timor-Leste should
not be interpreted to mean that earlier efforts failed. On
the contrary, the achievements since 1999 were
noteworthy. However, we have learned that
peacebuilding and nation-building processes are long-
term tasks. The international community has the
responsibility not only to renew its commitment to
Timor-Leste, but also to continue that commitment in
the long term.

The forthcoming months will be of the greatest
importance for the consolidation of the Timorese
institutions. The general elections to be held in 2007
will be the principal milestone in that process. The
support of the United Nations will be essential if
success is to be ensured.

The justice sector and the police were two of the
areas most affected during the recent crisis. For that
reason, we believe that most of the international
assistance efforts should focus on those areas.

We warmly welcome the Secretary-General's
report on justice and reconciliation (S/2006/580),
requested by the Council in September 2005. Argentina
supports the inclusion in the mandate of the new

United Nations mission concrete provisions regarding
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report. We believe that the draft resolution to be
considered by the Council in coming days should
adequately reflect those aspects.

We support all the efforts being made by Timor-
Leste and Indonesia to achieve reconciliation. The
Commission of Truth and Friendship could be a
valuable mechanism in this regard. However, we
believe that both Governments should make every
effort to further strengthen the credibility of the
Commission, in particular by reviewing the amnesty
clause, in order to ensure that that mechanism
conforms with international human rights standards.

The events of April and May demonstrated that
the security situation in Timor-Leste continues to be
extremely fragile. We are pleased to note that the
recommendations of the Secretary-General envisage
the establishment of a mission comprising all the
components necessary to face those complex security
challenges.

The emphasis of the new mission should be
placed on the deployment of a robust police component
to support the maintenance of internal law and order
and to contribute to the training of the Timorese
national police. Given that elections are scheduled for
2007, the continued presence of that component will be
of the utmost importance. For that reason, we should
consider its deployment for at least one year.

I wish further to state that Argentina supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the new
mission include a small military capacity under United
Nations command and control; we believe that the
proposed numbers and mandate are appropriate.

In retrospect, we can say that the Security
Council's decision to accelerate the withdrawal of the
previous peacekeeping operation in Timor-Leste was
premature. Drawing from these lessons, the Council
should speedily respond to Timor-Leste's current needs
and should act on the basis of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General. That would send a clear
message of support to the people and the Government
of Timor-Leste.

