Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): International law is the
basis for the Security Council's efforts to maintain
international peace and security. We welcome today's
open debate to discuss the role of the Security Council
in strengthening this foundation.

I would like to express my thanks to Mr. Per Stig
Moeller, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, for
convening and presiding over this important meeting.
My thanks go also to Judge Rosalyn Higgins, President
of the International Court of Justice, and to Mr. Nicolas
Michel, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, for
their thoughtful and enlightening statements.

Mr. President, you have focused our debate on
four aspects of the role of the Security Council, namely
the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations, ending impunity for international
crimes, enhancing the efficiency and credibility of
United Nations sanctions regimes and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. These are all important issues
in which the Security Council has been directly
involved and which have seen major development over
the past decade. We agree that the Security Council
needs to address the way forward on those issues.

Promoting justice and the rule of law means
enabling a fragile post-conflict society to avoid further
damage from the conflict and to reconstruct its society
and build sustainable peace. In considering assistance
to promote the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations, it is essential to secure the support and
participation of the people in those situations. To that
end, it is necessary that laws be applied in an impartial
manner with regard to those who are socially
vulnerable, especially minority groups, women and
children. Nor should we overlook the importance of
public relations and educational activities.

There is more than one prescription for
promoting the rule of law. We believe that a United
Nations compilation of best practices would be of great
use in helping the new leaders concerned, and their
supporters, make judgements regarding the best path to
establishing the rule of law.

Ending impunity for international crimes is an
indispensable step for constructing a new nation and
society. It is particularly crucial that perpetrators of
serious crimes be punished and that respect for law and
order be strengthened. Bearing in mind that the
International Criminal Court is conducting full-scale
activities, it will be necessary for the Security Council
to consider seriously the exit strategies for the tribunals
regarding whose establishment the Council has taken
decisions, such as the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In determining
assistance to post-conflict societies, and in the
discussions of the newly established Peacebuilding
Commission, we hope that rule of law issues, including
ways to end impunity, will be given due regard.

The efficiency of sanctions has increased since
the Security Council has adopted targeted sanctions.
However, with a greater focus on particular individuals
and entities as the targets of sanctions, questions have
been raised as to transparency, efficiency and

credibility. Some of those targeted have been placed on
a sanctions list by mistake and the names of some no
longer eligible for sanctions have yet to be removed
from the list. My Government considers that sanctions
can be an effective tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security. From that standpoint,
we consider that many of the concerns raised can be
resolved through conscientious efforts to clarify further
the procedures for sanctions, reduce the possibility of
evasion of sanctions by those who are true targets and
allow the voices of those who have concerns over their
inclusion in a sanctions list to reach the relevant
sanctions committees. If those elements are achieved,
we believe the credibility of sanctions regimes
implemented by Member States can be improved.

As political, economic, cultural and other
contacts between States and societies continue to grow,
it is inevitable that the number of conflicts will
increase. What is important, however, is to prevent the
escalation of these conflicts and to try, as far as
possible, to resolve conflicts following appropriate
legal procedures. That is exactly what the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, in close
cooperation with the International Court of Justice and
other judicial bodies, have to strive for. From that point
of view, it is vital to ensure that law-abiding culture
prevails and that international law is equitably applied,
no matter what the size of the States concerned.

The Security Council has exerted efforts to
establish the rule of law in societies in which peace has
been restored. The Security Council has a mission to
continue to pursue that goal. The formulation and
application of the international legal order must be
strongly supported by the international community. It
is important for the Security Council to move forward
by making necessary improvements in that regard. My
Government will also exert its utmost efforts to that
end.

