Mr. Vrailas: The candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to be present here today at this timely and important
briefing on issues of crucial significance to the
European Union (EU) and its member States. I also
thank the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive
and informative briefings.

Terrorism remains a serious threat to the
international community. The attack on the United
Nations Office in Abuja in August took the lives of
some of our United Nations colleagues who - as the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his reaction -
were those who devote their lives to helping others.

The EU has a long-standing record of support for
a wide range of counter-terrorism undertakings and
will continue to uphold that record. Last week,
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues in the European External Action
Service, took part in a number of meetings in New
York with relevant United Nations entities in order to
foster our cooperation and set up the way ahead for
joint EU-United Nations efforts to better tackle the
challenge of terrorism.

The EU stands firm on the position that the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime continues to play an
important role and is proving its effectiveness. We
fully believe in the importance of an effective
sanctions regime to disrupting the financial flows
financing terrorist acts. We express our support for all
improvements of the United Nations system aimed at
reassuring that the procedures for designating
individuals are fully compliant with fundamental
rights. In order to improve transparency and visibility,
narrative summaries of reasons for listing represent a
particularly appropriate tool.

We supported the Security Council's decision of
17 June to create a new sanctions regime for
Afghanistan, while maintaining and improving the
existing 1267/1989 counter-terrorism regime focused
on Al-Qaida. Therefore, we welcome the adoption of
the resolution 1988 (2011) creating a new sanctions
regime targeted at the Afghan insurgency, and of
resolution 1989 (2011), adopted on 17 June, amending
the existing 1267 sanctions regime to target individuals
and entities associated with Al-Qaida alone. We
especially commend the work of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which provides individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities with an opportunity to have
their listings reviewed in an independent and impartial
manner.

Regarding resolution 1989 (2011), we
particularly welcome the fact that the Ombudsperson
now has the possibility to present recommendations
with a view to de-listing concerned individuals and
entities to the Committee. We also welcome the new
and improved form of interaction between the
Ombudsperson and the Committee. This enhanced
procedure will further improve the effectiveness of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Moreover, resolution 1989
(2011) will also provide greater transparency in the
process being followed by the Committee, including
the possibility of bringing a particular case to the
attention of the Security Council upon request of any
Committee member.

In this regard, access to relevant information is
key to the Ombudsperson's ability to carry out her
mandate. In particular, we note with satisfaction the
first arrangements between the Office of the
Ombudsperson and member States for access to
confidential and classified information, which is often
an indispensable precondition for a comprehensive
analysis of the case. The way the Ombudsman Office
performs its duties will be meaningful from the due
process perspective regarding the implementation of
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) in
international, regional and national Courts.

Regarding resolution 1373 (2001), we
congratulate the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
on the successful special event commemorating the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution, and
we note with interest the establishment of the United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism. Moreover, the
EU fully supports the focus on deliverance of counter-
terrorism capacity-building to the counter-terrorism
efforts of countries. The EU looks forward to receiving
the final report of this meeting. The European Union
has developed specific instruments to support countries
in their counter-terrorism efforts, and cooperates
closely with the United Nations on this work.

The EU fully appreciates the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and its Executive Director, Mike Smith. The
EU has long-standing, excellent cooperation with
CTED. The EU welcomes the updated global survey of
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
European Union and its member States implement the
various provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), in
particular in the EU legal framework concerning
border control, migration, asylum, police and judicial
cooperation. The EU counter-terrorism strategy of
2005 provides the overall approach regarding the
prevention of and fight against terrorism. In terms of
thematic priorities, the EU supports the implementation
of the specific recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force on terrorist financing. In terms of
geographical focus, the EU strategy for the Sahel,
which combines security and development actions,
fosters a global approach to countering terrorism.

The EU is a key provider of counter-terrorism
capacity-building to many countries, especially in the
areas of the rule of law, criminal justice, law
enforcement, countering violent extremism and
terrorist financing. The EU fully supports the United
Nations and its Member States in their efforts to
implement the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, and the risk that non-State
actors, in particular terrorists, could gain access to such
weapons continue to be a major threat to international
peace and security that calls for a global approach, in
addition to actions at the national and regional levels.
We therefore commend the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We also
welcome the adoption of resolution 1977 (2011).

Only last month, we signed a joint EU-United
States declaration aimed at further supporting the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977
(2011). The declaration confirms our focus on
supporting countries in developing legislation related
to weapons of mass destruction materials control, and
developing relevant training programmes. The
declaration also highlights the need for reinforcement
measures for domestic visits to States by the 1540
Committee's Group of Experts in order to gather and
exchange information on best practices and lessons
learned for implementing the resolution.

The EU is also working on initiatives in support
of resolutions 1540 and 1977 (2011), with special focus
on country visits and providing long-term solutions to
challenges on the ground. These initiatives, together
with the EU's capacity-building - especially
concerning the establishment of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear centres of excellence
throughout the world, including the Maghreb, the
Middle East, the Caucasus, and soon in Central Asia
and South-East Asia - are mutually reinforcing
measures that provide a tangible contribution to the
field of counter-terrorism.

Let me take this opportunity to once again
express our gratitude for the whole spectrum of vitally
important tasks undertaken by the Security Council
committees, aimed at tackling the threat of terrorism.
The European Union and its member States stand firm
in their support for all of these actions, and remain
committed to enhancing cooperation with the United
Nations in this regard.

