Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to join the other delegations
that have congratulated you, Sir, and the Guatemalan
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the first time, and to wish you every
success in your forthcoming tasks.

We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fernandez Amunategui,
for his briefing on the situation in Haiti. We read
with interest the recent report (S/2012/678) on the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and agree with the conclusions
contained therein.

Unfortunately, despite the progress made on the
political front, the situation in Haiti continues to be
most difficult. The political process remains fragile.
The Permanent Electoral Council does not have wide
support, and the legitimacy of the amendments made
to the Constitution by the President is not recognized
by all. That is the backdrop against which complex
elections will take place in the Parliament and in local
Government bodies.

The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, and there is some social unrest owing to
social and economic instability, increased criminal
activity and the inability of the national police to take
on responsibility for providing internal security. The
humanitarian situation remains difficult.

MINUSTAH without a doubt plays an important
stabilizing role, and, along those lines, we believe
that the issue of its drawdown must be taken up
particularly carefully, taking into due account the
possible consequences. We support the proposal of
the Secretary-General that the reconfiguration of the
Mission should be carried out on the basis of objectives
agreed upon with the Government of Haiti, objectives
that are clear and achievable over the next four or five
years.

Moreover, we believe that the Mission should be
gradually relieved of the duties that were entrusted to
it after the earthquake, which include a wide variety
of social, economic and humanitarian activities. In that
connection, United Nations funds and programmes
should participate actively in rebuilding the country,
along with the United Nations peacebuilding machinery
and donor support.

The Haitian Government must lay a leading role
in resolving critical tasks in the country, first and
foremost on the economic and humanitarian fronts.
The Government bears particular responsibility for
the effective utilization of international aid and must
participate actively in its coordination.

One ofmost significant tasks facing the Government
at this stage is the bolstering of police capacity. If the
rule of law is not strengthened and national forces
cannot ensure security, it will be difficult to speak
of an authentic stabilization of the situation in Haiti.
In that connection, we note the contribution made by
MINUSTAH in attaining those ends.

The international aid provided to Haiti under the
auspices oftheUnitedNationshasbeenanunprecedented
demonstration of solidarity in its scale and scope.
Without a doubt, efforts to provide comprehensive aid,
including the strengthening of State institutions, should
be continued so as to ensure that the Haitian people
can independently resolve issues related to security,
reconstruction and sustainable development.

