Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting on the situation concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for inviting it
to participate. My delegation welcomes the presence of
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of Belgium. We welcome Mr. Alan Doss, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
thank him for his briefing. Our thanks go also to the
Secretary-General for his efforts to find an appropriate
solution to the problems we are facing, in particular
through his appointment of His Excellency President
Obasanjo as his Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of heads of
State or Government of countries of the Great Lakes
region and of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), including in particular the
outcome of the meeting held on 7 November in Nairobi
and the 9 November meeting of SADC. We also thank
the secretariat of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region for its efforts.

Any solution to the security problem in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be based on
firm political will and on accurate information
regarding the true situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in the eastern part of the
country.

If it is to benefit from accurate information, the
Security Council should ensure that it receives as
complete information as possible. It should avoid
holding meetings that are too restricted and giving the
floor to persons whose anti-Rwandan positions are well
known, as occurred, for example, yesterday afternoon,
in the absence of the delegation of Rwanda.

The dangers of such practices are that the
Security Council will be misinformed, leading to the
risk of a biased solution, the underpinning of its efforts
to find a solution in the field, the perpetuation of the
horrible problems afflicting the population of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the ongoing
expenditure of funds that could otherwise serve other
purposes.

My country would like to exercise its right of
reply to the mendacious assertions made about Rwanda
in yesterday's Security Council meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope that the
Security Council will give us the opportunity to do so
in a meeting of the same format - and, if possible, to
confront the politically motivated specialists who had
been invited - in order to ensure that the Security
Council has accurate information.

My delegation reaffirms Rwanda's resolve to
contribute to settling the security problem in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such a solution can
come about only by stemming the underlying cause of
that situation, namely, the presence of members of the
former Rwandan armed forces and Interhamwe and the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, who
kill, rape, recruit child soldiers and intelligence agents,
live off the backs of the population and exploit the
mineral resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Here, I would note resolution 1804 (2008),
which has remained a dead letter to date. The solution
to these problems can come about only through the
implementation of the agreements already signed, of
which there are many.

My delegation is gratified by the actions under
way between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo undertaken by countries of the Great Lakes
region, the Secretary-General, the Security Council, in
particular through the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
08-62035
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alan Doss, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, President Obasanjo. My delegation also
welcomes the efforts of the entire international
community to find a solution to this terrible situation.

