Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate on water, peace and security, and for
bringing this important issue to the attention of the
Security Council. We welcome Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; Mr. Danilo Turk, Chair of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace; and Mr. Sundeep
Waslekar, President of Strategic Foresight Group. We
thank them for their contributions.

To date, water has been linked primarily with
two of the three pillars of the United Nations.
The international community thus recognizes the
fundamental connection between water and sustainable
development and between water and human rights. On
the other hand, the connection between water and the
United Nations peace and security pillar has as yet not
been fully explored and recognized by the Security
Council and the international community. Switzerland
believes that that connection is key and must be
further explored.

On the one hand, competition for access to water can
cause or fuel conflicts at both local and regional levels.
Water-related problems often affect countries that are
already in a fragile state and can exacerbate social
tensions and weaken States. The challenges linked to
water are also compounded by the effects of climate
change and can cause increased regional tensions.
Finally, cutting off the water supplies has become an
instrument of war with disastrous consequences for
civilian populations.

On the other hand, water possesses an important
potential as a source of cooperation and peace. That
is the case with transboundary cooperation with
regard to water. There are many examples, such as
the transboundary cooperation for the Rhine and the
Senegal River Basin Development Organization.
Collaborative water activities can also be an effective
measure to prevent conflicts. Water can therefore serve
as an entry point when other elements make dialogue
between parties difficult.

A number of efforts to strengthen the link between
water, peace and security are currently being carried
out at the international and regional levels. First, a draft
resolution on water, peace and security is currently
being negotiated within the International Organization
of la Francophonie, based on a proposal put forward
by Senegal and Switzerland. Secondly, a high-level side
event was held on the margins the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly. That event facilitated raising
awareness about the Global High-Level Panel on Water
and Peace, which will publish its preliminary findings
by end of this year and its final recommendations in
2017. Finally, international Geneva hosts several actors
working actively on the connection between water and
peace, such as the Geneva Water Hub, which provides
input for the Panel's work, as well as the Group of
Friends of the High-Level Panel on Water and Peace,
with approximately 40 participating Member States.

Switzerland believes that the issue of water, peace
and security must be included on the United Nations
political agenda in the same manner as the link between
water and development and that between water and
human rights have been. We believe that the United
Nations, in collaboration with regional organizations,
has a major role to play in the area. It is particularly
in the interest of the Council to address water-related
issues from a preventive perspective, that is, when
such issues can lead to conflict and destabilization
threatening international peace and security.

Experience shows us that water offers enormous
potential in terms of peace and cooperation. For those
reasons, we strongly hope that the various activities
launched to address the issue of water, peace and
security will be acknowledged by the Council and
contribute to its work in the future.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.
