Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As an
associate member of the European Union, Bulgaria
fully endorses the statement to be made by the
Ambassador of Spain on behalf ofthe Union.

Less than a month ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1397 (2002) with near unanimity.
Great hopes were born at that time, which were
followed by a certain initial decline in the violence in
the Middle East and by some encouraging signs on the
ground. I point to the resolute mission of General Zinni
and of the efforts made by the European Union and
other important stakeholders on the diplomatic scene in
the Middle East. I also point, of course, to the Beirut
summit, which endorsed the peace plan of Crown
Prince Abdullah.

For the time being, however, it would seem that
the enemies of peace have gained the upper hand. The
terrorist attacks in the Israeli cities of Netanya and
Jerusalem were victories for the extremists. Bulgaria
strongly condemns these terrorist acts and reiterates its
position of unequivocal condemnation of terrorism
from any quarter and for any motive - political,
economic or religious. As the Secretary-General said
earlier in his outstanding statement, these are morally
repugnant acts.

Bulgaria, while acknowledging Israel's right to
respond to terror, appeals to it to show restraint in the
current very difficult circumstances. We call on the
Israeli authorities not to use violence and above all to
respect the physical integrity and freedom of
movement of Palestinian President Yasser Arafat, who,
as the democratically elected leader of the Palestinian
people, remains the interlocutor in any political
process.

In these circumstances, the watchword for both
sides must be "restraint", as previous speakers have
urged. The Tenet plan and the recommendations of the
Mitchell Committee point the way out of the current
crisis. I would refer yet again to resolution 1397
(2002), which is not only outstanding for its
endorsement of the vision of two States living in peace
and security in the Middle East, but is also important
for our Council, which has for so long been virtually
unanimous on the question of the Middle East.

My delegation is prepared to continue to work
towards the unity of the Council on the question of the
Middle East, because unity alone can help to provide a
lasting solution to the problems ofthat region.

