Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Before addressing the
issues of today's open debate, I want to express my
deepest condolences to all those affected by the recent
terrorist attacks and the massive loss of life in France,
Lebanon and Iraq and in the downing of the Russian
civilian aircraft.

Let me start by commending the presidency of the
United Kingdom for convening this very timely open
debate, which acknowledges the mutually reinforcing
link between peace and development.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I shall make
some additional brief remarks in my national capacity.
Speaking from the experience of a country that once
hosted one of the largest and most successful peace
operations in United Nations history, I would like to
make the following points.

True and encompassing development cannot be
achieved and sustained without peace; peace cannot
be achieved and sustained without justice; and neither
peace nor development nor justice are truly possible
without respect for human rights and the rule of law.
That link has often been acknowledged, even at the
highest political level, yet a coherent, comprehensive
and implementable approach to crisis situations is still
lacking. Clearly there is a need to "break down the
silos", as stated in the concept note (S/2015/845, annex),
and work together across all three United Nations
pillars. There is a need to fully understand not only the
complexity of each of the pillars but also their mutual
interdependence and potential.

The new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) is not only the
best starting point for a new approach, but also a
matrix on how to do it. The three important review
processes - on peacekeeping operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) - must focus on the link among
peace, development and human rights, and go beyond
operational improvements. They should provide a
foundation for a paradigm change. Open, inclusive
and effective partnerships are needed, both among key
stakeholders within countries and with international
partners. That includes the pivotal role of regional and
subregional organizations, as well as other sustainable
development stakeholders, such as civil society, the
private sector and development organizations.

Understanding the root causes of conflict is
crucial to conflict prevention, as well as to building
and sustaining peace. To that end, we believe that the
Security Council could make better use of available
insights and analysis. In that context, enhanced
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council comes to mind. I
would like to underline the importance and potential
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Due to its
composition and mandate, and especially through its
convening role in bringing together all relevant regional
and international actors, the PBC can bring a new
perspective and advice to the Council's deliberations
and decision-making.

There is an evident and urgent need for greater focus
on conflict prevention. The number of ongoing conflicts
and wars and their enormous human, economic, social
and political costs clearly underscore that urgency.
Extreme poverty, social inequality or exclusion, the
uncontrolled exploitation of natural resources, youth
unemployment, lack of basic services, including health
care and education, to name a few, can be drivers of
conflict and sources of instability that can have dire
consequences way beyonod national borders, as we can
witness in the current migrant and refugee crises.

Therefore the 2030 Agenda, with all its goals and
targets, has to be regarded not only in the context of
development but also as an important contributor to
peace and security. That is the key message we should
take from today's important meeting.
