Mr. De Mistura: This emergency meeting of the
Security Council underscores the gravity of the events
in recent days in Syria, of which there are severe
consequences for civilians. It takes place at a time of
increased international tensions, drawing national,
regional and international actors into dangerous
situations of potential or actual confrontation. It is an
important meeting.

There is an urgent need for the Council to address
the situation with unity and purpose. How did we reach
this point? The month ofMarch saw devastating violence
in part of eastern Ghouta, which resulted in at least
1,700 people killed or injured in opposition-controlled
areas, dozens and dozens of people killed or injured
in Government-controlled areas and, ultimately, the
evacuation of 130,000 people, including fighters,
family members and other civilians.

However, in Douma there was a fragile ceasefire,
which continued for most of March. The United Nations
good offices played an important role in that regard.
Since 31 March, the United Nations has no longer
been able to be involved in talks, since, at that time,
the Syrian Government did not agree to our presence,
although we made efforts to propose concrete ways
to address the issues that we understood were arising
in the continuing contacts, including the proposal to
activate the detainee working group agreed in Astana.
However, that proposal was not taken up at the time.

From 2 April, the evacuation of some 4,000 fighters,
family members and other civilians from Douma to
northern Syria took place. However, on 6 April there
was a major escalation in violence. There were reports
of sustained air strikes and shelling against Douma,
the killing of civilians, the destruction of civilian
infrastructure and attacks damaging health facilities.
There were also reports of shelling on Damascus city,
which reportedly again killed or injured civilians. Jaysh
Al-Islam requested our involvement in emergency talks
in extremis, but there was no positive response to that
request when it conveyed the same message to the
other side.

At approximately 8 pm. local time on 7 April,
reports of an alleged chemical weapons attack in
Douma started to emerge. Pictures immediately
circulated on social media showing what appeared to be
lifeless men, women and children. Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on the ground claimed to have
received hundreds of cases of civilians with symptoms
consistent with exposure to chemical agents. The same
NGOs claimed that at least 49 people had been killed
and hundreds injured.

I wish to recall what the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, noted, namely, that the United
Nations "is not in a position to verify these reports".
However, he also made it very clear that he cannot
ignore them and that he "is particularly alarmed by
allegations that chemical weapons have been used
against civilian populations in Douma" once again.
He further emphasized "that any use of chemical
weapons, if confirmed, is abhorrent and requires a
thorough investigation".

I note that a number of States have strongly
alluded to or expressed the suspicion that the Syrian
Government was responsible for the alleged chemical
attack. I also note that other States, as well as the
Government of Syria itself, have strongly questioned
the credibility of those allegations, depicting the attacks
as a fabrication or/and a provocation. My comment is
that this is one more reason for there to be a thorough
independent investigation.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has said that it has made the preliminary
analysis of the reports of the alleged use of
chemical weapons and is in the process of gathering
further information from all available sources. My
colleague Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy of the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, who is with
us in the Chamber today, will further address this
matter. But I urge the Security Council, in accordance
with its own mandate to maintain international peace
and security and uphold international law, to, for God's
sake, ensure that a mechanism is found to investigate
these allegations and assign responsibility.

Returning to the narrative of the events, at
around midnight on 7 April, hours after the alleged
chemical-weapons attack, Jaysh Al-Islam informed the
United Nations that it had reached an agreement with
the Russian Federation and the Syrian Government.
The Russian Federation Ministry for Defence stated
that the agreement encompasses a ceasefire and Jaysh
Al-Islam fighters laying down their arms or evacuating
Douma. The Russian Federation also reported that up
to 8,000 Jaysh Al-Islam fighters and 40,000 of their
family members were to evacuate.

As I brief the Security Council now, we understand
that additional evacuations from Douma are already
under way. We have also received reports that some
detainees - the ones we had heard about before - had
begun to be released from Douma today. We note reports
that the agreement provides for civilians who decide to
stay to remain under Russian Federation guarantees,
with the resumption of services in coordination with a
local committee of civilians.

I urge the Syrian Government and the Russian
Federation to ensure the protection of those civilians
so that as many civilians as possible can stay in their
homes ifthey choose to, or leave to a place of their own
choosing or return as per international law. I urge that
there be, for there should be, an immediate refocusing
for the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
What we have see is basically an escalation before a
de-escalation.

Clearly, the dangers of further escalation arise
from situations beyond Ghouta as well. We have
received reports of missiles targeting the Syrian
Government's Tiyas, or T-4, airbase early this morning.
No State has claimed responsibility for that reported
strike. The United States and France have explicitly
denied any involvement. The Syrian Government, the
Russian Federation and Iran have suggested that Israel
could have carried out the attack, with Iranian State
media reporting that over a dozen military personnel
were killed or injured, including four Iranian military
advisers. The Government ofIsrael has not commented.
The United Nations is unable to independently verify
or attribute responsibility for that attack, but we urge
all parties to show their utmost restraint and avoid any
further escalation or confrontation.

We are also concerned about the dynamics in other
areas of Syria. Syrians in Dar'a, northern rural Homs,
eastern Qalamoun, Hamah and Idlib have all expressed
to us their own fears that they may soon face escalations
similar to what we have seen in eastern Ghouta. We
therefore urge the Security Council and the Astana
guarantors and those States involved in the Amman
efforts to work towards reinstating de-escalation in
those areas and elsewhere in Syria. The indications are
the opposite at the moment.

Meanwhile, following its operations in Afrin, the
Turkish Government has indicated the potential for
further operations in other areas of northern Syria
if Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat and Kurdish People's
Protection Units forces are not removed from those
areas. Military operations in such areas have the
potential of raising international tensions. We therefore
urge all parties concerned to de-escalate, show restraint
and find means to implement resolution 2401 (2018)
through dialogue and fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria. Let me also highlight
the fact that we have recently seen - and this is
particularly tragic when we consider the efforts all of
us, including all members of the Security Council, have
made in the last year - the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant launch new operations within Syria, south
of Damascus, in rural Damascus, in remote areas near
the Iraqi border.

I would like to conclude with some bottom lines,
if I may.

First, civilians are paying a very heavy price for the
military escalation. We are not seeing de-escalation; we
are seeing the contrary. Today our first priority must
be to protect civilians from the war, from the conflict,
from chemical weapons, from hunger. We call on all
sides to ensure respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including humanitarian
access across Syria to all people in need. We urge once
more for concrete respect for resolution 2401 (2018)
throughout Syria, which is, after all, a resolution of the

Security Council.
Secondly, continued allegations of the use of
chemical agents are of extremely grave concern.
Those allegations must be independently and urgently
investigated. Any use of chemical weapons is absolutely
prohibited and constitutes a very serious violation of
international law, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). Preventing impunity and
any further use of chemical weapons and upholding
international law must be an utmost priority for all
members of the Security Council.

Thirdly, I have to say this very slowly because
today is the first time, in over four years of briefing the
Security Council in person, that I have reached a point
in which I have to express a concern about international
security, not just regional or national or Syrian security,
but international security. Recent developments have
more than ever before brought to the surface the dangers
that the Secretary-General warned about recently
at the Munich Security Conference, when he spoke
of "different faultlines" in the Middle East that are
interconnected and crossing each other, of conflicting
interests of both global and regional Powers, and forms
of escalation that can have absolutely devastating
consequences that are difficult for us to even imagine.
The Council cannot allow a situation of uncontrollable
escalation to develop in Syria on any front. Instead,
it must find unity and address the concrete threats to
international peace and security in Syria today.

I am sorry to have been this brief, but I wanted to
focus on one specific concern, namely, the threat to
international security related to what we are seeing now
in Syria and the danger of the alleged chemical-weapons
attacks being repeated. Next time I will brief the
Council on humanitarian and other issues and on the
political process, which I know we are all interested in
focusing upon, but today is the day for talking about
security - international security - and peace.

