Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, and the Chairmen of the three
Committees for their very helpful briefings. In
particular, I should like to welcome Ambassador
Apakan and Ambassador Heller as they give their first
briefings to the Council in their new capacities.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we are pleased

with the progress achieved through the adoption of
resolution 1904 (2009). We have long championed
improving listing and de-listing procedures, so we
strongly welcome the latest reforms, which build on
the significant improvements that have been made in
recent years. Most significantly, the appointment of an
ombudsperson will provide assurance that the process
of deciding whether to de-list individuals and entities
is both fair and clear. The office of the ombudsperson
will improve the flow of information between the
designated individual and the Committee. It will also
enhance the transparency of the decision-making
process.

As Ambassador Mayr-Harting has said, the
Committee still has much work to do, especially in the
next months as the review of the consolidated list
comes to completion. We shall continue to play a
constructive role in this process and urge all Member
States to do the same. It is important that we all work
to ensure that the review is meaningful.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime
remains a vital counter-terrorism tool that enables the
international community to disrupt terrorist activity on
a much greater scale than we could through domestic
measures alone. We must all work to ensure that the
regime remains credible as a tool to maintain
international peace and security. In that respect, the
United Kingdom is pleased that resolution 1904 (2009)
confirms that measures targeting the financing of
terrorism apply to the payment of ransoms to
individuals and entities on the consolidated list. We
must not allow kidnapping to become a major source of
revenue for terrorists. The United Kingdom's policy
not to pay ransoms or make other substantive
concessions to hostage-takers is well known and clear.

With respect to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), we welcome the increasingly effective external
outreach work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) under Mike Smith's
leadership and the fact that this work is increasingly
aligned with threats and needs. It was helpful, for
example, that CTED was able to bring forward its visit
to Yemen last month. But the CTC itself could play an
even more effective role in the international counter-
terrorism architecture.

We therefore support the recent reforms to its
procedures, particularly on processing States'
Preliminary Implementation Assessments, and its
organization of more frequent open briefings, which
have included action-oriented recommendations for the
membership and increased transparency. These are
important first steps, and we would welcome further
discussions and suggestions on how to make the CTC
yet more effective.

We welcome the outcome of the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The review usefully highlighted areas - such
as biological weapons, means of delivery, national
control lists, access to related materials and financing
of prohibited or illicit proliferation activities - in
which States have adopted fewer measures. We hope
that the adoption of the review's recommendations will
lead to better working methods, the speedier and more
effective matching of implementation assistance
requests with donor funds and capabilities, and better
cooperation with other international groupings that
share the goal of preventing non-State actors from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery.

We also welcome the international attention
brought to the threat posed by the nexus of nuclear
materials and non-state actors by last month's Nuclear
Security Summit in Washington, DC. We note that the
Summit's recommendations on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the assistance needed to
achieve it complement the recommendations of the
comprehensive review.

