Mr. Mammadov (Azerbaijan): I would like to
express my delegation's appreciation to the delegation
of Indonesia and Foreign Minister Wirayuda for
convening today's open debate on the role of regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations has recently increased

significantly. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the European Union's
contribution to the protection of civilians in Chad and
the Central African Republic, the activities of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations in Myanmar,
the role of the Economic Community of West African
States in elections in West Africa, NATO in
Afghanistan and Kosovo, the Organization of
American States' support for the electoral process in
Haiti, and regular consultations with the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the League of Arab
States, as well as with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the European
Union, on European security are examples of such
broad and comprehensive cooperation.

The Secretary-General stated in today's meeting
that the United Nations is committed to helping build
up the capacities of regional and subregional
organizations to undertake conflict prevention,
peacemaking and peacekeeping tasks in their
respective regions. That approach would reinforce and
mutually complement the activities of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
OSCE, in maintaining international peace and security,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

With that in mind, and with the aim of giving new
impetus to the peace process and facilitate the final
settlement of certain conflicts on the OSCE agenda, the
United Nations may and should consider those
conflicts. That is not to say that we seek a substitute
for the peace process; rather, we seek to provide
encouragement and support for the ongoing mediation
efforts conducted by the OSCE. We believe that the
consideration of those conflicts by the United Nations
and its General Assembly will have a positive impact
on the existing negotiations and reveal the
determination of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, to continue to take
practical steps to settle those conflicts. Any settlement
will have to be based on the norms and principles of
international law.

Another OSCE dimension that needs to be
mentioned here is the Conventional Forces in Europe
(CFE) Treaty. As a result of occupation, some parts of
our State territory are beyond the Government's
control, which has led to the establishment of so-called
black holes, where a significant amount of CFE Treaty-
limited conventional armaments has been deployed and
cannot be accounted for under the Treaty. That is in
gross violation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe, to our great concern.

All of those problems reconfirm that there is still
room for an expansion and deepening of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
We are ready to contribute, within our capacities, to
that process.

