Mr. Douste-Blazy (France) (spoke in French):
Finally, the Security Council is deciding to put an end
to the war in Lebanon and Israel. Finally, it is putting
an end to the destruction, to the plight of hundreds of
thousands of displaced people on both sides of the
border, to an economic and humanitarian situation that
has grown more and more tragic with each passing day.
Today, the international community is shouldering its
responsibilities; we are shouldering our responsibilities.
Certainly, the time spent in negotiations seemed, for
some, to delay the moment of decision, but for France
and for the entire Security Council, it was a matter of
reaching a long-term comprehensive and political
solution.

Since the beginning of the conflict, France has
called for an immediate cessation of hostilities, a
lifting of the blockade imposed on Lebanese ports and
airports, and the return of displaced civilians. We must
then create the conditions for a way out of the crisis so
that we can swiftly achieve a lasting ceasefire. The
stability and equilibrium not only of Lebanon and
Israel, but of the entire region, depend on it.

The settlement on which we have worked must,
as the President of the French Republic has
emphasized, respect a twofold imperative. It must
allow Lebanon's sovereignty to be restored throughout
its entire territory and it must guarantee Israel's right to
security.

France has played a very active part in the search
for a solution. France is linked to Lebanon by deep
historical and cultural ties and by strong and ongoing
relations with the countries of the region. We are also
very attached to the sovereignty and the independence
of that country. On the strength of that imperative and
of our close ties with all the actors, France wishes to
reaffirm Israel's right to security.

It is from that perspective, too, and in that spirit
that France worked intensively with its partners,
including the United States - which I would like to
thank for its support, and in particular Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice - to craft a draft resolution
that takes all of those elements into account.

Decisive elements have come into play that have
enabled the present result. The Council of Ministers of
Lebanon announced its intention to deploy its army in
southern Lebanon with the support of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). France
welcomed that initiative, which it deems to be a major
event. It is an historic turning point for that country.

The deployment of Lebanon's army is an
essential element for restoring the sovereignty and
authority of Lebanon throughout its entire territory.
Furthermore, that decision meets a recurrent demand of
the international community that is reiterated in many
resolutions. We were duty-bound to respect that
decision. It was our responsibility to take note of it.

Both Lebanon and Israel submitted certain
demands to us. They shared certain expectations with us.
France heeded them and the international community
responded to them. That is the thrust of today's draft
resolution. That seems to us the best guarantee for a
lasting ceasefire and for a long-term solution.

The main thing, first of all, is to secure a
cessation of hostilities and to immediately start a
process that will lead to the deployment of the
Lebanese army in the South, with the assistance of a
reinforced UNIFIL. That will occur concomitantly with
the gradual, progressive withdrawal of the Israeli army
south of the Blue Line. It is also essential to begin
resolving border issues, particularly that of the Sheba'a
farms. That question goes to the heart of the conflict.
For the first time, today's draft resolution starts a
process, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, to
address that question. In that respect, the Security
Council has taken due note of the seven-point plan of
Mr. Siniora.
Finally, we wanted to set down from this moment
the principles and elements of a lasting ceasefire and a
comprehensive political solution. Through today's draft
resolution, the Security Council is responding to the
request of the Lebanese authorities that UNIFIL be
strengthened by a proposed 15,000 servicemen. I
should like on this occasion to pay solemn tribute to
the United Nations personnel in Lebanon who have

demonstrated self-denial and courage in this crisis,
some of whom, unfortunately, have paid with their
lives for their devotion to the cause of peace.

I should like to make it clear that the mandate
that the Security Council is giving UNIFIL is not one
that imposes peace. UNIFIL will help the Lebanese
Government in several of its missions, including the
deployment of its army to the South, humanitarian
assistance to the people and assistance to help
displaced persons return. It will also be responsible for
monitoring the cessation of hostilities, and then for
observing compliance by the parties with the
permanent ceasefire and the Blue Line.

We call upon all the parties to strictly respect the
personnel, equipment and premises of the United
Nations, whose security must be guaranteed in all
circumstances. France, finally, believes it crucial that
many countries respond favourably and expeditiously
to the request of the Lebanese authorities by
contributing to a reinforced UNIFIL. France is already
present in UNIFIL and will consider, alongside its
European partners, the possible supplementary support
that it may be able to give to the Force.

I express the hope that today will be the first day
of restored peace and stability in the Middle East. It is
important that what the Security Council is offering
Lebanon today, the international community offer the
Palestinian people in the future. The lives and the hope
of millions of people who are counting on us are at
stake. At stake, too, is the future of an entire region that
has suffered too much and must find peace once again.
The message of the international community is clear. We
need to replace a culture of hatred, mistrust and rejection
with a culture of trust, mindfulness and dialogue.

