Mr. Jovanovie: In its latest ferocious attack, North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) aeroplanes bombed
refugees in Korisa, near Prizren, and killed over 80
civilians, predominantly children, women and elderly
people who were returning to their homes in Kosovo, in
Metohija. Many were wounded, 58 seriously. Is this
tragedy going to be once again cynically interpreted as
collateral damage of NATO humanitarian bombings? How
many more innocent victims have to die before the
international community and the Security Council react by
condemning and stopping this brutal NATO aggression
against Yugoslavia and insisting on a political solution?

The aggression of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
now in its fifty-first day, is continuing, expanding and
intensifying. It is a gross violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the basic principles of international
relations. Notwithstanding many requests by the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
Security Council took no steps to uphold the Charter of
the United Nations, to prevent the arrogation of its
authority and the violations of international peace and
security. Had this legitimate request been heeded, vast
human suffering and material destruction would have
been avoided.

NATO's campaign of terror and devastation targets
civilians, infrastructure and the economy, inflicting a
humanitarian catastrophe on the 11 million citizens of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. So far more than 1,200
people have been killed and more than 5,000 wounded,
while more than 300 schools, dozens of hospitals and a
great number of civilian factories, bridges, railways,
public roads, churches and cultural and historical
monuments have been destroyed. NATO's strikes against
downtown Nis and Belgrade have caused many civilian
deaths, while entire city blocks, marketplaces, hospitals
and even foreign diplomatic missions have been destroyed
or damaged. This is telling proof that NATO is
perpetrating a deliberate and premeditated genocide in an
attempt to intimidate the population and erode its morale,
which stands in the way of NATO's conquest and
occupation.

 

NATO bombs have caused an ecological disaster in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and in the region. My
country has informed many United Nations specialized
agencies about this disaster. NATO is increasingly using
weapons banned by the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects, of 10 October 1980. These
weapons include cluster bombs, which afflict children the
most, depleted uranium ammunition and graphite bombs
aimed at short-circuiting the power grid of the country.
NATO has caused deliberate, indescribable suffering,
especially to the most vulnerable segments of the
population, such as pregnant women, babies in incubators,
the hospitalized and the elderly.

The most recent estimates put the damage done by
NATO bombs at more than $100 billion. The destruction of
much of the Yugoslav industry has rendered half a million
people jobless, and more than 2 million are without any
source of income whatsoever. The indirect damage from the
enforced halts in production cannot be calculated.

As we all witnessed, only a few days ago the Embassy
of the People's Republic of China in Belgrade also fell prey
to this reign of terror and twilight of reason. Three persons
were killed, and a large number were wounded. This act of
barbarism is without precedent in the recent history of
international relations and constitutes a flagrant violation of
the 1973 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including
Diplomatic Agents.

NATO has flagrantly violated international
conventions and covenants on human rights and freedoms,
in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. In
destroying radio and television stations in my country,
NATO is trying to prevent the public around the world
from being informed about the shameful campaign and is
trying to impose its own mendacious propaganda as the
only and the whole truth.

NATO has cited its concern for protecting the
Albanian national minority from alleged mistreatment and
ethnic cleansing by Serbian security forces as a post-facto
pretext for its aggression. The best evidence of the fallacy
of this claim is the humanitarian situation before and after
the NATO bombs began to fall. Refugees took to the roads
as soon as the first bomb was dropped. Of all the mayhem
wrought to date, one of the worst incidents was on 14
April, when a convoy of refugees returning to their homes
in response to a public appeal by the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was struck along the
Djacovica road. Seventy-five civilians were killed and
more than 40 were wounded. NATO bombs have also hit
many refugee camps, killing Serbs expelled from Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. More than 100 people -
primarily women, children and the elderly - have been
killed in those camps. So these people's sad and sorry
exodus ended in a most tragic and careless fashion.
Regrettably the draft resolution makes no mention of
these tragic consequences of the NATO aggression.

The concern of the Security Council about the
humanitarian situation in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is justified. However, the attempt to legalize
the aggression of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
against my country by means of this so-called
humanitarian resolution is unjustified. The bypassing of
the Security Council, the body charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security, prior to
the commencement of the aggression, and the subsequent
attempts to get the Council on board in order to legalize
the aggression deal a heavy blow to the reputation of the
United Nations and sets a dangerous precedent for
international relations in general.

The draft resolution must, therefore, contain a
demand by the Security Council that the NATO
aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia be
stopped immediately and unconditionally. For without
addressing the causes, no success will be achieved in
addressing the consequences. The sooner this is
understood, the quicker the solution will be found for all
the problems caused by the unprovoked and unauthorized
attack by the United States of America and its NATO
confederates against the independent and sovereign
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

