Mr. Lyra: My Foreign Minister truly wanted to
be here today, but he is now attending a meeting of the
Quartet on the Middle East peace process.

I have the honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate
countries Croatia and The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

Let me first thank the presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this timely meeting. At the 2005
world summit, the United Nations membership agreed
on supporting a stronger relationship between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter.
One of the European Union's priorities for the sixty-
first session of the General Assembly is to support the
development of cooperation between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations as a way to
strengthen effective multilateralism. We see this as an
area with potential; such cooperation has already
yielded results.

The cooperation among the European Union, the
United Nations and the African Union is a good
example of how these efforts can lead to concrete
achievements. Capacity-building to enhance the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations is also addressed in the excellent discussion
paper by the Greek presidency of the Security Council
(S/2006/719, annex), and the EU is ready to discuss its
recommendations.

We welcome the emphasis on the increased
responsibility of regional organizations for and
ownership of efforts to solve regional conflicts. At the
same time, it is important that this take place in
framework of the United Nations and with the Security
Council's support, and that universal principles such as
the rule of law, human rights and peacebuilding be
respected.

It is useful for us to be together here today to
exchange views on the way forward. I would, however,
also like to add a word of caution. We should look for
results, and we should be careful to avoid creating
additional structures. I fully agree with the Secretary-
General that the establishment of a more effective
partnership should be based the comparative advantage
of each organization. We should also be careful not to
force a uniform framework on organizations that are
very different from one another.

It can be useful to provide conceptual
clarification on the role of the organizations
participating in this framework. The Capacity Survey
by the United Nations University clearly shows the
vast discrepancy in the working areas, roles and
capacities of the organizations taking part in this
partnership. While fully supporting efforts to enhance
capacity-building, in particular of the African Union
and of African subregional organizations, the European
Union agrees with the Secretary-General that we
should not adopt a one-size-fits-all approach. What
counts are the results. The EU considers that flexibility,
light structures and, first of all, pragmatism should be
the guidelines for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

The report of Secretary-General (S/2006/590)
identifies a number of areas for strengthened
cooperation, in particular conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
disarmament and non-proliferation. These are all areas
where the European Union is active and cooperates
with the United Nations. I will address these issues in
further detail in our statement at the seventh high-level
meeting between the United Nations and regional and
other international organizations, on 22 September. In
the context of today's meeting, I will rather explain the
philosophy behind the European Union's cooperation
with the United Nations and give a concrete example
of how this is translated into action, in particular in the
area of crisis management.

The European Union considers that its relations
with the United Nations are one of the cornerstones of
its external action. As stated in the European Security
Strategy of 2003, one of the EU's central priorities is
strengthening the United Nations and equipping it to
fulfil its responsibilities and to act effectively. The
European Union is itself a structure for peace and
security in its region. The EU was created to overcome
the legacy of two world wars and to prevent new wars
in Europe. The founding idea of the European Union is
to create a zone of peace and prosperity based on the
voluntary pooling of sovereignty, common institutions
and the rule of law. The EU emphasizes the same
values in wider international relations. Building on its
own experience, the European Union is an active
proponent of effective multilateralism.

The EU's commitment to support the United
Nations has been reaffirmed on many occasions, both
in important statements, including at the level of heads
of State or Government, and through action. Relations
between the European Union and the United Nations
have been intensified in recent years. I would like in
particular to highlight the EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management. This began to
develop at a time when the United Nations was looking
at the reform of its peace operations in the framework
of the process of the report (S/2000/809) of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations chaired by
Lakhdar Brahimi, which coincided with the laying of
the foundations of the European Security and Defence
Policy. The United Nations, confronted with the
changing nature of peacekeeping, sought increased
support from regional actors.

Two operations under the European Security and
Defence Policy, in 2003, were real and successful tests
of the EU-United Nations relationship. The EU Police
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina took over from the
United Nations International Police Task Force. And
the EU-led Operation Artemis, carried out in the
summer of 2003 in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1484 (2003), succeeded in stabilizing the
security conditions, improving the humanitarian
situation and protecting the civilian population in
Bunia, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Those examples of cooperation on the ground
constituted a major breakthrough in relations between
the two organizations. A framework for consultations
between the two organizations was set up by the Joint
Declaration on United Nations-EU Cooperation in
Crisis Management, of September 2003, which
identified four areas for further cooperation: planning,
training, communication and best practices. A
consultative mechanism, the Steering Committee, was
set up in order to enhance coordination in those areas
between the United Nations - in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs - and the EU staff.

Since the beginning of 2003, the EU has engaged
in more than a dozen military or civilian operations,
most of them in close cooperation with the United
Nations. The new relationship with the United Nations
has undoubtedly also stimulated the European Union's
efforts at improving its crisis management capacity,
and it has developed into very fruitful cooperation. I
will not go into details on technical cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union,
but will just briefly draw attention to a recent
achievement: the European Union has deployed a
military operation to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the deployment to Kinshasa of an
advance element of several hundred military personnel
and a battalion-sized force over the horizon, quickly
deployable if necessary.

The United Nations and the European Union have
also cooperated constructively in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as regards election observation.
The deployment of some 300 EU observers occurred
with the full logistical support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), and the EU Election
Observation Mission's security arrangements enabled it
to request assistance by MONUC where required
throughout the EU Mission's period of deployment.

Another recent development is the EU's role in
the efforts to ensure a swift implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). At the extraordinary
meeting of the Council of the European Union on
25 August, the EU Foreign Ministers had an exchange
of Views with Secretary-General Kofl Annan on the
situation in Lebanon. The Council welcomed the
elements provided by Mr. Arman on the operational
framework of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). The significant overall
contribution of the EU member States, becoming the
backbone of UNIFIL, demonstrates that the European
Union lives up to its responsibilities.

A further area of cooperation that I would like to
emphasize, as the Secretary-General has in his report,
is conflict prevention. Indeed, since 2003 a regular
geographical desk-to-desk dialogue has been taking
place between the EU and the United Nations on
conflict prevention.

Let me mention the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission, which is now becoming
operational. The Commission will have a central role
in the United Nations system in the definition of
peacebuilding strategies for countries emerging from
conflict and in enhancing coordination. Close
cooperation with regional organizations and the
involvement of civil society in peacebuilding will be
important for the Commission's success. The relevant
regional organizations should be involved in
accordance with their working areas, roles and
capacities. As a leading global player in peacebuilding
and a major provider of funds to this effect, the
European Union is committed to fully and actively
contribute to the work of the Commission from the
beginning.

I will conclude by stating that it is a priority for
the European Union to continue to deepen and broaden
its cooperation with the United Nations, both in the
areas I have indicated and in many others.

