Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I, like
others, start by extending sincere condolences to the
Niger and France for the loss of their servicemen
and servicewomen.

Let me also thank our briefers and welcome to the
Council His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.

As set out in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/371), there is some clear progress to be
welcomed, particularly the resumption of Joint Force
operations from January and the deployment of 75 per
cent of troops, as of March. We recognize the efforts of
the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
to combat cross-border threats despite difficult and
adverse circumstances. Now, the Force must accelerate
its efforts to achieve full operational capacity and
demonstrate that its security capacity is greater than
the sum of its parts. Evidence of tangible results from
its operations will build the Force's credibility, both
regionally and internationally. To aid the Joint Force in
overcoming the challenges it faces in terms of funding,
and thereby achieving full operationalization, the
United Kingdom strongly urges all partners to make
good on the financial commitments they have made,
with the utmost urgency.

On the United Kingdom's part, we have contributed
to the European Union's package of support and
provided further bilateral contributions, which for the
Joint Force alone total approximately $20 million. That
is set against the far bigger contribution for the Sahel
as a whole. Continuing the close cooperation with the
European Union, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Operation
Barkhane is vital to aid operational efforts. In that regard,
we welcome the creation in January of the Coordinating
Body for Mali, which serves as a framework to enhance
information-sharing and coordination among the
various military and security forces present.

We also welcome the steps taken to advance the
human rights compliance framework and strongly urge
continued efforts to further embed and operationalize it
across the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. That will not only lead
to enhanced civilian protection but also support efforts
to win the hearts and minds of the populations that the
Joint Force was created to protect, which is crucial
to the stabilization of the region. Any alleged human
rights violations need to be fully investigated. Looking
forward, we encourage the G-5 Sahel secretariat to
finalize the Joint Force's strategic concept of operations,
which will both demonstrate a unity of purpose within
the Joint Force and boost donor confidence.

The challenges facing the Sahel region are becoming
progressively more complex. With increasing incidents
of terrorism, criminality and inter-community violence
in Mali's central regions, we share the Secretary-
General's concerns about the spread of insecurity and
terrorism to other parts of the region, including into
Burkina Faso. We call upon G-5 Sahel countries to
expedite their efforts to deploy all their outstanding
troops and to fully establish the police component in
order to address the growing transborder threat.

Military action alone is not the solution, as
recognized by the Council in its December 2017
resolution 2391 (2017) in support ofthe G-5 Sahel Force.
Long-term stability will be delivered to the region only
if security efforts are accompanied by programmes to
address governance, development, human rights and
humanitarian issues.

