Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We condemn unequivocally
the attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu this morning and offer our condolences to
the families of the victims.

We appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, in
organizing this seminal debate designed to establish the
link between the transparent and effective management
of extractive industries and conflict prevention. I thank
you very much for the concept note, which has provided
a compass for our discussion today (S/2013/334, annex).

I would like to express my appreciation to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, World Bank Managing
Director Caroline Anstey, Under-Secretary-General
Rebeca Grynspan and the Chair of the Africa Progress
Panel, Mr. Kofi Annan, for their informative briefings.

There is no doubt that natural resources and their
exploitation have been a contributing factor to tensions
and conflicts both within and between States. In recent
years, while inter-State conflict over natural resources
has been managed relatively well through appropriate
mediation and adjudication, the struggle over domestic
natural resources has been the source of brutal conflicts
and civil wars in some parts of the world.

In discharging its remit to maintain international
peace and security, it is only appropriate that the Security
Council should focus on the exploitation of natural
resources as one of the root causes of conflict. While
such resources can present opportunities for enhanced
economic growth and sustainable development, in many
cases they have provided the fuel for conflict instead.
It is therefore imperative that natural resources be
managed responsibly, for the benefit of the population,
in order to prevent conflict. Such a good-governance
approach should be aimed at promoting human security
and economic development. It should also establish a
nexus between human security and development. It is
the inherent responsibility of Government to ensure the
protection and survival of the constitutional order by
creating the conditions necessary for human security.
This implies that the equitable distribution of the returns
from natural resources would provide health care and
education, promote poverty alleviation and reinforce
efforts towards development, as well as eliminate
sources of tension and disaffection from society.

We believe that States facing difficulty in
the management of their natural resources should
invest greater effort in strengthening the rule of law,
especially in its enforcement, in order to contain the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. In Nigeria, the
tensions in the oil-rich Niger delta were exacerbated
by the illicit foreign-driven exploitation of the
region's natural resources, oil theft, illegal bunkers,
illegal fishing and the attendant degradation of the
environment. That anomalous situation could have
plunged the region into crisis if the Federal Government
had not taken major steps to ameliorate the problem.
Though the Government has taken steps to ease the
tension, the situation has been exacerbated by illicit
domestic and external activities, leading to the loss of
about 150,000 barrels of crude oil per day.

A more significant and no less devastating aspect of
the illegal exploitation of natural resources in conflict
situations is its impact on the environment and its
distortion ofthe livelihoods of the people in the affected
communities. Good governance must establish linkages
between natural-resource exploitation, environmental
degradation and poverty, and in so doing take the steps
necessary to ensure compliance with international
safety and environmental standards.

Today, we are not unmindful of the multifaceted
nature of conflicts. The natural-resource dimension
that we are addressing in this forum appears to be the
touchstone. I believe that we must take a long-term
strategic view of this dimension of conflict in order to
secure a more peaceful future.

