Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would

like to thank the Special Representative of the

Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de

Mistura, for presenting the report (S/2010/630) and for

his strong commitment to the peace, stability and

development of the country. We would also like to

thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,

Ambassador Tanin. We paid the greatest attention to
his statement, as usual.

We associate ourselves with the remarks
honouring the memory of Ambassador Holbrooke.

Over these past two years during which we have
had the honour and privilege to participate in the
Security Council, the greatest concerns of my
delegation regarding Afghanistan have focused on the
impacts of the conflict on the precarious security
situation of the population and the alarming number of
civilian casualties, including attacks against United
Nations personnel, and the building of an inclusive
political process that can lead to stability and
reconciliation in Afghanistan.

We have stressed that stability in Afghanistan
does not depend only on the success of military and
security operations, but rather on a process of dialogue
and genuine reconciliation, as well as on addressing the
real causes of violence by promoting development,
respect for human rights and the strengthening of the
rule of law. We share fully the position of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that there is no
military solution in Afghanistan.

The support given to the strategy whereby
Afghan forces will resume lead responsibility for
security from 2014 has demonstrated the shared
resolve to tackle the remaining challenges. However,
we agree with the position of the Secretary-General
that this strategy should be guided by progress on the
ground and not implemented according to a rigid
timeline.
Here, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
and encourage them to continue assisting the Afghan
authorities to establish conditions that will enable them
to gradually take on full responsibility for governing
the country and for its security and economic
development, in keeping with the Kabul process. We
reiterate that the prospects for the success of this
process will be improved by an inclusive approach that
incorporates women and ethnic and religious
minorities.

My delegation reiterates its serious concern at the
number of civilians, including women and children,
who have been killed or injured in acts of violence
linked to the conflict, which has risen sharply since
2009. We also want to express our concern at and
rejection of the recruitment of children by Taliban
forces and violence specifically targeting girls. We
urge all parties to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
do everything possible to guarantee the protection of
civilians pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1882 (2009).

We also reiterate our total rejection of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, and we condemn all
attacks against civilians and humanitarian and United
Nations personnel. We hope communication and
coordination between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Afghan and ISAF forces will
continue to be strengthened in order to reduce civilian
casualties and improve the security situation in the
country.

Although the last elections, held on 18 September,
showed a clear strengthening of Afghanistan's electoral
institutions since the preceding elections, the high
number of irregularities and complaints submitted to
the Electoral Complaints Commission is a reflection of
the challenges still to be faced in Afghanistan in the
area of institutional capacity-building. Transparency
and legitimacy in electoral processes are among the key
elements that will enable the Government to better fight
corruption and impunity.

It is important to take this opportunity to plan an
electoral reform for the long term, a reform that would
be designed by the Afghan Government itself, with the
support of UNAMA and the international community,
with a view to strengthening the capacities of the
electoral authorities.

As regards the rule of law, we reiterate that the
implementation of justice and accountability processes
is necessary to building a sustainable peace in
Afghanistan. That would include the fight against
corruption and organized crime. We commend the joint
initiatives, undertaken in particular by the
Governments of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, to
combat the production, trafficking and consumption of
drugs in the region. That cooperation, which is based
on the concept of shared responsibility, will contribute
to promoting mutual trust and common strategies to
combat that phenomenon, which clearly has a direct
impact on the security situation in the region.

Finally, we reiterate our support and gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his commitment and leadership in the pursuit of
dialogue and reconciliation, as well as the personnel of
UNAMA and the international presence in Afghanistan.
We are confident that the country's leaders will remain
committed to their national priorities and take
advantage of the support provided to them by the
United Nations to ensure the stability, well-being and
development of the Afghan people.

