Mr. O'Brien: When I last reported on the situation
in Yemen, in a closed meeting of the Security Council
on my second day in post, on 2 June, I described Yemen
as a looming humanitarian catastrophe. By every test,
that catastrophe has now loomed, and loomed large.
This is an intense disappointment, given the extent of
our efforts here at the United Nations and with partners
to find ways of alleviating the suffering and the descent
into catastrophe.

The dire humanitarian situation in Yemen continues
to deteriorate rapidly. With 80 per cent of the population
of about 26 million people in need of some kind of
humanitarian assistance, and more than 1,895 civilians
killed by fighting since March, the impact of this
conflict on civilians is indeed catastrophic. Airstrikes
hit a residential complex in Mokha on 24 July, killing at
least 73 civilians, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Bodies
continue to be pulled out of the rubble, and the final
death toll is unknown.

A humanitarian pause announced over the
weekend has not been respected by any party to the
conflict, with airstrikes and ground fighting reported
in eight governorates. Since the nominal beginning
of the unilateral pause announced by Saudi Arabia,
set to begin at a minute before midnight local time
last Sunday, coalition airstrikes have been confirmed
in Haijah, Lahj, Sa'ada and, most recently, in Sana'a.
In Hajjah, an airstrike hit a health centre, killing one
person and injuring others. Ground fighting has also
been confirmed in Al-Dhale'e, Lahj, Marib and Taizz.
Rockets were launched from Houthi/pro-Saleh-held
areas of Lahj into neighbouring Aden, prompting return
fire by popular committees.

Parties to the conflict continue to fail to meet
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We continue
to witness the death and injury of civilians and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure, including homes,
hospitals, schools, roads and bridges. As of 24 July,
health facilities had reported over 4,000 conflict-related
deaths, and over 19,800, injuries since 26 March. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights reports that 1,895 civilians have been
killed and 4,182 injured.

Since March, the number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance in Yemen has increased by
33 per cent, from an already staggering 16 million
people to more than 21 million in July. The number
of those facing food insecurity has risen from 10.6
to 13 million, an increase of 21 per cent. Some aid
agencies are now using the term starvation to describe
the situation of those most food insecure. Conditions
caused by the fighting have contributed to the spread
of preventable diseases such as acute diarrhoea, dengue
fever and polio. More than 15.2 million people lack
access to basic health care, and more than 20 million
lack access to safe water.

Commercial imports - which accounted for 90 per
cent of Yemen's food and fuel before the conflict - have
decreased dramatically. A light, United Nations-
led inspections mechanism to enable the flow of
commercial imports to increase has long been proposed
and is still urgently needed. Negotiations continue.

The Humanitarian Coordinator visited Aden this
week, where he witnessed at first-hand the scale of
the destruction caused. He described the situation as
harrowing.

It is against that backdrop that the international
community continues to call for a substantial
humanitarian pause that is respected by all parties,
that is, an unconditional freeze in the fighting to
allow humanitarian actors to reach more people in

need - whoever, wherever they are in Yemen and
however their need arises - with critically needed
assistance.

Humanitarian partners, with the expectation that
the planned pause would take hold, had developed an
operational plan to reach an additional 3 million people
with vital assistance in the initial five-day period,
including 3 million people with water and sanitation,
600,000 people with life-saving health care, 3.1 million
people with food and 2,200 children under 5-years-old
with treatment for acute malnutrition. That plan is live
and ready to go now, if only we could get a pause to
stick.

With ongoing violence making deliveries
dangerous, and with key roads and bridges destroyed,
humanitarian access is limited. However, partners
continue, amazingly and bravely, to deliver assistance
to the people in need whenever and wherever
possible, often at great risk to themselves. Yesterday,
humanitarian agencies, including the World Food
Programme, dispatched food for 62,000 people to
Al-Hudaydah, Abyan, Amran, Al-Dhale'e, Lahj and
Taizz. In Sa'adah city and the Rahban area, 50,000
people continued to receive water after UNICEF and
its partners delivered fuel for the pumping station. In
Al-Jawf, four mobile clinics provide nutritional health
services. In Aden, humanitarian partners have reopened
health facilities that serve 360,000 people, and began a
vaccination campaign for 120,000 children. Brilliant as
this is, it is a mere fraction of What is needed, and what
could and can be delivered, if the violence and fighting
paused, preferably ceased.

Recognizing the need to scale up operational
presence, the United Nations is establishing five hubs
across the country, and international United Nations
staff began working in Al-Hudaydah today, the first
time that United Nations international staff have been
based outside the capital since the start of the conflict.
We can go where we have access * there are no partial
judgments involved.

Efforts to respond to the overwhelming levels of
humanitarian need are woefully underresourced. The
humanitarian appeal for Yemen stands at $1.6 billion,
of which only 15 per cent - $241 million - has been
received. Much has already been spent by United
Nations agencies and their partners, who have advanced
their own funds in expectation of the original Saudi
pledge of $274 million being forthcoming. Additional
resources are urgently needed - now.

I wish to inform Council members that I will travel
to Yemen in the coming weeks to see for myself the
needs of the Yemeni people and the challenges faced
in meeting them. This conflict has brought appalling
damage on an already suffering people. We must
redouble our efforts to secure a pause in the fighting
that is adhered to by all parties, to reach all those in
need with basic assistance and urgently to give time
and space to seek to reach a more durable ceasefire and
a political solution.
