Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Chilean presidency's convening of today's
open debate on the Middle East. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim Toyberg-Frandzen for
his briefing. China has also listened attentively to the
statements made by the Ambassadors of Palestine and
Israel.

Today's meeting is the Council's first debate on the
Middle East in the year 2015. The past year marked the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, as established by the United Nations. Sadly,
2014 witnessed severe difficulties in the peace process
in the Middle East, with the Palestinian-Israeli peace
talks stalled and the conflict in the Gaza Strip.
Palestine and Israel were once again beset by tension
and confrontation. The Security Council was still not
able to take substantive measures on the subject of
Palestine, and was not able to adopt the draft resolution
on the question of Palestine proposed by Jordan on
behalf of the Arab States. China expresses its profound
regret in that regard.

The history of the Middle East peace process has
repeatedly proved that conducting peace talks is like
sailing upstream - if they do not move forward, they
will fall back. The stalled peace talks will inevitably
bring about intensified conflicts and bring both
Palestine and Israel into the vicious cycle of violence
begetting violence. China hopes that Palestine and
Israel will consolidate their confidence in peace,
remain committed to the strategic option of peace talks
and take measures to rebuild mutual trust.

We call upon Israel to stop building settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, stop dismantling
Palestinian housing, completely lift its blockade against
the Gaza Strip and transfer to Palestine the tax revenue
that has been withheld so as to create the conditions
necessary for relaunching the peace talks. We support
Palestine's bid to join the United Nations and other
international organizations and its efforts to strengthen
its internal solidarity.

Meanwhile, Israel's legitimate security concerns
should also be addressed. China hopes that Palestine
and Israel will meet each other halfway and resume
negotiations as soon as possible so as to promote an
early and proper settlement of the question of Palestine.
The question of Palestine is the core of the question
of the Middle East and is interwoven and closely
related with other hotspot issues in the Middle East.
The protracted absence of a settlement of the question
of Palestine will lead to more violence and extremism
in the region and will make the regional hotspot issues
more complicated and difficult.

The international community must have a sense
of urgency when it comes to the question of Palestine,
strengthen coordination, explore all possibilities and
develop synergies so as to bring Palestine and Israel back
to the right track of peace talks. The Security Council
should respond as soon as possible to the call ofPalestine,
the Arab States and the international community by
effectively shouldering its responsibilities and playing
an effective role in promoting peace talks, ending the
occupation and promoting the rebuilding of Gaza, and
take action to promote progress on the question of
Palestine.

China has been a firm supporter and sincere
mediator of the peace process between Palestine and
Israel. We support the endeavour of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State of Palestine on
the basis of the 1967 borders, with full sovereignty and
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support Palestine
and Israel's enjoyment of common peace and security.
China has been promoting, through its means, peace
talks among the parties concerned. China is in favour of
all international efforts that are conducive to the peace
process. China is ready to enhance its cooperation with
the international community so as to play a greater role
in pushing for a settlement of the question of Palestine.

The Syrian crisis will soon enter its fifth year.
Protracted warfare has plunged the Syrian people into
misery and suffering, and has severely threatened
regional and international peace and stability.
Promoting a political settlement through dialogue and
negotiations among the parties in Syria is the only way
to achieve peace and stability in Syria.

Recently, the international community has made a
series of efforts towards a political settlement to the
Syrian crisis. Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
De Mistura has been conducting shuttle diplomacy
with the goal of establishing freeze zones. Russia has
invited the Syrian Government and the opposition to
hold a dialogue in Moscow at the end of the month.
China welcomes those initiatives. We are in favour of
all efforts conducive to resolving the conflict in Syria,
enhancing mutual trust, alleviating people's suffering
and promoting a political settlement. We hope that
all the parties in Syria will act in the interests of the
entire nation and its people, actively cooperate with
the international mediation efforts, achieve as soon
as possible a political settlement that responds to the
circumstances in the country and addresses the interests
of all parties concerned, so as to give peace a chance
and bring tranquility to the Syrian people.
