Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm to Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Citaku, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. We are pleased to see both
of them, and we thank them for their statements. I
would also like to welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing. We
appreciate and support the work the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
doing towards promoting security, stability and the
protection of human rights under his leadership.

We are pleased to note that the overall security
situation in Kosovo remains generally calm, with the
exception of northern Kosovo, where, unfortunately, a
certain number of inter-ethnic clashes occurred. We
strongly condemn all ethnic violence and see these acts
as attacks against the peace and security of all the
citizens of Kosovo. As such, we urge all sides to
refrain from escalating tensions, especially in northern
Kosovo, and stress the importance of continuing
cooperation with UNMIK.

We also call on the authorities of Kosovo,
particularly local-level institutions and the Kosovo
police, to make sure that they continue to take all the
necessary measures to prevent violent incidents, with a
special emphasis on those affecting minority
communities.

We attach great importance to the early elections
next month being conducted in an orderly and inclusive
manner in Kosovo, thus allowing all the citizens of
Kosovo to decide on the future of their country. We
believe those elections will further contribute to the
strengthening of democratic institutions and the rule of
law in Kosovo.

At our last meeting on the subject, I underlined
that, as one of the first countries that recognized
Kosovo as an independent State, we welcome the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
that Kosovo's declaration of independence did not
violate any applicable rule of international law.

We also welcome the recent General Assembly
resolution 64/298, jointly sponsored by Serbia and the
European Union countries, acknowledging the advisory
opinion of the Court and expressing the readiness of
the European Union to facilitate dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. It is our sincere hope that that
advisory opinion will open a new phase in relations
between Pristina and Belgrade. Both are close friends
and partners. We are confident that the dialogue will be
based on the Court's advisory opinion and that the
General Assembly resolution will make important
contributions to sustainable peace, security and
stability in the Balkans.

We recognize that there are still problems on the
path towards reconciliation. The problem posed by the
issue of missing persons and the challenges encountered
in the returns process in that respect cannot be
overlooked. Still, we are glad to see that with UNMIK
facilitation, Belgrade and Pristina continue to cooperate
on this issue through the Working Group on Missing
Persons.

Lasting peace and stability in the Balkans remains
our ultimate and overriding goal. As we stated in
yesterday's debate (6421st meeting), we hope that the
general improvement of relations between the countries
of the region, illustrated by the reciprocal visits and
statements, will also have a positive impact on the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

The preservation of Kosovo's territorial integrity
and sovereignty is essential for complete stability in
the Balkans, as well as for the peace and stability of
the Euro-Atlantic area. In that respect, Kosovo should
not be left isolated in the middle of Europe, and the
continued support of the international community to
Kosovo in such fields as the consolidation of
democratic institutions, rule of law and the fight against
corruption is needed. We are strongly committed to
Kosovo living in peace with its neighbours and
participating in regional cooperation in every aspect.

At the same time, Serbia, as an important player
in the region, can do much for the consolidation of
peace, democracy and prosperity in the Balkans and
the greater European space. We welcome and support
the developing relations between Serbia and the
European Union. The future of Kosovo also lies in its
integration into European structures. Accordingly, we
believe that that European perspective provides a
sound basis for cooperation and dialogue.

As indicated by our Prime Minister during his
recent visit to Kosovo, Turkey also stands ready to
assist Pristina and Belgrade. While such efforts are
under way, as the Secretary-General emphasizes in his
report (S/2010/562), it is imperative that the parties
avoid any unilateral steps that could derail the path
towards dialogue.

