Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): In line with the time limit,
I shall deliver a condensed version of my statement,
while the full text will be circulated in the Chamber.

I wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing. Malaysia also wishes to associate itself
with the statement made by the representative Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and that to be
delivered later by the representative of Kazakhstan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
has shown some encouraging signs of stability, with the
political aspirations of the region's peoples manifesting
themselves in political reality. We continue to witness
democratic processes and the participation of people in
politics and political institutions is promising. Malaysia
would like to highlight these positive developments as
the appearance of normalcy and recovery has attracted
the interest of many countries across the globe,
including in the Council.

Malaysia welcomes the recent political developments
in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia, which have held elections
in recent months. Malaysia believes that the transition
to democratic processes in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia
has shown that the people are at the forefront of
political developments and will undoubtedly contribute
to regional peace and stability.

While the situation in those countries has improved,
the same cannot be said for what we are witnessing in
Syria. The violence that we have witnessed over the
past months has left thousands of civilians maimed and
dead, despite the six-point plan and presence of United
Nations observers.
Malaysia is appalled by the civilian losses in
Syria. Malaysia calls for all parties to the conflict to
cease their violent activities immediately. Malaysia
believes that the Syrian Government and opposition
should commit themselves fully to the six-point plan,
which would contribute to peace in the country. We
further call on the international community, the Syrian
Government and all other parties to work together to
find an amicable solution for the people of Syria.

The question ofPalestine and the Middle East cannot
be separated, nor be overlooked or ignored. In order
to achieve peace in the Middle East, the plight of the
Palestinian people should be resolved with international
determination. The suffering of the Palestinians and
the predicament of its people are currently the longest
global tragedy of modern times. The solution has
always been in sight, but it has been almost 20 years
since the Oslo Agreement, which was endorsed by the
two sides but never took off. Additionally, the Arab
Peace Initiative of 2002 also never materialized. The
long-standing two-State solution remains a vision, but
nothing more. Peace in the Middle East once seemed so
close, and yet today that solution is as far off as when it
was first envisaged.

The continued occupation by Israel of Palestinian
land and territory are as unlawful today as it was in
1967. Israel's continued occupation of the occupied
Palestinian territory has stood as a sustained violation
to international humanitarian and human rights law.
The regime has displaced thousands of Palestinian
people and killed innocent civilians. In short, Israel has
failed in its obligation as an occupying Power to protect
civilians, instead committing extrajudicial killings
and oppression. The regime has continued along that
degrading trajectory with impunity. Its persistent
blockade of the Gaza Strip has further translated into
misery for more than 1.6 million Palestinian people.

I have just returned from Gaza, where I was on
a United Nations mission under the auspices of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs ofthe Territories Occupied since 1967.
While in Gaza, we had the opportunity to observe the
actual situation on the ground and to meet directly with
witnesses and victims affected by Israel's blockade.
The blockade continues to have a devastating impact
on the people of Gaza.
The principal result of Israel's blockade has
been to make 80 per cent of the Palestinians in Gaza
dependent upon international humanitarian aid. I
have to admire the resilience of Gazans for being able
to survive on so little, especially in the face of the
inadequate health care, frequent power outages and not
infrequent incidents of violence that mark their daily
lives. The blockade on Gaza is illegal. It amounts to the
collective punishment of 1.6 million Palestinians. The
international community must bring pressure to bear on
Israel until it is fully lifted.

The mass imprisonment of Palestinians, the
routine demolition of homes and the displacement of
Palestinians, the widespread violence by Israeli settlers
against Palestinians, and the blockade and resulting
reliance upon illegal smuggling to survive are practices
that amount to a strategy to either force the Palestinian
people off their land or so severely marginalize them
as to establish and maintain a system of permanent
oppression.

Those Israeli practices are systematic. They are
aimed at moving Palestinians off their land. Working
together, they increasingly discredit Israel's claim of a
commitment to two states living side by side in peace
and security.

Malaysia calls for the immediate cessation ofIsraeli
military activity and the withdrawal from all occupied
territory, including East Jerusalem and the Syrian
Golan, to the 1967 borders. Malaysia also calls for an
immediate stop to the annexation of Palestinian lands
through Israeli settler activities, as well as for Israel to
rightly return those lands to people of Palestine.

Malaysia shall continue to support the aspirations of
the Palestinian people for self-determination and for the
return of their inalienable rights. We shall also continue
to support the two-State solution so that it achieves the
intended outcome, namely, the establishment of the
State of Palestine on the basis ofthe 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and the State of Israel,
both living in peace and security.

