Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I also want to start by
thanking Mr. Geir Pedersen for his relentless work,
and I congratulate him on what he has achieved. In his
statement, the United States representative said that the
process could open the door for a peaceful process, but
it is just the first step. There are worrying statements
by President Al-Assad, who is trying to disassociate
himself from the Constitutional Committee. Of course,
that must not happen, and we must have a guarantee
that the independence of the Constitutional Committee
will be respected and that its members will be safe and
secure and will not be blackmailed.

We have opened the door for a political process.
I would also like to remind colleagues that, from
Germany's perspective, there must be a genuine
political process that is comprehensive and inclusive
and a transition under way before we can start to think
about assistance to reconstruction.

In talking about an inclusive process, I would like
to pay tribute to what Ms. Al Hallak said with regard to
women. We greatly welcome the fact that Mr. Pedersen
mentioned in his briefing that he had met with the
Syrian Women's Advisory Board. But there needs to be
the full participation of women in the political process
and in all political bodies. I fully subscribe to what he
said about the future Constitution, namely, that the goal
of the political process is that women's rights must be
enshrined in the Constitution. What Mr. Pedersen said
about gender-based Violence, discrimination, forced
disappearances and the fact that still today women are
being taken hostage is horrifying.

We need a political process. We need a ceasefire,
as colleagues have said, and, as we discussed earlier
this week in this body (see S/PV.8668), we need
reconciliation in the country. As a first step, what is
absolutely necessary for that is that the Syrian regime
put an end to arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence,
forced disappearances and the extrajudicial killings
of detainees. It must inform the families of tens of
thousands ofmissing persons about the fate oftheir loved
ones, provide the United Nations or the International
Committee of the Red Cross unconditional access to
all detention facilities under its control, allow persons
in custody access to medical treatment and release all
political prisoners and arbitrarily detained persons.

With regard to reconciliation, there is one
more key point that I have repeatedly stated, that is,
accountability. Without accountability, there cannot be
reconciliation. I therefore again appeal, including to our
Russian colleagues, to fully support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, which actually creates the conditions for
reconciliation and a better future for Syria.

This morning, when we discussed the situation in
Yemen, our Russian colleague said that there needs
to be unconditional compliance with international
humanitarian law (see S/PV.8672). This afternoon, I
listened to his statement and he did not mention that.
When I hear and read about what is happening and
what the Russian and Syrian forces are undertaking
in Syria, I understand why he did not mention it. We
heard the news about the sixty-fifth attack on a medical
installation, in Qah, where 10 people - civilians and
medical personnel - were killed. There is no excuse
for indiscriminate attacks against innocent civilians
and civilian infrastructure. As has been said earlier,
we also support that the board of inquiry should look
into such attacks and that its subsequent report should
be published.

