Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing on developments in the Middle East.
The situation in this region plagued by crises old and
new remains problematic and demands considerable
collective efforts, including by the Security Council.
The only way we can make progress on stabilizing
and normalizing the situation in the region is by
acting together, regardless of the differences in our
approaches. By presenting the broadest possible united
front, which Russia's President Vladimir Putin has
called for, we can achieve substantive breakthroughs
in combating terrorism. Together we can end the
bloodshed in Yemen, stabilize Libya, help Syrian
refugees return home, tackle the global migration crisis,
support normalization in Iraq and end the stalemate in
other crises. And, of course, through our joint efforts
we can sort out the Palestinian-Israeli peace process.
We can say that based on our experience of friendly
relations with the Arab States, Palestine and Israel.
The foundations for our cooperation exist. They are
based on international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations and many Security Council resolutions.
Our main tools should be dialogue and mediation, and
we should refrain from unilateral steps. We cannot
achieve lasting solutions to these crises any other way.

The need for urgent collective action is greatest
with regard to the Palestinian-Israeli issue, which
is at the epicentre of the turmoil in the Middle East.
Resolving it is key to improving the situation in the
entire region. We have regretfully had to conclude that
against a backdrop of increasingly frequent attempts to
aggressively revise previously settled agreements aimed
at achieving sustainable Palestinian-Israeli and Arab-
Israeli settlements on an internationally recognized
basis, the prospects for a resumption of the negotiation
process are still faint. The misunderstanding and
mistrust between Palestinians and Israelis is growing
constantly. Aggressive attitudes are intensifying and
violence, unilateral measures and provocative rhetoric
are coming to the fore. But there is an alternative to
the current developments, which entails implementing
the steps outlined in the 2016 report of the Middle
East Quartet. Implementing its recommendations
would enable us to stop the violence, whose victims
are Palestinians and Israelis alike, and to tackle the
familiar destabilizing factors hindering progress on
the political process, including the settlement activities
and the rupture between the West Bank and Gaza.
Bringing that sector back under the control of the
legitimate authorities in Ramallah under the leadership
of President Abbas would strengthen the international
community's humanitarian efforts there. We should
emphasize in particular that every step taken should
be geared to ensuring and restoring Palestinian unity.

Itisurgentthatweintensify ourcollective diplomacy
in order to prevent a collapse of the efforts that the
international community - all of us - have jointly
undertaken, including in the Security Council, for the
sake of ensuring the conditions for implementing the
only viable solution, which is the establishment of two
States through direct negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. It is direct dialogue that can find answers
to all final status issues regarding Jerusalem, refugees,
borders and security. Dismissing those problems will
not work. Any future deal must take account of these
issues, which are so sensitive and significant for both
parties.

Russia will continue to maintain its principled
and consistent position that a comprehensive and
lasting settlement between Palestinians and Israelis
and Arabs and Israelis can be achieved on the basis
of internationally recognized principles, including
the Security Council's resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Madrid principles - including the
principle ofland for peace - and the two-State formula,
which provides for the creation, through negotiations,
of an independent State of Palestine living side by side
in peace and security with Israel. Policies that seek
to change the facts on the ground are unacceptable,
and we reject violence in any form. We consider the
expansion of Israeli settlements, the demolition of
Palestinian property and the expulsion of Palestinian
families to be illegal.

Russia will continue to play an active role in
restoring peace in Israel, Palestine and the entire
Middle East in its capacity as a permanent member of
the Security Council and a participant in the Middle
East Quartet, which remains the only mediation format
approved in Security Council resolutions. Our offer
to convene a summit in Russia between the leaders of
Palestine and Israel is still on the table. We will continue
to assist the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose critical
humanitarian activities have an important stabilizing
effect in the Palestinian territories and the countries of
the Middle East.

In conclusion, we want to once again call for
genuine collective efforts in the Middle East. Despite
the evolving realities, we must help to create conditions
there that are conducive to strengthening a general
atmosphere of trust, which is hugely important to the
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran. We
would like to remind members that in its resolution 598
(1987), the Security Council directed the Secretary-
General to work with regional stakeholders on measures
to strengthen security and stability in the region. It
is time to implement that resolution. In that context,
we believe that the Russian blueprint for security in
the Persian Gulf could be very helpful. Russia stands
ready to work on all of those aspects, and others,
with interested partners on a basis of openness and
impartiality.

