Ms. Kyung-Wha Kang: I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Navanethem Pillay.

The particular vulnerability of human rights in
situations of armed conflict means that the daily work
of the Office of the High Commissioner includes a
significant focus on the full range of situations under
the Council's review. For this reason, and for more
than a decade, successive High Commissioners have
been called to brief the Council, and we are pleased to
continue this tradition of collaboration in our common
cause of protecting civilians exposed to the horrors of
armed conflict.

The constitutional responsibility of the Council
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security is one of the greatest trusts of
humankind. By keeping the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on its agenda during the past ten years,
the Council has significantly advanced our
understanding of the crucial importance of the
protection of civilians and human rights to the cause of
international peace and security at the normative and
policy level. Translating that policy into more effective
action on the ground is the challenge that we must now
confront.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277) points out, this will mean enhancing
compliance with international law, bolstering
protection through more effective and better resourced
United Nations missions, securing humanitarian access
and pursuing accountability for violations. It will also
mean seeking creative solutions to the political
obstacles that have at times kept critical situations off
the Council's formal agenda and to those obstacles that
have stalled action or blocked the Council's protective
response all together. And it will mean moving beyond
narrow notions of what constitutes an imminent threat.
If the cause of protection is to advance in the next
ten years, a higher level of political will must be
mobilized to take timely and effective action to prevent

atrocities, protect the vulnerable, hold perpetrators to
account and ensure redress for victims.

It is now axiomatic that the resolution of conflict
and the maintenance of peace and security will be
neither achieved nor sustained without due attention
being paid to redressing grievances, ending impunity
and protecting the human rights of civilians. But this
requires greater clarity in our concepts and
expeditiousness in our action. To be clear, when we say
protection, we are talking about protection of the
human rights of individuals as contained in
international law, including international human rights
law, international humanitarian law, international
refugee law and international criminal law.

The authority of international law and the
obligations of duty bearers - among all the parties to
conflict - cannot be replaced by more amorphous
notions of protection, or by less obligatory notions of
charitable action. To be sure, the politics of conflict
cannot be ignored. But where conflict entails the abuse
of human rights, the international community must act
to identify the facts and then to apply the law.

But law without enforcement is of little moment
to would-be perpetrators. To be effective in the
protection of civilians, the Council must consistently
work to ensure accountability for perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other gross
violations of human rights. The establishment of
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
elsewhere, as well as the referral of specific cases to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), has helped to
send an important signal that, even in the fog of war,
impunity is not assured. The dispatch of credible,
independent, law-based commissions of inquiry that
are focused on accountability and which report their
findings publicly has proven to be an important
catalyst in the Council's efforts to combat impunity,
and more use could be made of such mechanisms.

The corrosive effect of impunity on both human
rights and peace is evident in the case of the occupied
Palestinian territory, as documented in the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission (A/64/640)
headed by the distinguished international jurist Richard
Goldstone, which has been transmitted to this Council.
The report lays out in detail the nature and scope of
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law perpetrated against the civilian
population of the occupied Palestinian territory, where,

in Gaza earlier this year, Israeli forces killed well over
one thousand civilians and attacked homes, schools,
mosques, food and water installations and United
Nations facilities. The report also documents the
indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars into
southern Israel by armed Palestinian groups in Gaza,
killing Israeli civilians and causing terror and trauma
among communities in disregard of international
humanitarian and human rights norms.

Collective punishment, as evidenced by the
crippling Israeli blockade and the devastating military
offensive, is a violation of international human rights
and humanitarian law, as are the forcible evictions of
Arabs, the demolition of homes and the expropriation
of occupied East Jerusalem lands for Israeli
settlements.

Until meaningful steps are taken to end impunity
for these violations and to assert the applicability of
international law, peace and security will remain
elusive for all the people of the region. The Council is
urged to embrace the recommendations in the report, so
as to secure accountability for all perpetrators and to
fully integrate human rights guarantees into
peacemaking efforts.

The situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of Congo is a horrifying reminder of the depths to
which inhumanity can spiral if left unchecked. Military
operations against residual armed groups, such as the
Lord's Resistance Army and the Forces Democratiques
de Liberation du Rwanda, have led to massive
displacement, and several hundreds of civilians have
been killed this year alone. Sexual violence, including
rape, has increased drastically. Support provided by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Congolese
Army in the context of these operations needs to be
reviewed whenever there is a risk of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
This situation is further compounded by concerns that
well-known human rights violators, including an
individual indicted by the ICC, continue to occupy
high-level command positions within the Congolese
army. Recent public statements by senior Government
officials demonstrate a lack of political will to
investigate high ranking officials and raise doubts
regarding the zero-tolerance policy against sexual
violence proclaimed by the President. Under these
circumstances, the sustained and unequivocal support
of the Council to the fight against impunity is urgently
needed.

Efforts to bring effective protection to the long-
suffering people of Darfur have occupied countless
hours of this Council's work over many years now, but
without satisfactory progress towards a sustainable
solution to the conflict. The Council has again
emphasized the protection of civilians as a priority in
renewing the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. In 2005, the
Office of the High Commissioner supported the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, which
concluded that Government forces and militias were
responsible for serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law, and which led to
the referral of the situation by this Council to the
International Criminal Court. But justice remains
elusive and violations continue. Darfur illustrates that,
even with robust mandates, there are political,
structural, operational and resource issues that limit the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The situation also necessitates the
employment of a broader human rights approach with a
focus on the entire spectrum of rights beyond physical
protection.

The conflict in Afghanistan has repeatedly caught
civilians in the crossfire. The recent attack on a United
Nations guesthouse in Kabul, killing five United
Nations staff members and injuring numerous others, is
a stark reminder that United Nations personnel
continue to put their lives at risk, while protecting war-
affected civilians and working to build an environment
that is conducive to respect for human rights. Civilian
casualties continue to mount, with hundreds killed
every year by armed anti-Government elements,
Government forces and international forces carrying
out both air strikes and ground assaults.

During the first 10 months of 2009, the United
Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan recorded
2,021 civilian deaths, compared with 1,838 for the
same period in 2008 and 1,275 in 2007. The
intensifying conflict has had a disastrous impact on the
enjoyment by many Afghans of basic rights to health,
food, shelter, a livelihood and education.
In addition, there continues to be an urgent need
to improve overall accountability procedures, including
through criminal prosecution when warranted, as well
as redress for victims, while bringing the legal

framework governing conflict-related detention by all
who take and hold detainees into line with human
rights law. The failure to pursue a credible transitional
justice strategy, including holding to account those
responsible for the gravest crimes over more than three
decades of war and the resulting climate of impunity, is
a significant factor in the challenging political context
and growing insecurity that now envelop Afghanistan.

For 10 years now, the Council has worked under
this thematic track to build up a framework for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That work has
better equipped the Council, and all of us, to address
that vital issue. Institutionally, the Council should
mandate arrangements on the ground to ensure an
enhanced coherence, rather than fragmentation, and to
make full use of civilian capacities, with robust human
rights components in United Nations peace missions
tasked to provide effective protection to the full range
of vulnerable persons and groups in conflict and post-
conflict countries.

The early deployment of human rights officers,
the rapid fielding of human rights investigations and
the organization of human rights assessments have
proved to be valuable interventions, allowing us to
identify trends, threats and risks, to document abuse
and to hear the concerns of victims and the vulnerable.
At the same time, the disparity between mandated
responsibilities, on the one hand, and inadequate
resources, on the other, must be addressed if the
expectations of the international community and the
demands of victims and the vulnerable for effective
protection are to be met.

However, as this brief review of four countries on
the Council's agenda reveals, the most important gap
remains between policy and practice. Closing that gap
will require a greater commitment by all to the explicit
application of international law and to its enforcement.
It will require more political will and less political
exceptionalism. All must be held to a single standard.
It will require enhanced resources and their more rapid
deployment and an unwavering focus on the three
mutually reinforcing imperatives of accountability for
perpetrators, redress for victims and protection for the
vulnerable. In this challenging endeavour, we - the
High Commissioner and her Office - stand ready to
assist.

