Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
discussion today and for giving us an opportunity to
address the entire membership on this vitally important
subject and on the draft resolution before the Council.

In September of last year, President Bush came to
the General Assembly and said that, because
proliferators will use any route or channel open to
them, we need the broadest possible cooperation to
stop them. He asked the Security Council to help by
adopting a resolution that would be effective in the
fight against proliferation and against terror. The same
day, Secretary-General Annan, in his address to the
General Assembly, said that all of us know that there
are new threats that must be faced, or perhaps old
threats in new and dangerous combinations, new forms
of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). He added that terrorism is not
only a problem for rich countries; ask the people of
Bali, Bombay, Nairobi or Casablanca. We agree with
that assessment. A terrorist use of WMD would punish
all of us, strong and weak alike.

The draft resolution that the Security Council will
adopt in the coming days responds to what all agree is
a real and growing threat to global peace and security:
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their means of delivery and the ability to
produce them. This is especially true with regard to
non-State actors, including terrorists. Were non-State
actors and outlaw regimes to possess these weapons
and the means to deliver them, they would be able to
blackmail and create chaos in entire regions. Terrorist
groups such as Al Qaeda have shown their readiness to
kill thousands, and they do not hide their desire to
acquire WMD and their means of delivery in order to
increase that number many times over. If such a group
acquired these weapons, they would be used to bring
sudden disaster and suffering on a scale that we can
scarcely imagine.

The problem is not just with the weapons
themselves, it is with the ability to produce them. The
international community has also become aware of the
existence of sophisticated international black market
efforts to buy and sell the plans, technologies and
materials required to build these weapons, making
them available to the highest bidder. Thus the threat
that the Security Council is addressing is both clear and
present.

The draft resolution under discussion has a
forward-looking focus, it sets a standard for how
nations should act in the future rather than judging past
actions. It reinforces an objective of vital interest to all:
that proliferation cannot be tolerated. We must act now
to stem this threat and the draft resolution soon to be
adopted by the Council is the fastest means to address
it. It asks Member States to take precautions to ensure
that WMD and their technology are properly
controlled. It asks Member States to review their
domestic controls and to strengthen them if needs be. It
also asks Member States to review domestic legislation
and adopt appropriate and effective laws to keep
dangerous items out of the hands of non-State actors,
that is, those not authorized by the State.

The goal of this draft resolution is to halt
dangerous traffic by directing Member States to make
illegal the unauthorized trade in these weapons, their
means of delivery and the plans, technology and
materials needed to develop and build them. It asks
them to do this by strengthening their national export
and trans-shipment controls and by providing for the
physical protection of sensitive materials within their
borders. The desirability of taking these steps is self-
evident, we hope.

We have been careful to make clear that this draft
resolution is in no way meant to undermine, undercut
or otherwise weaken the existing treaties and regimes,
and there is specific language in the draft resolution to
that effect. The draft resolution is placed under Chapter
VII in order to send the important political message of
the seriousness with which the Council views the threat
to international peace and security. It also is placed
under Chapter VII because the Council is acting under
that Chapter and levying binding requirements.
However, the draft resolution is not about enforcement.

As others have noted, the text of the draft
resolution has been revised and the current text is dated
15 April. Revisions to the original text introduced by
the sponsors reflect the useful discussion we have had
in the Council and the many informal exchanges the
sponsors have had with the wider United Nations
membership. The text has been improved by the
opinions and ideas that have been shared with us. For
example, the revised text includes the recognition of
the importance of disarmament obligations. While
preserving language that makes clear the fact that the
draft resolution is not meant to undermine or be at
cross-purposes with existing treaties and regimes, the
revised text also makes clear that Member States not
parties to treaties or regimes will not be forced,
through this draft resolution, to adopt them. Language
on the usefulness of peaceful dialogues has also been
made more prominent.

While discussion on a follow-up mechanism
continues, I would note that the follow-up committee
will establish its own programme of work upon its
creation, and that this is standard practice for Security
Council committees. As is also standard practice, it
will be composed of all members and operate under
COHSGHSUS.

I would also call attention to the language in
operative paragraphs 4 and 5 of the draft resolution.
Both of these paragraphs have been included in the
draft resolution to make clear that Member States who
find they would like assistance in implementing this
draft resolution may voluntarily request it. To be clear,
we are not expecting that Member States will
necessarily be able to report the complete
implementation of the resolution when they report to
the committee.

In conclusion, the United States and the sponsors
welcome the views that we are hearing and those that
we will hear later on today. This is an important issue,
and we value this discussion as part of our ongoing
consultations.

