Mr. Makayat-Safouesse (Congo) (spoke in French): I would also like to associate myself with the
thanks addressed to Mr. Joachim Rucker for his
briefing. At the same time, I would like to assure him
of the support of my delegation in the exercise of his
new duties as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). His
commitment and his experience of working within
UNMIK reinforce our feeling that his new mission will
be successful, at a time when negotiations on the
definition of the future status of Kosovo are entering
into a critical phase.

The briefing we have just heard, in addition to the
dense report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/707),
gives us a better picture of the developments in the
field.

The presence here of Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic,
the President of the Coordination Centre for Kosovo of
the Republic of Serbia, also gave us valuable testimony
concerning the realities of the situation on the ground,
which my delegation greatly appreciates.

We share the analysis of the Secretary-General
with regard to progress made. We welcome that
progress, as it seems to reflect the response that we all
were expecting with regard to the Council's repeatedly
expressed concerns with regard to the lack of progress
in standards implementation.

Three months after our last meeting on the
situation in Kosovo, the Council's appeal for effective
implementation of standards increasingly seems to
have been heeded. The report of the Secretary-General
shows that, despite some challenges that remain, the
Kosovo authorities, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Agim Ceku, have shown great commitment in
that area. Whether it concerns the implementation of
the 13 priorities defined last June by the Contact
Group, or security - although that is still fragile - or
education, transportation, the return of refugees or
minority rights, we must say that during the reporting
period, more than before, a real effort was made to
seek solutions to specific problems encountered by the
various communities.

Those efforts must, of course, be continued. That
is why we call upon all of Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to continue to take the
necessary steps to make the needed improvements on
the ground that are conducive to the sustainable
settlement of the situation. Those improvements are
particularly essential with regard to national
reconciliation, reconciliation among the various
populations regarding security, respect for the cultural
and religious heritage of Kosovo and the establishment
of constructive and trusting relations among the
minorities.

We also appeal to the Belgrade authorities to
promote better participation of Kosovo Serbs in the
Provisional Institutions. We believe that the
harmonious functioning of the Institutions, including
the participation of everyone, is the only guarantee for
the effective implementation of standards. Everyone
has stressed the importance and the impact of that in
the final settlement of the question of Kosovo.

My delegation renews its conviction that building
a multi-ethnic democratic society serving the interest
of all communities offers the best conditions for a
lasting solution and for the stability of the region.
Congo therefore attaches great importance to the
implementation of those benchmarks. We think they
are decisive for the better ownership by the Kosovo
people of their future. Whatever the future orientation,
it will help to improve the daily lives of everyone and
to introduce the prospect of Kosovo being integrated
into Europe.

Of course the international community will
continue to fully support the political process here, but
it still remains that it is primarily up to the two parties
to demonstrate the necessary political will, which is the
only way to promote a final and lasting solution to this
conflict that has gone on for far too long. We therefore
hope that the parties will move along those lines, in
this decisive phase, which is being guided by
Mr. Martti Ahtisaari.

