Ms. Siider (Sweden): Madam President, I wish
to thank you for having convened today's briefing on
Afghanistan, with a necessary focus, on International
Women's Day, on women and peace and security.

The correlation between gender equality and
peaceful societies is clear. Afghanistan will not achieve
the peace and development that its people so strongly
desire without unleashing and embracing the agency of
Afghan women.

I align myself with the statement to be made later
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his comprehensive briefing and to express
appreciation for the very important interventions by
Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi.

Sweden is a long-term donor to Afghanistan. We
were a participant in the Resolute Support Mission,
and we follow developments very closely. Today I will
dedicate my intervention to women's issues. That does
not mean that the other aspects of the very difficult
situation in Afghanistan are forgotten.

While there have been genuine improvements in
women's enjoyment of their human rights over the past
15 years, more is needed, as Afghan women continue to
seek to play their role in society. This is a particularly
critical moment for women's participation in shaping
the future of Afghanistan.

As the country prepares for elections in 2018 and
2019, we expect the Government and the electoral
management bodies to take all steps necessary to
develop and implement gender-sensitive security and
election plans, so as to enable an environment in which
both women and men can safely run for elected office,
campaign freely and vote, not least in remote and
rural districts.

Let me commend the Government's continued
efforts to realize its vision for peace. This is essential
given that, as we have heard, violence by terrorist
groups must be stopped, and the solution to the conflict
can only be political. We commend the hosting of the
second meeting of the Kabul Process last week. During
the meeting, the Government presented a constructive
road map for peace. We call on the Taliban to engage
in a dialogue on the road map. In order to ensure the
legitimacy of the peace process, it must be inclusive
and uphold all of the achievements made over the past
decades. Regional actors are expected to make their
contribution to the peace endeavours. This is decisive
in the fight against terrorism and in breaking the
vicious circle.

In each of our Council meetings, we must reflect
on how the women and peace and security agenda
translates into real change. We must build on the
knowledge that the slogan "more women, more peace"
is certainly true. On the basis of the principles of our
feminist foreign policy, we want to highlight the "four
R's": rights, representation, resources and a reality
check. I would like to briefly highlight four areas in
which increased efforts could make a real difference
for Afghan women.

First, it is about safe access to health care
and education.

Secondly, it is about investing in women, not least
in the national action plan on women and peace and
security, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).

Thirdly, violence against Afghan women and girls
is a grave violation of their human rights and must
be ended. In this regard, Sweden supports Women
for Afghan Women, which works to fight gender-
based violence with shelters, family counselling
and mediation.

F ourthly, women should be present across the whole
of Afghan society. We are encouraged by the improved
gender equality in business, civil society, the civil
service, the judiciary, the police and the army. Women
should never have to fear making their contribution
to society.

Today's briefers, Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi, have
devoted much of their professional lives to women's
participation. They have demonstrated that Afghanistan
does not lack strong female leaders; yet they are not
often enough at the table when decisions about peace
and security are being made. Sweden will continue
our dialogue and mediation training of local female
actors to build their capacity to lead in local peace and
reconciliation efforts.
Let me commend the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as penholder, on today's adoption of resolution 2405
(2018) and for the constructive manner in which
it conducted the negotiations. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays
a critical role in support of national efforts towards a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process. This is also true of women's
roles and for the national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000).

The Council now need to back up and support
UNAMA as it carries out its work at this critical time.
The renewed mandate must now also be backed up with
adequate and sustainable resources in order for the
Mission to fulfil its mandate.

After years of conflict and violence, Afghanistan
has reached yet another milestone. Elections are around
the corner, and the outlines of a path to peace are on
the table.

The potential for peace must be fully realized with
the meaningful participation of Afghan women.

