Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's successful presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February and on the relevance of the
chosen theme, "Reflect on history, reaffirm the strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations". It was a wise proposal
on your part, Sir, to invite Member States to reflect
upon history, because only history, with a little bit of
perspective and objectivity, can enable us to draw the
right lessons.

After two devastating and deadly World Wars,
which rocked the history of humankind in the twentieth
century, the founding fathers, with their experience of
this tragic chapter in our history, saw the future and
thus drafted the Charter of the United Nations and
signed it in San Francisco on 26 June 1945.

The goal is to maintain international peace and

security, ensure development and promote human
rights. These three principles must be translated into
reality through the adoption of a comprehensive, cross-
cutting approach based on the rule of law in all aspects
ofinternational relations, especially through respect for
the United Nations Charter; the peaceful settlement of
disputes, including through referral to the International
Court of Justice; respect for the sovereignty of States,
their national unity and territorial integrity; and
non-interference in their internal affairs. This was
reiterated in the declaration of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, adopted by the General
Assembly in September 2012, in which Member States
reaffirmed, inter alia, their respect for international
law and the provisions of the United Nations Charter.

Committed to the purposes and principles set out
in the Charter, the Kingdom of Morocco joined the
United Nations on 12 November 1956 and has since
been an active member of the international community
and a staunch defender of the purposes and principles
of the Charter, which have become the backbone of its
foreign policy and activities at the international level.
The Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations regarding the
peaceful settlement of disputes outlined in Chapter VI
and firmly supports the continued role played by the
United Nations as a universal Organization charged
with resolving and handing down decisions on matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, the promotion of human rights and sustainable
development.

The peaceful settlement of disputes remains one
of the fundamental pillars of the work of the United
Nations and one of its main objectives. That is why my
country firmly supports all efforts to consolidate the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

The Kingdom readily participates in efforts at
reconciliation and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as reflected in the mediation efforts by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI in resolving the crisis in the Mano
River region. Furthermore, tireless efforts have been
made by the Kingdom to stem crises in Africa and
elsewhere. As early as 1960, Morocco participated in
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security, including through its participation in
peacekeeping operations in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and Mali, as well
as NATO operations and those of the European Union
mandated by the Security Council.

Moreover, since joining the United Nations and
during its three terms as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, most recently in 2012-2013,
Morocco has consistently upheld the purposes and
principles of the Charter and worked for African causes.
Morocco currently chairs the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Similarly, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter IX of the Charter, in addition to socioeconomic
policies and the implementation of the national initiative
for human development in 2005, aimed at raising the
standard of living of its population, the Kingdom has
shored up its relations with developing countries in the
framework of South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation, exchanging expertise and knowledge, in
particular with our African brothers.

In addition, the Kingdom of Morocco, in its
ongoing efforts to promote human rights and in the
new Constitution adopted by referendum in July
2011, emphasizes respect for human rights as globally
recognized, making the space for civil liberties broader
and recognizing the cultural diversity of the Kingdom.
Morocco was a founding member of the Human Rights
Council, created by the General Assembly in 2006, and
is currently discharging its second three-year mandate
following its election in 2013.

The marking in June of the seventieth anniversary
of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations is
also an opportunity to take stock and to reflect upon
the most effective means to revitalize the work of the
United Nations while also respecting the purposes and
principles of the Charter. While progress has been
made, much remains to be done so as to tackle the new
challenges brought about by new changes in the world,
including globalization, the socioeconomic impacts
of the global financial and economic crisis, climate
change, growing conflicts and, especially, the scourge
of terrorism.

As was well summarized by the late Dag
Hammarskjold, the second Secretary-General of the
United Nations, "The UN was not created to take
mankind to heaven, but to save humanity from hell".
Today we must act together, urgently, so as to avoid
hell. The fight against terrorism must be the top priority
of the international community. Terrorism spreads like
fire, threatening ever more international peace and
security, development and human rights. No country
is spared the terrorist threat. Atrocities, killings and
violations of the most basic rights, especially the right
to life, by terrorists, including Daesh, Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida and their affiliates, should encourage us to
pool our efforts better so as to better combat terrorism.

My country reiterates its condemnation of terrorism
in the strongest terms, emphasizing that it should never
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. The response to this scourge and others
should not be limited to the security aspect but must
concern aspirations to a dignified life by guaranteeing
the right to work, health and equal opportunity.
These aspirations can be achieved only through good
governance, the promotion of the rule of law, access to
justice and respect for human rights.

It is also imperative to collectively and effectively
combat, in a coordinated manner, all forms of extremism,
hatred and xenophobia, provocation or undermining of
the faith or sensitivities of others, regardless of motives
or manifestations.

Finally, it is up to us all, Member States, to provide
the necessary means and to reaffirm the political will to
support our Organization and reform its structures and
its means of intervention, so as to make it an effective
tool to achieve peace, security and cooperation, and
to ensure the necessary dissemination of the values of
tolerance and coexistence for all of humankind.

