Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to welcome
Mr. Jessen-Petersen to the Security Council and to
thank him for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General and for updating the Council on the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). Pakistan will continue to offer its
fullest support to Mr. Jessen-Petersen in his efforts to
establish a multi-ethnic, tolerant, democratic and
peaceful society in Kosovo. We would also like to
acknowledge the presence of Mr. Covie in the Security
Council today.

According to paragraph 3 of the Secretary-
General's report, Kosovo is "getting back on track in
regard to fulfilling the standards". The report describes
tangible and encouraging progress in some areas
towards meeting the standards since the March riots,
even though that progress has been uneven and limited.
One of the most positive developments in the process
of stabilization and normalization in Kosovo has been
the elections for the Kosovo Assembly, held in
October. We welcome the positive outcome of those
elections, but regret the fact that the Kosovo Serbs did
not participate in them.

We support all efforts aimed at reaching out to
the Kosovo Serbs, involving them in the Kosovo
Assembly and working with them to create the
conditions for normal life in Kosovo. In that regard, it
is imperative that the parallel structures should be
dismantled. At the same time, it is equally important to
address key concerns of the Kosovo Serbs and of other
minorities. Key among them are their security and
freedom of movement and the sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

Also key to success in Kosovo is economic
development. We fully subscribe to the view, as
contained in the Secretary-General's report, that such
development is necessary, not only to improve general
social and economic conditions, but specifically to
improve security and stability. While UNMIK's quick-
impact projects are certainly helpful, the real solution
lies in mid- and long-term economic assistance and
investment. We continue to encourage international
donors - especially European support - in those
areas.

Also of great importance is the need to resume
and regularize the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, not only to facilitate the implementation of the
standards, but also to promote confidence-building
between the two sides. A sustained and meaningful
dialogue of that nature is, we believe, key to the
prospects of peace in the region.

In our view, the progress made on the standards
issue, although commendable, is still fragile. It will
remain fragile unless and until a more pressing issue -
Kosovo's status - is also addressed. While we agree
with paragraph 17 of the Secretary-General's report
that "progress against standards translates into tangible
and sustained change in Kosovo that concretely
benefits all of its population", we believe that real
progress in Kosovo will remain elusive unless its final
status is also resolved. Therefore, we will continue to
urge the adoption of a status-with-standards approach.
Such an approach would simultaneously aim at the
implementation of standards in Kosovo and seek to
clarify Kosovo's status issue, including by finding
ways in which to promote self-determination for all
Kosovars while seeking to uphold the rights and
interests of its minorities. That, in our view, is the best
course, essential to create hope for peace and stability
and to end the legacy of war in the region.

