Mr. N obilo (Croatia): Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of November and to express our gratitude for your
understanding and cooperation regarding the
circumstances related to one of the draft resolutions
before us.

I should also like to extend my congratulations to
the delegation of Nigeria for the exemplary way in which
it guided the work of the Council during the month of
October.

Croatia warmly welcomes the Dayton accords that
were initialled yesterday. They become valid pending
expected mutual recognition among all successor States of
the former Yugoslavia next month. We firmly believe that
with these accords, and imminent mutual recognition, we
have overcome the biggest policy obstacle to a lasting and
just peace in the region once and for all. All of this was

 

achieved because the Council' s sanctions regime against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
fulfilled its intentions, because the joint Croatian/Bosnian
offensives and later the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) intervention created new realities on the ground,
and thereafter, because of the new leadership role assumed
by the United States.

My Government has always called for a peaceful and
negotiated settlement of this kind for the region as a whole.
In fact, we have for years argued that NATO is the only
institution that can impose peace in the region and provide
a lasting and stable environment that will render
belligerence expendable and reconciliation and economic
reconstruction profitable. Thanks to the leadership of the
United States and the efforts of the European Union and the
Russian Federation, we have now finally been able to
achieve both a negotiated settlement and an implementation
force that promises stability but also envisages remedies for
the horrible crimes of a sort recorded only during the
darkest days of history.

The Dayton accords were a compromise for all parties,
but we firmly believe that Croatia made the largest
compromise. We have foregone two days of war for one
year of patience. The Dayton accords have offered us many
promises and commitments. We believe that they were
made with the parties' full intention of carrying them out.
About 125,000 non-Serb Croatian citizens, who have been
"ethnically cleansed" in a most brutal way in the occupied
Vukovar region since 1991, would never forgive us if they
were still displaced or refugees one year from now - if
those commitments had been made in vain.
Croatia's compromises for peace, when it clearly could
have chosen another option, demonstrate once more its
long-standing commitment to a policy based on peaceful
resolution of the conflict. Almost four years of utmost
patience under less than promising circumstances, prior to
our recent short but credible appliance of force, also
demonstrate our commitment to peace.

I must also add that precisely these short but credible
actions by Croatia made the Dayton accords possible. Who
can dispute the fact that only four months ago the Bihac
safe area was on the verge of being overrun, that Europe
was about to be faced with another 200,000 Bosnian
refugees, and that the moral conscience of the world was
about to be shaken by a possible repeat of the Srebrenica
massacre in Bihac? The balance of power established by
the Croatian Army should secure peace and stability in the
region for a long time to come, but only if NATO and the
international community now fulfil their promises and
commitments to both Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
Croatia. The problems in both countries will need to be
addressed with the same instruments and with equal
vigour. The occupied Vukovar region of Croatia should
be no more and no less important than the occupied parts
in Bosnia if we are to have just and lasting peace in the
region.

Furthermore, often unprecedented scrutiny and
outlandish criticisms of Croatia, especially by some
delegations in this Chamber, should come to an end.
Clearly, over the past four years Croatia has played a
substantially constructive role in the region. It has
provided solutions - not problems. For instance, its
strategic and humanitarian assistance to the politically
supported but effectively abandoned Bosnian Muslim
community, has regrettably never been acknowledged by
this Chamber.

My Government supports the draft resolutions now
before us. It hopes that the draft resolution on sanctions
relief will send a message to the Serbian people that the
world is not against them, as they have been told by their
leaders. The sanctions regime was a just and necessary
mechanism to have those leaders accept responsibility for
the ills they brought upon other people and their own
ethnic kin in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Regarding paragraphs 5 and 6 of that draft resolution, it
is Croatia's understanding that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) would be prevented
from transferring and using common funds of all
successor States of the dissolved Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia until an agreement on succession
and distribution of common assets has been reached
among all successor States and approved by the Council.
Any unfreezing and misuse of funds by Governments and
international financial institutions could potentially nullify
the succession negotiations, and worst of all, the whole
peace process. The best way to eliminate this risk is for
the Council to act immediately and endorse the existing
succession and asset distribution agreement proposed by
the European Union and the Russian Federation.

Further, Croatia hopes that the draft resolution lifting
the embargo will achieve its goal of maintaining a
balance of power in the region, and not become a source
of new instability. In that regard, Croatia calls for prudent
use of the draft resolution, within a broader framework of
collective security arrangements in Europe.

 

My delegation especially welcomes the imminent
adoption of the third draft resolution related to the Dayton
accords - the draft resolution that endorses the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, and reaffirms that these areas are integral
parts of Croatia. The Basic Agreement was among the first
accords achieved in Dayton, and set the pace for the later
accords that completed the so-called package arrangement
for the region as a whole.

That resolution is needed to establish the necessary
technical framework for defining the new implementation
force for Croatia. The force should be established as
quickly as possible. It should have an active mandate under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, with clearly
defined military and civilian roles, as called for in the Erdut
Basic Agreement and the preceding Erdut Principles. The
Council has both of these documents at its disposal, and
can consult both as it begins its consideration of the issue.
The two documents, both of which are equally valid, will
eliminate any misunderstandings or lack of information. We
emphasize this point, given the discussion and the questions
brought up by the members of the Council following the
briefing last Friday by the Co-Chairman of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY), Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg. The Basic
Agreement did not need to be more specific when the Erdut
Principles were so clear. For example, the Erdut Principles
leave no ambiguities about the structure of the transitional
authority and the new police force. They eliminate the legal
and security vacuum in the occupied Vukovar region by
reinstating Croatian law, social and utility services, and
border controls throughout the region. They call for the
timely return of all displaced persons and refugees to their
homes prior to local elections in the region. They require
that the region must be demilitarized in 30 days. The only
missing elements that still need to be decided upon are
related to the economic reconstruction package for the
region, especially the demolished city of Vukovar, and the
division of responsibility between the military and civilian
components of the new transitional implementation
mechanism.

In this regard, we must keep in mind that the mandate
of the United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia (UNCRO) expires in nine days. My Government
has made it clear that UNCRO's mandate cannot be
extended, not because we do not trust the United Nations,
but because the Organization could not fulfil its two
mandates while operating under Chapter VI of the Charter.
The situation in Croatia requires a Chapter VII mandate
that can only be realized through regional arrangements.

While the present UNCRO mandate will end on 30
November, existing UNCRO resources can remain in
Croatia as a nucleus for the new implementation force.
The Belgian and Russian battalions could be quickly
reinforced by the United States battalion, so that the most
important element of the Basic Agreement, the
demilitarization of the region, can commence
immediately.

My Government is of the view that a large and
expensive force is not needed. Rather, what is needed is
a proactive and robust force that can implement the
demilitarization requirements immediately, and quickly
turn over the remaining elements of the mandate to the
civilian administration. We look forward to continuing
United States leadership in this regard, not only because
the United States is trusted by both sides in the region,
but also because of its commitment to utilize all elements
of the peace process, including the credible threat and use
of force. Following demilitarization, the emphasis should
be on the role of the civilian sector in the reconstruction
and confidence-building aspects. Again, this part of the
mandate will require not a large force but a reasonable
number of specialists and non-military professionals. My
Government also supports the appointment of a United
States national to lead the civilian part of the mandate as
head of the Transitional Administration.

Finally, the new implementation force and the
Transitional Administration cannot overlook still-relevant
elements and the spirit of previous Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, operative paragraph 12 of
resolution 820 (1993) in particular. I should like to
remind the Council that that paragraph is not related to
the sanctions regime imposed on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and now suspended.
That paragraph simply supports the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Croatia by allowing the Croatian
Government to regulate all export, import and
transshipment activity through its territory, and therefore
it remains valid.
Needless to say, my Government will expect the
Council, and thus the implementation force and
Transitional Administration, to respect this important
element of sovereignty granted to all Member States by
the Charter. Moreover, we are of the strong View that this
element should be reflected in no ambiguous terms in
future documents and resolutions on this issue.

