Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate the Federal Republic of
Nigeria on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and we welcome this open debate
under its leadership. We also welcome the opportunity
to participate and share our views in this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, with
particular reference to the Middle East peace process.

I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
for his briefing to the Council today.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

On countless occasions, we have met in the Security
Council Chamber to lament the fact that the deadlines
set for the peace negotiations have not ushered positive
ways forward with regard to the Middle East peace
process. We regret that despite efforts of the United
States over the past nine months, we see, instead of
progress, regression with the talks frozen indefinitely.
The stakes are high for both the Palestinians and
the Israelis, and the suspension of the talks will not
contribute to the achievement of a two-State solution,
in which we all envision a State of Palestine, living side
by side in security with Israel. South Africa is deeply
concerned by the latest setbacks in the Middle East
peace process.

In addition to the suspended talks, obstacles
created by the illegal occupation of Palestine remain.
South Africa reiterates its position that the solution
envisioned by the Oslo Accords is being taken apart
piecemeal with every new settlement that is announced.
Not only are the settlements illegal under international
law, but they also remain a major stumbling block to
the achievement of sustainable peace. Essentially, the
Israeli settlement activities are confiscating Palestinian
territory that is important for a future State, and at the
same time they are aimed at isolating East Jerusalem
from other main Palestinian Cities.

South Africa welcomes the unity agreement between
the Palestine Liberation Organization and Hamas as a
positive step. We have long argued that the division
between the two main Palestinian parties has weakened
Palestine's ability to negotiate a fair dispensation. More
importantly, that unity will strengthen the Palestinian
State and service delivery to its people through the
establishment of a united Palestinian Government
within weeks. We also welcome the announcement
that elections will be held in Palestine in six months.
In our view, a unified Palestinian voice will contribute
significantly to the realization of a two-State solution.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council
to fully exercise its functions under the Charter of
the United Nations. With regard to the Palestinian
question, we express our firm belief that the Council
should provide sustained support to the peace process
and work towards its full and satisfactory completion.
We have yet another failure to achieve peace behind
that. Perhaps the time has come for us to be much
more creative in our endeavours to find a lasting and
peaceful solution.

South Africa continues to believe in the right of the
self-determination of the people of Palestine. We remain
unshaken in our belief that the two-State solution, with
East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State,
remains the viable option for durable and lasting peace.
The delicate process of negotiations between Israel and
Palestine requires trust, and trust is earned by action,
not by mere words.

