Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to extend to you, Mr.
President, my delegation's congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish you every success in carrying
out your task. I would also like to take this opportunity
to convey our appreciation to the Ambassador of
Bulgaria for his remarkable conduct of the Council's
proceedings during the month of September.

The Council is meeting today to consider the
issue of Iraq's implementation of international
resolutions. This meeting has great importance for both
the security and stability of the countries and peoples
of the region and for international peace and security.
This fact is borne out by the enormous number of
delegations that have requested to speak in this debate
to express their keen interest with regard to
implementing international law and avoiding any steps
that could aggravate the situation or threaten peace and
stability in the region.

There is no doubt about the need to respect
international law and, in particular, the resolutions of
the Security Council, which is the body with the
primary and important responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
conviction stems from the fact that when the Security
Council adopts resolutions it does so on our behalf, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and in line with the provisions of
Article 24 of the Charter. It is on that basis that the
Council's resolutions enjoy the support of the
international community and, hence, the necessary
conditions for their implementation.

With regard to Iraq, the resolutions adopted by
the Council since 1990 have made clear the obligations
that must be met by that nation before the sanctions
imposed on it are lifted. Despite difficulties and
obstacles during the last 10 years, Iraq has in fact
cooperated with the United Nations and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
implement the provisions of the relevant international
resolutions. The good offices of the Secretary-General
have made it possible to convince the Iraqi authorities
to agree to the return of inspectors. That willingness
was reaffirmed in Iraq's letter of 16 September 2002 to
the Secretary-General. In that letter, Iraq expressed its
readiness to receive inspectors and to discuss the
necessary arrangements for the prompt discharge of
their tasks. Meetings were subsequently held at
Vienna- on 30 September and I October 2002 -
between Mr. Blix and the Iraqi side, during which the
Iraqi side reaffirmed its resolve to cooperate with
international inspectors and to allow them to carry out
their tasks without conditions or restrictions. The
briefing made to the Council by Mr. Blix on 3 October
included references to the points agreed between Iraq,
the United Nations and the IAEA. It has been agreed
that those points would be referred to as the rules of the
game. This has given the impression that most of the
difficulties that have impeded the work of inspectors
will be overcome.

The founding fathers of the Organization
established the common defence system provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. That system was designed
in a way that makes resorting to the use of force the
very last means available to the Security Council, after
all other means have been exhausted. Foremost among
those means is the use of economic sanctions to bring a
State to implement the Council's resolutions. The
objective of sanctions is therefore to persuade the
country concerned of the need to comply with
international law and to avoid the use of force.
Avoiding the use of force is central to both the role and
the responsibilities of the United Nations, especially of
the Security Council.

On that basis, and given the fact that Iraq has
agreed to accept the prompt and unconditional return of
inspectors, the Security Council must now consider
whether the resolutions it has thus far adopted are
sufficient to enable inspectors to carry out their
functions without impediment, or whether it should
adopt a new resolution. Whatever the situation may be,
our interest in showing respect for international legality
and the provisions of the United Nations Charter makes
it incumbent upon us to give an opportunity to the
inspectors to return to discharge their task and await
the report that will be presented by Mr. Blix before
taking any other measure.

The peace and security of the States and peoples
of the Middle East makes it necessary for all those
countries, without exception, and I repeat without
exception, to respect international law and to comply
with all relevant United Nations resolutions. It must be
recalled here, that the resolutions of the Arab Summit
in Beirut have consolidated the reconciliation between
Iraq and Kuwait. They reaffirmed the need to respect
the independence and sovereignty of Iraq, and the need
for it to cooperate in order to finally close the file of
Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing persons. They
also affirmed the need to avoid any need for military
action against Iraq.

In order to ensure the security and stability of the
Middle East, the region must be made into a zone free
from nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. In this regard, I must reiterate the
consistent support of the Kingdom of Morocco for
declaring the Middle East a zone free from those
weapons in order to ensure the security and well-being
of all peoples of the region.

We cannot ignore or gloss over the humanitarian
aspect of the situation in Iraq because those who suffer
ultimately are the Iraqi people. We must not forget the
tragedy that the brotherly people of Iraq have lived
through for the past 10 years. Large numbers of
children continue to die as a result of malnutrition and
disease, while others are denied their right to
education. As for adults, the pitiful financial situation
impels them to sell their personal effects, a common
sight on the streets of Baghdad, in order to provide for
their families and loved ones.

Taking into account this critical situation in
which the Iraqi society finds itself, the Security
Council must help Iraq overcome this crisis and
authorize the resumption of weapons inspections in
accordance with United Nations resolutions; the
objective is to enable the Iraqi people to return to a
normal stable life.

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that the Security
Council, as the custodian of international legality and
of the credibility of the Organization, will arrive at a
common vision and agree to the arrangements for the
return of the inspectors to discharge their task. That
would give new hope to the peoples of the region and
of the whole world, thus avoiding the scourge of
another war; for if it were to take place, it would have
dire consequences on the stability of a large number of
States.

