Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
China for convening this important debate at a crucial
moment. In addition, we would like to thank Secretary-
General Guterres and Commissioner Sma'il Chergui for
their informative briefings.

As the concept note (S/2018/1004, annex) states,
the African Union (AU) remains an important partner
for United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa.
We fully agree, and therefore hope that today's debate
will serve as another step towards strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and AU in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union (EU). The
EU's contribution to peace and security in Africa is
considerable, both in peace operations and in support
for the African Union.

I will focus on three aspects of strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU: first, enhancing the partnership; secondly,
enhancing collaboration between troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and other partners; and, thirdly,
financing for AU peace support operations.

With regard to my first point - enhancing the
AU-United Nations strategic partnership - AU
and United Nations peacekeeping operations have
the potential to be mutually reinforcing. A strong
partnership enables the United Nations and the AU
to respond more swiftly and decisively to addressing
challenges to peace and security in Africa. The AU's
ability to act as a first responder and move in quickly
should be facilitated as much as possible. We attach
great value to partnerships as an essential element
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Closer
collaboration between the AU and the United Nations,
as enshrined in resolution 2320 (2016), is therefore
essential. In order to enhance the partnership, we
encourage joint AU-United Nations analysis, planning
and decision-making, and that includes the increased
issuance of joint statements. By sharing and jointly
developing early-warning information and analysis,
we can reach a common understanding of emerging
conflicts. Through consultative decision-making, we
can develop collaborative approaches to effectively
responding to conflicts.

Concerning my second point, the strength of both
United Nations and AU peace support operations is
dependent on troop-contributing countries, and we
pay tribute to the countries that contribute troops and
police. We just mourned this past week the deaths of
six peacekeepers from Malawi and one from Tanzania,
who paid the ultimate price in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We welcome their efforts and honour
their sacrifice.

We need well-trained and equipped peacekeepers
who are able and willing to act quickly when citizens,
troops or the mission is at risk. The Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative is an opportunity to
enhance collaboration between TCCs and partners on
peacekeeping performance, as stressed in resolution
2436 (2018). For peacekeeping to be effective, troops
must meet the highest standards. In that regard, we
welcome the close collaboration with Cote d'Ivoire and
Ethiopia in the lead-up to the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments. We continue to
work with Cote d'Ivoire on a draft resolution that will
provide follow-up to the Declaration by improving
peacekeeping mandates. We are also working
with Cote d'Ivoire on a draft resolution focusing
on peace, justice and corrections in the context of
peacekeeping operations.

Additionally, we express our appreciation for our
collaboration with Rwanda on the Kigali Principles and
for the peacekeeping preparatory conference to be held
at The Hague in January 2019. We also welcome the
ongoing collaboration with Ghana, Zambia, Senegal
and South Africa on the Elsie Initiative on Women
in Peace Operations, which focuses on strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping operations - an
important issue mentioned earlier by the Secretary-
General. We encourage other TCCs to join us in
that endeavour. We still have much to accomplish
with regard to performance in peacekeeping, and an
enhanced AU-United Nations partnership will help
achieve that. Strengthening the AU-United Nations
partnership should also lead to enhanced dialogue
and clearer standards with regard to the performance
of peacekeepers.

Concerning my third point - the need for
predictable and sustainable financing for the African
Union - the AU's role in peace operations in Africa is
essential, as resolution 2320 (2016) clearly states. We all
therefore need to invest in the AU's capacities, and we
should agree on a different mode of financing between
the United Nations and the African Union. Sustainable,
predictable and flexible financing is needed to enhance
the effectiveness of AU peacekeeping. We should also
agree on compliance with relevant agreed standards
on international humanitarian law, human rights and
strategic and financial oversight. We encourage the
continued drafting and implementation of a robust
and comprehensive compliance framework in that
context by the African Union in collaboration with the
United Nations.

In conclusion, we need to make progress in the
following areas: first, implementing resolution 2320
(2016); secondly, enhancing peacekeeping performance
through dialogue with TCCs and police-contributing
countries; and, thirdly, ensuring the necessary
conditions for predictable and sustainable financing for
the African Union. The African Union will continue to
find a partner in the Kingdom of the Netherlands with
regard to efforts to strengthen the strategic partnership
on peace and security. We count on the engagement
and the support of the Council in connection with the
two draft resolutions that we are currently working on
together with Cote d'Ivoire, concerning the Action for
Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments and
peace, justice and corrections. Let me reiterate our
most heartfelt thanks to the Secretary-General for his
leadership, and to both him and AU Commissioner for
their efforts.

