Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note of the report
by Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and we are grateful for his
informative briefing and those of the other briefers,
which were also helpful.

We are concerned about the rapid deterioration in
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is sad that during the past year alone,
according to United Nations estimates, we have seen
the number of people in need of humanitarian aid grow
by 50 per cent, while the cost of the humanitarian
response plan for the country has almost doubled. We
agree with the view that the reasons for the worsening
humanitarian situation lie in the continuing inter-ethnic
clashes and the activities of armed groups in the northern
and eastern regions of the country. The situation with
regard to food security, sanitation and epidemics is
particularly worrying. A new wave of refugees will
have negative humanitarian consequences both for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's neighbours, many
of which are already dealing with acute humanitarian
crises, and the Great Lakes region as a whole.

These developments pose new challenges for the
humanitarian community that it is unlikely to be able
to cope with, considering the current funding available
for humanitarian assistance. It will be essential for
donors to step up their support for United Nations
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours. For its part, Russia will continue to
support such efforts. In particular, we are taking steps
to relieve African countries' long-term debt. To date,
we have written off more than $20 billion of underlying
debt within the framework of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Country Initiative, as well as implementing debt-
for-development swaps. We consistently contribute to
international assistance programmes for Africa through
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
World Health Organization, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the International Civil Defence
Organization, and we also provide aid to the health
sector. We were one of the first countries to respond to
the Ebola epidemic, contributing more than $60 million
to combating it.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to those neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo who have been helping
Congolese refugees. We will continue to provide them
with appropriate assistance. Last year Russia sent
dozens of KAMAZ trucks to Uganda for use in United
Nations humanitarian operations there, and we plan to
transfer additional transport units for use in Uganda to
the WFP this year as well.

With regard to the country's overall situation,
we hope that ensuring that the presidential elections
scheduled for 23 December are held on time will help
to reduce tensions in Congolese society. We call on the
opposition forces to cooperate more actively with the
Independent National Electoral Commission, recognize
its proposed election dates and to refrain from any acts
of violence. We are opposed to any efforts to mentor or
impose recipes on Kinshasa regarding election issues.
Nor should MONUSCO's role go beyond providing
technical and logistical assistance to the national
authorities in organizing and conducting the elections.

The primary responsibility for normalizing the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
belongs to its citizens themselves, and respect for the
country's sovereignty is an absolute imperative. We
again urge the Blue Helmets to act in accordance with
the basic principles of peacebuilding and not to permit
any interference in Kinshasa's internal affairs. Any
situation in which MONUSCO supports a particular
Congolese party is to be avoided at all costs. We
assume that the Mission's main function is to stabilize
the security situation, which in itself would also help
to improve humanitarian access. In that connection,
we would like to draw the Council's attention to the
renewed activity of illegal armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where civilians,
Government security forces and peacekeepers are
being systematically attacked. We are also concerned
about the reports that after years of quiet, inter-tribal
conflicts in the north-east of the country have broken
out again. Needless to say, we were all concerned about
the series of rebel attacks on peacekeepers at the end
of last year. All of those factors should be taken into
account during the work on the new mandate for the
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We see no justification for the proposals in the
Secretary-General's report on the results of the strategic
review (S/2017/826) for reducing MONUSCO's
implementation of its stabilization efforts and its
cooperation with Kinshasa in support of the camps
for ex-combatants. It will be impossible to ensure
long-term solutions to the problem of armed groups
without restoring State authority in the eastern part of
the country and resolving the issue of the repatriation
of former combatants. The implementation of the
protection through projection concept endorsed by the
Secretariat will hardly help to strengthen the security
of civilians or ensure humanitarian access.

At this meeting, we would also like to take the
opportunity to raise the issue of the working methods
ofthe Council. As the discussion has shown, it is hardly
worthwhile to discuss the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo separately from
the military and political context. We would draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that many of the
ideas proposed by participants at today's meeting were
also heard at the meeting on 7 March (see S/PV.8198).
In that regard, we believe that it is important to prevent
briefings that largely overlap in order not to reduce the
effectiveness of the Council's work.

