My delegation would like to express its gratitude to you for convening this meeting. We would also like to thank the briefers, Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, and Mr. Edmund Yakani, human rights and peace activist for their comprehensive and useful briefings on the developments in South Sudan. We commend Mr. Shearer, Mr. Yakani and the team of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for all the work they are doing to contribute to peace and stability in South Sudan amid difficult conditions, which have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In my statement, I will focus on the political process, the humanitarian situation and the operations of UNMISS. On the political situation, South Africa would like to continue encouraging all parties to work in unison to fulfil the terms of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The current environment, brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, clearly presented a difficult dynamic for all, particularly in adapting to the pandemic itself amid the dire challenges predating it. Consequently, we urge the Government to be pragmatic and to remain steadfast in its determination to use all means necessary to fully establish the mechanisms and committees provided for in the Agreement. South Africa continues to emphasize the importance of the revitalized agreement as the only mechanism that can help create a conducive environment for constructive dialogue and the necessary democratic processes for working towards sustainable peace and development in South Sudan. We underscore that only inclusive political dialogue that incorporates women can move the country forward and ensure that the whole populace is represented. Furthermore, South Africa encourages the parties to work together to break the impasse over the allocation of state governorships. It is crucial to curb the uptick in intercommunal violence so as to not significantly undermine the progress achieved in stabilizing the security situation in South Sudan. The commitment to the cessation of hostilities enabled a lot of work and saved a significant number of lives. As the international community, we have played a pivotal role in supporting South Sudan and we should continue to do so in a unified manner, especially given the economic impact of COVID-19 and the further limited financial resources for the implementation of the revitalized agreement. For its part, South Africa will continue to play a key role in supporting the peace process in South Sudan through the mediation efforts of President Ramaphosa as Chairperson of the African Union High Level Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan, as well as Deputy President Mabuza as South A frica's Special Envoy to South Sudan. Our efforts are geared towards complementing the processes of the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. On the humanitarian situation we, like many on the Council, are concerned about the impact COVID-19 is having in the country, particularly on those living in internally displaced persons (IDP) camps. The need is far greater now than it was before. Consequently, we urge international stakeholders to continue contributing to post-conflict reconstruction and development programmes. In addition, they should support efforts to repatriate and resettle IDPs and returning refugees in South Sudan, and to rebuild their community livelihoods. Further, we urge the Government to provide the United Nations humanitarian agencies unfettered access to vulnerable areas. Lastly, on the operations of UNMISS, we would like to encourage the Government to work closely with the Mission to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic responses. UNMISS continues to be a strong pillar of support to help the Government to attain its peace and stability objectives. We appreciate the strong collaboration between UNMISS and the region, and underscore the importance of that collaboration.
