Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin for
his briefing.

In February, the United Kingdom celebrated
10 years of diplomatic relations with Kosovo. In the
same month, the European Commission adopted a
strategy for a credible enlargement perspective for
the Western Balkans. Kosovo's opportunity here
was not overlooked. Through implementation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement, Kosovo has
an opportunity to progress on its European path.

We welcome the significant milestones that Kosovo
has reached since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8176),
including the ratification of the border-demarcation
agreement with Montenegro. Good-neighbourly
relations are a key feature of any European democracy,
and crucial for stability in the wider Balkans region.
We encourage both Serbia and Kosovo to continue to
make progress towards a sustainable solution through
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. Progress is
vital for stability, security and prosperity in the region,
as well as in the two countries themselves. Provocative
acts and rhetoric from both sides are deeply unhelpful
and antagonistic.

Our priority in Kosovo remains strengthening
the rule of law, and challenges remain. We welcome
President Thaci's public commitment to upholding
Kosovo's obligations through the Specialist Chambers.
We also welcome the speedy appointment of Jack
Smith as Kosovo's Specialist Prosecutor, as well as the
continuity that provides in the Specialist Chamber's
pursuit ofjustice for victims.
We note that Prime Minister Haradinaj has
requested a review into the arrest and deportation of
Turkish nationals. As a supporter of democratic values,
Kosovo must continue to give priority to the rule of
law and respect for international human rights in all
its institutions.

The investigation into the death of Oliver Ivanovic'
is clearly ongoing. We have been clear in our expectation
that Kosovo's rule-of-law institutions will lead a
thorough and fullinvestigationto bring those responsible
to justice at the earliest opportunity. But, equally, we
expect Serbia to refrain from any provocations that
could heighten tensions and to support investigative
efforts in an open and constructive manner.

The hard work and dedication of thousands of
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has helped to bring peace
to Kosovo. The current situation is in part a result of
their work. We also recognize Kosovo's commitment
to peace, stability, reconciliation and prosperity. The
United Kingdom will continue to be a proud supporter
of Kosovo as it strives to achieve its full potential.

Given the scale ofthe threats to international peace
and security around the world right now and the relative
stability and progress on the ground in Kosovo, it is
clearly inappropriate and inefficient for the Security
Council to spend so much time discussing the situation
in Kosovo and devoting so many resources to it. The
United Kingdom joins other European members of the
Council in firmly believing that the situation in Kosovo
allows for a substantial reduction in the current cycle
of reports and meetings. We further believe that the
Security Council must refocus UNMIK's efforts so that
the means deployed by the United Nations are tailored
fully to the situation on the ground. To this end, we
look forward to a strategic review of the Mission in
due course.

