I thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report and for her briefing today. At the outset, I would like to reiterate Estonia's continued strong support for the International Criminal Court as an independent and impartial judicial institution and an important pillar of a rules-based international order. We call on all States to uphold and defend the principles and values enshrined in the Rome Statute and to respect the ICC's integrity and impartiality. We welcome the update provided by the Prosecutor on the progress achieved during the reporting period in the Libya investigations. We commend the overall significant advancement of the Court in its judicial activities despite the ongoing difficulties caused by the coronavirus pandemic. In this context, we would like to take this opportunity to call on all States parties to the Rome Statute to fulfil their financial obligations vis-a-vis the Court in a timely manner. With regard to political developments on the ground, Estonia welcomes the 23 October ceasefire agreement of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, facilitated by the United Nations. We continue to call on States to respect and support the implementation of this agreement. At the same time, Estonia continues to condemn the violations of international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian law, reported in Libya. We condemn the use of landmines and improvised explosive devices in the district south of Tripoli by the Libyan National Army and affiliated forces, which continue to pose a lethal threat to civilians. We are also extremely worried about reports of arbitrary detention and torture, ill-treatment and other serious crimes in detention facilities. We call on the respective authorities in charge of the facilities to fully cooperate with international observers and investigators and ensure their access to the facilities in question so that these allegations may be investigated. Estonia is furthermore concerned about crimes against migrants and refugees, and welcomes the ICC's role in assisting States to prosecute cases in their domestic jurisdictions. In addition, we underscore that the use of excessive force against protesters is unacceptable and that all cases must be fully and promptly investigated. Estonia joins the Court in expressing gratitude to the authorities of the Government of National Accord for their cooperation with the Court during its latest missions and for its activities related to the preservation of evidence, including with regard to the ongoing investigations of the mass graves of Tarhouna. We further acknowledge the fruitful cooperation between the ICC and the European Police Office, including in the Libya matter. Estonia welcomes the very positive role played by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in assisting and supporting the work of the ICC in the country. Estonia remains highly concerned about the fact that so far there has been no implementation of ICC arrest warrants in the case of Libya. This has meant that the three fugitives - Al-Werfalli, Al-Tuhamy and Al-Qadhafi - all accused of the serious crimes of murder, torture and inhuman and degrading treatment, remain at large. The execution of these arrest warrants is a requisite to upholding justice for the victims. There can be no long-term peace without stopping impunity. In the light of this, we call on all States to cooperate with the ICC in arresting the fugitives and surrendering them to the Court. In conclusion, let me recall that international criminal justice is a matter of collective effort and that, ultimately, it is up to the States to fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the Court arising from the Rome Statute and resolution 1970 (2011). Therefore, while assuring of its full support for the work of the ICC, Estonia urges all States, including States that are not party to the Rome Statute, to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court to end impunity and establish justice for the victims in Libya.
