Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame for his very
valuable briefing and commend his ongoing efforts to
find a political solution. On behalf of France, I assure
him of our full steadfast support. I also thank Ms. Hajer
Sharief for allowing us to hear the voice of Libyan civil
society. She stressed the importance, for Libya and in
general, of enabling effective women's participation in
peace processes. Finally, I thank the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden for her enlightened briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

I would like to underscore three principal points.

My first point is that, with regard to the political
situation in Libya, the stabilization of the country is
more than ever a priority for France. The implementation
of the Special Representative's action plan is the key
to easing tensions and achieving an inclusive political
solution. We therefore continue to give our full support
to Special Representative Ghassan Salame in that
endeavour. The first positive steps have already been
undertaken in the political process. Consultations
between the two chambers have led to a consensus
on key points in the revision of the Skhirat Political
Agreement. That Agreement remains the only valid and
legitimate framework throughout the transition, as the
Council recalled in its statement of 14 December 2017
(S/PRST/2017/26). However, we must now go further.
We must move forward in drafting the constitution and
all stakeholders must remain engaged throughout the
two next steps.

First, the inclusive national conference will be
decisive, as it should make it possible to contribute to
the national reconciliation of all Libyans and to garner
the necessary political consensus for the success of
the elections.

The second deadline is the holding of a transparent
and democratic electoral process in 2018 that will
enable the people of Libya to express themselves.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General pointed out, the number of registered voters
recently exceeded 2 million, thanks to the efforts of
Mr. Salame, who is making every effort to ensure the
success of the elections. We congratulate him, and the
international community must support a credible and
transparent electoral process. Mr. Salame is actively
making preparations for those two deadlines, and we
can appreciate how lengthy the preparation process
is. The Security Council must fully support him and
call on all Libyan stakeholders to commit resolutely
and sincerely to the implementation of its action plan.
That is the message of the French Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, delivered to Mr. Al-Sarraj
and Mr. Haftar when he visited Libya on 21 December.

My second message, in the context of the volatile
situation on the ground, is to insist that there can be
no military solution in Libya and that all actors must
convince themselves of that. In recent days, radical
militias have launched a worrisome new offensive in
Tripoli, in the Sirte region where Da'esh continues
its abuses. France condemns such use of armed force.
Defeating terrorism in Libya once and for all and
ensuring sustainable security will require a political
solution centred around national reconciliation and the
restoration of a State with full control of all its territory.

In that context, the Constitution and the building of
a unified national security architecture under civilian
authority is an absolute priority. In this fragile security
context, the economic and humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. The Council cannot ignore that
situation, which weighs heavily on political balances.
Our role is also to ensure that all Libyans can enjoy the
country's significant wealth. I am referring particularly
to Libya's oil resources, which should remain under the
exclusive control of the Government of National Accord,
pursuant to Council resolutions. We must not hesitate to
strengthen the sanctions mechanism to fight against the
parallel economy that stokes political divisions.

Finally, I wish to address the situation of migrants
passing through Libya, who are victims ofserious human
rights violations. We are maintaining close dialogue
with our partners and the Libyan authorities in order to
make progress in fulfilling the commitments to ensure
that migrants can received dignified treatment and in
facilitating cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner as it relates to access to
detention centres and the evacuation of refugees and
migrants. The issue of migrations was also at the heart
of our Minister's visit to Libya on 21 December. The
Council has highlighted the importance for perpetrators
of such crimes to be prosecuted by the Libyan judiciary,
but individuals responsible for human trafficking and
the trafficking of migrants must also be sanctioned
under the existing United Nations regime. We must
continue to work together in that regard.

Moreover, Libya must meet its obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and
help it carry out its investigations and issue arrest
warrants. That would be an important signal of the
commitment of Libyan actors to international criminal
justice and to the fight against impunity, which are
essential for securing the trust ofthe Libyan population.

In conclusion, I note that all of our efforts must
converge on supporting Mr. Salame's plan of action. The
people of Libya, with the support of the international
community, have a major interest in seeing their country
advance towards national reconciliation and political
consensus. In that regard, our support for the United
Nations and our unity within the Council will be more
important than ever if we are to successful navigate the
different stages of the action plan. France pledges its
full mobilization to that end.

