Mr. Maema (Lesotho): At the outset, let me say
how pleased I am to participate in this open debate on
the subject of small arms under your presidency, Sir.
We look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion
of the debate under your able leadership. I also wish to
thank, through you, Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her
informative and detailed presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General.

My delegation considers this debate an excellent
opportunity for the Security Council to complement the
work of the General Assembly aimed at tackling the
issue of illegal small arms. We are elated that this
debate comes on the eve of the Third Biennial Meeting
of States on the 2001 Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Meeting will
focus on, among other things, illicit brokering,
stockpile management and surplus destruction, as well
as on the implementation of the International Tracing
Instrument. In our view, some of the observations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
those pertinent issues, as well as his analysis of the
relevant multilateral instruments, provide Member
States with some food for thought as they prepare for
Third Biennial Meeting.

It is an undisputable fact that excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons pose a significant threat to
international peace and security, human rights and to
social development in many countries. It is also a hard
fact that in Africa - a continent that continues to be
engulfed by internal armed conflicts - these weapons,
which are easily accessible, cause untold humanitarian
suffering. A close link between illicit transfers and
trade in small arms and light weapons, terrorism and
organized crime is also well acknowledged.

Yet there are still no accurate figures for the
number of small arms and light weapons currently in
circulation globally, as highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General. We share the view expressed in the
report that Security Council embargoes, if well
enforced by States, can have a destabilizing effect on
the circulation of illegal small arms and light weapons.
We therefore encourage the Council, as one of the
relevant actors in the fight against illicit transfers of
small arms, to continue to improve the enforcement of
the arms embargoes.

Our general view is that the United Nations
Member States, at large, still have to garner the
necessary political will to be able to effectively tackle
illicit trade in small arms in all its aspects. Since the
2001 Programme of Action remains the main reference
that regulates the United Nations in that area, we wish
to reiterate our firm commitment to its full
implementation. Nonetheless, the fact remains that its
effective implementation is a challenging task for those
countries, like Lesotho, that have the political will but
do not have sufficient resources - hence our repeated
pleas for technical and financial assistance to those
States in need to enable them to implement the
provisions of the Programme of Action.

Lesotho remains committed to regional and
global efforts aimed at addressing the problems related
to illicit trade in small arms. To that end, we are
committed to the full implementation of these
instruments, to which Lesotho is a party: the 2001
South African Development Community Protocol on
Control of Firearms, Ammunition and other related
materials; and the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its supplementing
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition. Lesotho also fully subscribes to the
2000 Bamako Declaration on an African Common
Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and
Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, of the
Organization of African Unity.

The Government of Lesotho has made significant
strides on the ground regarding the reduction of the
number of small arms held by official institutions, as
well as in the collection and destruction of illegal small
arms. In that regard, we express our gratitude to our
partners for their assistance.

In conclusion, we commend you, Mr. President,
for your able leadership under your presidency, which
ends today.

