Mr. Begec (Turkey): Ijoin others in congratulating
Sweden on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.

The Under-Secretary of State of Finland delivered
a joint statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Mediation and its co-Chairs, namely, Finland and
Turkey. Turkey has also aligned itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. The
following remarks are made in my national capacity.

Turkey highly values and genuinely contributes
to efforts aimed at the peaceful settlement of disputes
at the regional and international levels. In that regard,
our renewed efforts in cooperation with our partners
to address the crisis in Syria, including the suffering
of the people, demonstrate both the need for effective
political engagement as well as the cost paid in their
absence. Defusing tensions before they escalate into
violent conflict should be the first course of action
in preserving peace and stability, and Member States
should commit themselves to that objective.

In any quest for sustaining peace, the root causes
of problems should be addressed, long-term grievances
must be brought to an end and prospects for security,
development and justice should be made available to all.

Turkey has supported the key recommendations of
the United Nations reviews, in particular with regard
to the primacy of politics and the need for conflict
prevention and mediation. Accordingly, we see great
merit in conflict prevention, especially through
effective mediation. Yet there are Member States that
consider that preventive actions without the consent of
the parties may lead to premature interventions, and
such interventions may eventually damage the prospects
of a peaceful solution. We should all recognize those
concerns and explore the ways to address them, in
particular when we pursue new initiatives.

The complex political, ideological and
socioeconomic challenges, as well as asymmetric threats
and terrorism, have rendered conflict prevention and
resolution more difficult than ever. The humanitarian
dimension of conflicts and refugee problems do not
make the present situation easier. Those factors dictate
a delicate handling of each and every conflict situation
where adherence to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law are no less
important than proper conflict analysis and inclusive
process design. In the meanwhile, the responsible organs
of the United Nations, together with the Secretariat, can
develop more effective ways to enhance the capacity of
preventive diplomacy for our Organization. The good
offices of the Secretary-General and United Nations
regional offices are certainly important assets at our
disposal, and they must be supported with political
vision and financial resources. More transparency and
consultation with Member States will help improve
coherence and build mutual trust throughout the system.

