Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The Chinese delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings. The question of Palestine has been dragging on for more than 70 years. It is at the root of the turbulence in the Middle East. It is also a wound to the conscience of humankind. At present, the Gaza Strip is gripped by endless conflicts and confrontation. Acts of violence and inflammatory rhetoric by the parties concerned have been frequent. The construction of settlements and the demolition of Palestinian homes continue to expand in scope and scale. The occupied Palestinian territory is in a grave humanitarian crisis, and the Middle East peace process is not on the right track. China is deeply concerned about all of this. Without a just and reasonable resolution to the Palestinian question, there will be no lasting peace or security in the Middle East. We should continue to adhere to the overall goal of the two-State solution, which is the only appropriate way to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli issue. Independent statehood is the inalienable national right of the Palestinian people; it is a right that cannot be traded away. The international community, especially parties with significant influence in the Middle East, should make joint efforts based on Arabic Peace Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the relevant Security Council resolutions and encourage Israel and Palestine to resolve conflicts through negotiations on an equal footing. Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly states that the construction of settlements in occupied Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem, is in violation of international law. The parties concerned should earnestly implements this resolution, immediately cease all settlement activities in occupied territory, stop the demolition of Palestinian homes and the destruction of their property, and prevent violence against civilians.Palestinian issue can be resolved only by political means. Countering violence with violence or the threat of force will lead nowhere. China encourages the relevant parties to meet each other halfway, stop military actions, cease incendiary rhetoric, refrain from taking unilateral measures that undermine trust, avoid any escalation of the tense situation in the region, earnestly safeguard the foundation of the Middle East peace process and create the favourable conditions for the resumption of dialogue. Early this month, Chinese State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Wang Yi visited Egypt and exchanged views with the Egyptian leadership, including the country's Foreign Minister, on international affairs, the Middle East and the Palestinian question. He also met with Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary General of the League of Arab States. State Councillor Wang Yi said that China has been and will always be a builder of peace, a promoter of stability and a contributor to development in the Middle East. We should pay close attention to and help improve the Palestinian economic and humanitarian situation. China is concerned at the recent announcement by the relevant party of another deduction from the tax revenues collected on behalf of Palestine. We call upon that party to earnestly fulfil its obligations under the Paris Protocol and other relevant international treaties, fully implement relevant United Nations resolutions and completely lift the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible in order to create the conditions for improving the economic and humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. China welcomes the General Assembly's adoption by an overwhelming majority of the resolution to renew the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (resolution 74/83). The international community should continue to increase its politicial and financial support for the Agency and provide concrete assistance to Palestinian refugees in host countries. It should also increase its investments with a view to boosting the reconstruction of the Palestinian economy and take an integrated approach to promoting peace through development. As State Councillor Wang Yi said in an interview with the Egyptian press, China will continue to stand up for justice and speak out at various international forums. China will continue to unswervingly support the just cause of the Palestinian people as they strive for the restoration of their legitimate national rights and the establishment of an independent, fully sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the 1967 borders.
