First, I would like to thank the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany, President of the Security Council for the month of July, for convening this important meeting at a time when the world is facing one of its worst global health crises. The crisis, in turn, poses a threat to international peace and security and has an impact on the least developed countries and the most vulnerable groups, especially those affected by conflicts around the world. We welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Mass, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany, presiding over the meeting. I also wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil, Commissioner for Social Affairs of the African Union, for their briefings. The unprecedented scope of the impact that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had on the world threatens international peace and security, as the Security Council affirmed in its resolution 2532 (2020), adopted unanimously yesterday. The COVID-19 pandemic was the direct cause of a global emergency that has killed more than half a million people worldwide. In particular, the pandemic has had an impact on conflict-affected countries, where conditions on the ground, violence and instability undermine efforts to contain and end the pandemic, as the health-care sector in most of those countries has been devastated by years of conflict. Moreover, the large numbers of refugees and displaced persons in camps, most of whom are women and children, increase the likelihood of outbreaks of the virus due to the difficulty of enforcing distancing protocols. The suffering of those groups is also exacerbated by the difficulties that the pandemic may pose in terms of humanitarian access. In that connection, Bahrain supported the Secretary-General's sincere call for an immediate global ceasefire and for redoubled international efforts to combat and eradicate COVID-19. It should also be noted that the pandemic will have adverse medium- and long- term effects, as its socioeconomic consequences may exacerbate the root causes of instability. This, in turn, may spark armed conflicts in some areas and cause existing conflicts to intensify, compounding human suffering and threatening international peace and security. In that regard, I wish to refer to the Secretary-General's plan to address the devastating social and economic repercussions of COVID-19. Although the COVID-19 pandemic presents a challenge, it also provides a good opportunity, not only because it has demonstrated the value of cooperation and solidarity but also because it has highlighted the extent to which countries are interconnected and rely on one another. This underscores the importance of cooperation and collective action at all levels and of coordinating the international response under the auspices of the relevant international organizations, such as the United Nations and the World Health Organization. In that regard, effective regional cooperation, a principle enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is an essential element of multilateralism, which cannot succeed if there are fundamental differences between States and global bodies. Regional cooperation is therefore vital and can play a key role in overcoming common challenges. Multilateralism and interdependence at the regional level also constitute important aspects of cooperation in these conditions. In conclusion, Bahrain affirms its support for the efforts to contain and end the COVID-19 pandemic in order to implement the Sustainable Development Goals and maintain international peace and security for the well-being and prosperity of the world's peoples.
