Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate, and we welcome the
invitation to the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Lykketoft, to participate in this important meeting.
His participation in this debate is an important step in
improving cooperation and coordination between the
principal organs of the United Nations. We hope that
the Council will invite the President of the Assembly
to participate in its work more often. We also thank the
Deputy-Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as
that by the Vice-President of the Economic and Social
Council.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We are especially pleased by the format outlined in
the concept note (S/2015/793, annex) drafted by your
delegation, Sir, which aims to reduce the overall length
of the debate and produce an outcome - with that
outcome being drafted after the debate in order to take
into account the positions of non-Council members.
That is only proper, as, after all, the Council acts on
behalf of all os us, not just on behalf of the privileged
15 members.

Over a number of recent years, we have debated
ad infinitum the question of Security Council working
methods. However, little has happened in terms of
implementing the useful proposals put forth by the
general membership of the United Nations in terms
of improving the Council's working methods. One
of the key areas of reform identified has been the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General. In
view of the fact that the term of office of the current
Secretary-General is drawing to an end, one ofthe most
immediate changes the Council could embark upon
would be to increase its engagement with the broader
United Nations membership. That could be achieved by
the holding of Arria Formula meetings to discuss that
matter.

Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 69/321,
South Africa calls on the Security Council to coordinate
closely with the President of the General Assembly in
formally starting the process as early as possible. That
should be accompanied by a list of criteria, developed
in consultation with Member States and drawing on the
Charter of the United Nations and additional sources,
such as previous Joint Inspection Unit reports on the
criteria for senior management positions in the United
Nations. South Africa believes that the membership
should be kept abreast of developments and that the
names of candidates, as well as their curriculums
vitae, should be circulated. Member States should
also be given an opportunity to formally engage with
candidates through a series of interactive dialogues in
the General Assembly.

Finally, South Africa fully supports the call for the
Council to send more than one name to the General
Assembly, in order for the entire membership to make
the appointment and for the next Secretary-General to
be appointed for only one term of seven years.

South Africa is pleased with the Council's enhanced
strategic cooperation with the African Union Peace and
Security Council. In that regard, South Africa implores
the Security Council to give effect to resolution 2033
(2012), which calls on the Council to elaborate further
ways of strengthening relations between the two
Councils, including through achieving more effective
annual consultative meetings, the holding of timely
consultations and collaborative field missions of the
two Councils, as appropriate, to formulate cohesive
positions and strategies on a case-by-case basis in
dealing with conflict situations in Africa.

While we have noted significant areas of
improvement in the strategic coordination between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, we are concerned about the
inconsistency with which the Security Council
coordinates its position with that of the African Union.
A recent example in that regard is the situation in South
Sudan, where some members of the Security Council
were ready to impose sanctions despite the African
Union Peace and Security Council being seized with
the matter and the unfolding processes at the African
Union level. We wish to thank those permanent and
elected members of the Security Council that heeded
the call of the African Union.

South Africa welcomes the debate on the use of
the veto and on restricting the use of the veto, which
has featured prominently in discussions over the past
few years. While South Africa in principle agrees
to a discussion on the use of the veto, we wish to
reiterate that the fundamental question that needs to be
addressed remains the composition and reform of the
Security Council.

We reiterate our stance that improving the
working methods of the Council is but a small step
in making the Council more effective. The only way
to truly and profoundly improve its efficiency is by
instituting a substantive reform of the Council to make
it representative of the geopolitical realities of this
century. It cannot be that in the seventieth year of its
existence, the Council still excludes vast geographical
areas in its permanent composition.

In that connection, we reiterate our commitment to
the Ezulwini Consensus, which seeks to provide Africa
with two permanent seats and five non-permanent
seats. In tandem with over two thirds of the United
Nations membership, we call for the abolition of the use
of the veto, which only serves to promote the interests
of a few. However, if that does not happen, we believe
that the new permanent members of the Council should
not be at a disadvantage and should be afforded all the
rights and privileges that come with a permanent seat,

including the right of veto.
