Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report, as
well as for the additional briefing given by the Secretariat.
We also wish to express our appreciation to the delegation
of the United Kingdom for convening this meeting on the
question of Sierra Leone.

The situation in Sierra Leone has recently been
developing in a positive direction. Mr. Sankoh and
Mr. Koroma have both returned to Freetown. A new
national Government has been established in Sierra Leone
that includes the former rebel forces. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme has
also made some headway. In general, the Lorne
Agreement has been implemented. We are satisfied about
this.

We wish to thank the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and its Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), as well as all other parties, for their positive
efforts and their outstanding contributions to the peace
process in Sierra Leone over a long time.

We are also fully aware of the fact that the present
political and security situation in Sierra Leone is still
fragile. There is still tension between the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) and the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC). Various unstable elements could affect
the peace process in Sierra Leone at any time.
Furthermore, the humanitarian situation in the country is
still grave and violations of human rights occur from time
to time. Therefore the future of Sierra Leone allows no
optimism.

The implementation of the DDR programme is vital
to the peace process in Sierra Leone. In this regard, we
have taken note of paragraphs 13 and 14 of the report of
the Secretary-General. We are surprised by the speech
given by Mr. Sankoh in which he said that the RUF
might temporarily suspend its participation in the DDR
programme. We are also concerned that part of the RUF's
troops have all along refused to take part in the
programme. We hope that the RUF will take part in the
programme with a more positive attitude. We urge
Mr. Sankoh to play his role.

At the same time, we have also taken note of the
fact that due to lack of resources and poor treatment,
there are incidents of unrest at some demobilization
centres. We call upon the international community to
further increase its assistance to Sierra Leone so as to
facilitate the smooth implementation of the DDR
programme.

We note that the Government of Sierra Leone was
supposed to have completed the implementation of the
DDR programme throughout the country by 15
December. In the light of the current process, it is almost

 

certain that this date will be postponed. However, it is our
sincere hope that it will not be postponed repeatedly.

We have taken note with satisfaction of the fact that
the deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) has already begun and that the first
contingent of troops is already in place.
The work of formulating a national development
security strategy framework is also close to completion. We
wish to express our appreciation to the Secretariat for its
efforts in this regard.

At the same time, I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Okelo for his work. We also hope that the new Special
Representative, Ambassador Adeniji, will be able to
complete this arduous task.

In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to continue its joint efforts to help the people of
Sierra Leone achieve peace, stability and, eventually,
national reconciliation.

