Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 2491 (2019), which extends the
mandate of the special inspection regime on the high
seas off the coast of Libya. We have always maintained a
constructive attitude to this Security Council initiative,
which resulted in the creation of special inspection
regimes on the high seas off the coast of Libya to
combat the illegal transport of migrants and support
the arms embargo regime. When that regime was being
created under resolution 2240 (2015), the main practical
measure for combating illegal immigration was and
still is the European Union naval operation SOPHIA.
Of course, while the resolution was not written with
that operation in mind, in practice it was the only
genuinely functioning instrument in that problem area
of the Mediterranean.
Now, with the operation's key naval component
suspended and Brussels unable to reach an agreement
on its future, the result is that the regime established by
resolution 2240 (2015) is not being backed up with real
instruments. That state of affairs has a negative impact
on the authority of the Security Council, which as
permanent members we are concerned about. We also
want to recall the appeal in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/7ll) for reinstating SOPHIA'S naval
functions, and we hope that today's resolution and its
call for continued practical measures will help to speed
up a decision on resuming the work of SOPHIA's naval
component. I also want to stress that we are interested in
continuing an informal, mutually beneficial interactive
dialogue with the representative of the European
Union and SOPHIA's command when the Security
Council considers the inspection regime on the Libyan
coast or whenever it may be necessary. When we take
decisions on extending the regime in future, we will
take into account the operation's effectiveness and its
practical contribution to ensuring compliance with
the arms embargo. In accordance with the resolution's
request, additional reports from the Secretary-General
will help us make an objective assessment of the
operation's effectiveness.

Today I should stress that Russia has always taken
a constructive approach to every European effort to
counter illegal migration. However, sanctions are
definitely not a long-term solution to the problem, which
requires a comprehensive approach. The true reasons
for mass migration are rooted in conflicts and misery,
and in the socioeconomic situation brought about by an
illegal military intervention in Libya's internal affairs
of Libya in violation of well-known Security Council
resolutions, which has led to the inhuman suffering of
so many millions of people.

The crimes that have been committed against
migrants only confirm our position, which is that the
way to combat this problem effectively is to eradicate
the related criminal networks. We need to see effective
criminal prosecutions at the national level. It is also
just as important to create sustainable conditions for
restoring peaceful, normal life in the States that have
seen a mass exodus. Needless to say, dealing with the
reasons for many of the migration-related problems of
the countries in crisis belongs to the arena of political
solutions, along with helping them rehabilitate their
societies and economies and build institutions. What
is basically essential is creating favourable conditions
so that people will return to their homes of their
own accord.
