Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank the
Venezuelan presidency for convening today's meeting.
It is a great opportunity for Member States to share their
views on the ongoing review process. I would also like

to thank Ambassadors Macharia Kamau, Olof Skoog
and Gert Rosenthal for their introductory briefings.

I would like to briefly share with the Council
some views based on the framework of the four areas
identified in the President's concept note (S/2016/104, annex).

First, with regard tp the lack of attention to
peacebuilding, we think that, although the concept of
peacebuilding is not present in the Charter ofthe United
Nations, it is utterly consistent with its letter and spirit.
From our perspective, the efforts that emanate from the
current peacebuilding architecture could, however, be
immensely improved. We should begin by addressing
the question of the lack of adequate resources. As
expressed by the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, providing
the Peacebuilding Fund annually with a symbolic 1 per
cent of the value of the total United Nations budget
for peace operations as core funding from assessed
contributions would help close the gap between
mandates and programme resources.

Secondly, regarding peacebuilding time frames,
we have two contradictory notions of time frame: that
of the United Nations, punctuated by successive yearly
sessions, and that of human beings in post-conflict
situations. The first is guided by calendaring priorities
and performance, and the second is hard to assess in
terms of controlled or arithmetic data, except for the
time required for national reconciliation and framed
social interactions to produce their expected positive
effects.

Thirdly, the importance of development in
peacebuilding is a sine qua non for lasting peace.
Where there is development, there is the possibility
of peace. Where there are issues of poverty and
disenfranchisement, there cannot be peace or stability.
Allow me also to stress the correlation with the rule of
law at the national and international levels, as, without
the rule of law, development and therefore peace in a
post-conflict situation could be short-lived.

Fourthly, the important role of regional and
subregional organizations in peacebuilding is
something we totally support, encourage and concur
with. Indeed, in the context of the African Union, we
clearly highlighted this element in our submission
following the invitation by the co-facilitators of the
United Nations peacebuilding review to Member States
to provide written contributions.

I take this opportunity to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia for their
open and transparent stewardship of the process. In
the Algerian submission, we underlined, among other
issues, the work that needs to be done in order to ensure
that the peacebuilding architecture is well connected
with and complementary to the African Union Post-
Conflict Reconstruction and Development Framework
and the African Solidarity Initiative. I would like
to take this opportunity to wish full success to the
co-facilitators of the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, Ambassadors Bird and
Gaspar Martins, in their endeavour, whose outcome is
expected to be submitted by the end of next month.

