Mr. Doyle (Ireland): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's
important debate.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union (EU) this morning.

Drawing from the concept note (S/2017/574, annex),
I will briefly outline the areas we see as particularly
important in enhancing the international community's
support for African capabilities in the area of peace
and security.

First, I turn to the many calls made for closer United
Nations-African Union (AU) partnership for action.

The foundation for an enhanced partnership is
well established. The three peace and security reviews
of 2015 underscored the need for a deeper strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. Over the past two years, the Security Council
has dealt with the issue, both through its reviews of
individual peacekeeping missions and through broader
thematic initiatives, such as resolution 2320 (2016), on
United Nations-AU cooperation, and the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. Moreover, we have
two major agreements adopted unanimously by all
States Members of the United Nations - the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the sustaining
peace resolutions - which call on us collectively to see
partnerships as the core of our work.

We must take steps to turn this well-established
foundation into action. We must ensure that United
Nations-AU partnership is something that occurs at
an operational level, on a daily basis. That requires
ongoing review and cooperation, particularly in the
areas of planning and decision-making. We welcome
today's debate as an opportunity in that respect.

Secondly, we must learn from the mechanisms we
already have. Cooperation between the international
community and Africa in the field of peace and security
is already ongoing. We have seen it in the evolving
engagement between the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to establish closer links with the AU.

We must look beyond that. For example, the work
of the EU's African Peace Facility, to which Ireland is
glad to contribute, could help inform United Nations
support for the operations and priorities of the AU. The
engagement of EU regional offices with the AU and
African sub-regional organizations should offer some
valuable lessons in that regard. In assessments ofjoint
United Nations-AU peacekeeping missions, we must
also focus on recording and adapting best practices.

Thirdly, we must explore financing options from
within - but also beyond - the budget of the United
Nations. It is clear that the current United Nations
funding structure for African-led peace operations
is in need of reform. The role of the regular budget
of the United Nations warrants discussion. The
Secretary-General's recent report (S/2017/574) is a
first step towards some financing options. There is
also the broader question - how can the international
community best support Africa to finance its own
initiatives for peace and security?

Neither the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development nor the AU Agenda 2063 is directly linked
to peace operations. However, if properly implemented
and supported, those frameworks can substantially
enhance Africa's capacity to self-fund programmes and
operations for peace. The AU has already committed
to funding 25 per cent of its peace operations by 2020.
Additionally, if African States receive the right support
for their development efforts, the resulting economic
growth could well allow the AU to far surpass this 25 per
cent marker in the longer term. Successful development
will also contribute to eradicating the root causes of
conflict. If we invest in that development, Africa's
capacity to fund peace operations will increase, while
the need for such operations will decrease.

Fourthly, we must identify mutual opportunities
and challenges. African priorities in the area of peace
and security are also the priorities of the international
community. Implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, the empowerment of youth as
actors of peace, sustainable security sector reform,
and more effective conflict prevention are just some of
those shared priorities. Stronger partnerships in those
areas will therefore be mutually beneficial. The same is
true in respect of mutual challenges.

As noted earlier by the EU observer, the Secretary
General's report highlights the importance of
compliance and oversight, particularly in the areas of
human rights and conduct and discipline. Those are
critical concerns in all peace operations, and ones we, as
a troop-contributing country, take extremely seriously.

Finally, we welcome the AU's efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms to ensure the respect for human
rights in all of its missions and encourage further
progress in their implementation. Joint standards for
reporting, accountability and protection are critical to
ensuring robust oversight of missions.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for holding
today's debate and for giving me the opportunity to
participate in the discussion on this important issue by
sharing Ireland's perspective.

