Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): Through you,
Mr. President, I thank the Secretary-General for his
extremely informative report on the situation in the
Central African Republic. The representative of
Belgium will be speaking later on behalf of the
European Union, and my delegation would like to
associate itself with what he will say, not least because
it is as a member of the European Union that we are
part of the international aid effort for the Central
African Republic.

The Central African Republic is in many ways a
paradigm of the sort of situation in which the efforts of
the international community have to be directed
towards post-conflict peace-building. And post-conflict
peace-building will always require the participation not
just of the political organs of the United Nations but of
all parts of the United Nations system and, indeed, of
the whole international community. In that context, it is
very appropriate that we welcome, through you, Sir,
not only Mr. Cisse, but also Mr. Calderisi, the
representative of the World Bank.

Against that background, I should just like to
offer a few thoughts on the sort of projects that the
international community can usefully be undertaking in
the Central African Republic, projects above all that
will promote the stability of the country. For example,
we think it is important that the international
community should support the improvement of human
rights protection, including the bringing to justice of
those responsible for abuses during the recent coup
attempt. We support attempts to improve good
governance, and in that context we note that the
European Commission is giving support on behalf of
the European Union. We support assistance towards the
resettlement of refugees, towards the disposal of
illegally held weapons and towards human rights
training for the police and the military. And finally, we
support projects which are aimed at helping to
restructure and professionalize the armed forces.

In that last context, I would refer to point (c) of
paragraph 18 of the Secretary-General's report. We
wonder whether it would be better, rather than
expanding the armed forces through recruitment, to
facilitate the reintegration of those forces who fled as a
result of reprisals following the attempted coup.

The United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) is
the natural channel for project management in the
Central African Republic. In considering the future of
BONUCA's mandate, we have noted very carefully the
proposals that the Secretary-General has put forward
for the expansion of BONUCA's activities. We feel that
we should take a decision on this in due course, but it
would be useful to have some more information in that
context about the further resources that are likely to be
required by BONUCA.

