Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General, and Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for their
informative briefings on the humanitarian situation and
latest developments in the political process in Syria.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's
concern regarding the ongoing military escalation in
north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib governorate,
where approximately 3 million people are trapped in the
fighting, as Mr. Lowcock reported. This new outbreak
of violence is exacerbating an already alarming
humanitarian situation and represents a major obstacle
to the smooth running ofthe political process. According
to humanitarian agencies, the resumption of hostilities
in Idlib governorate has claimed the lives of more than
500 civilians, displaced more than 578,000 people and
destroyed social and educational infrastructure.

Against the backdrop of the continuing deterioration
in the security situation and ongoing humanitarian
challenges, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the parties to adhere
strictly to the agreement made in Sochi on 17 September
2018 between the Russian Federation and Turkey with a
view to achieving the de-escalation required to relieve
the civilian population in distress and resume the
political process.

My delegation takes this opportunity to remind the
parties to the conflict that any action targeting civilians,
health and education facilities, means of transport and
personnel bearing the distinctive signs defined under
the Geneva Conventions constitutes a war crime subject
to prosecution under the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

The Security Council's commitment to finding
lasting solutions to the humanitarian challenges in
Syria must be accompanied by the promotion of a
political solution to the crisis. That is why Cote d'Ivoire
welcomed the holding, on 2 August, of the thirteenth
round of the Astana process, in Nur-Sultan, which
allowed the guarantors of that process to reiterate the
need for the implementation of all agreements relating
to Idlib, including that of 17 September 2018.
Moreover, my country welcomes the fourth visit
of the Special Envoy to Damascus, on 10 July, to
reconsider with the Syrian authorities the issue of
establishing a constitutional committee to review and
amend the Constitution.

Likewise, my delegation welcomes the initiative
of Pope Francis, who, in a letter sent to the Syrian
authorities on 22 July, stressed the need for a viable
political solution to the conflict and encouraged the
parties resort to diplomacy, dialogue and negotiation
with the assistance of the international community.

The search for solutions to the Syrian conflict will
also need to incorporate confidence-building measures
between the parties, such as the exchange of detainees,
the return of remains and identification of missing
persons, in accordance with the Astana process. My
delegation encourages the parties to the conflict to
continue such initiatives and urges them to prioritize
dialogue as the viable solution for ensuring lasting
peace in the Syrian Arab Republic.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire expresses its full
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General towards establishing a credible,
balanced and inclusive constitutional committee, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

