Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First, Mr. President, we share
fully your words of commendation directed towards
the delegation of Rwanda for its capable leadership of
the Council during the past month. I should also like to
thank Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for his
briefing.

Only yesterday, Europe and the rest of the world
solemnly commemorated the 100th anniversary of the
beginning of the First World War. Today, the people
of Ukraine and eastern Europe are experiencing the
misery felt by the people of Belgium and France 100
years ago.

Mr. Ging's briefing today is evidently disconcerting.
Nearly 4 million people are trapped in the conflict area
in southern and eastern Ukraine. According to recent
reports, Luhansk in eastern Ukraine is on the verge of
a humanitarian disaster, with 230,000 people internally
displaced due to the conflict.

The conflict has led to a scarcity of available
drinking water, an indispensable and essential factor of
life; and the shutdown of the power grid that supplies

electricity to homes, schools and hospitals. Every new
day brings new tales of death and destruction. With
gas reserves exhausted and the shortfall in medical
supplies, the population is understandably eager to
evacuate tumultuous cities.

The net result of the crisis is a mass exodus, as
innocent civilians flee deprivation and the incessant
violence. As the conflict in southern and eastern
Ukraine intensifies, support and solidarity from
the international community becomes increasingly
important. In that connection, we take positive note
of the preliminary response plan developed by the
humanitarian community, which lays the foundation
for the future humanitarian response in Ukraine, based
on an overarching structured goal and the four strategy
objectives that will guide sector-specific action and
response. We commend OCHA for being central to
those planning and response strategies.

Once again, the leadership role of the United Nations
in addressing humanitarian issues and concerns across
the globe has been demonstrated. We urge the relevant
agencies to remain engaged with the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine until it stabilizes.

We also call on the authorities in that country to
take steps and measures to ensure the establishment
of an effective system to engender the coordination
and implementation of relief efforts. There is no doubt
that the humanitarian situation is an outcome of the
conflict in that country, which has intensified and
assumed a perilous scale. The only sustainable solution
to the humanitarian situation, and indeed to the overall
situation in that country, is the cessation of hostilities
and a return to dialogue.

In that regard, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe road map for de-escalating
tensions in Ukraine and the 17 April Geneva agreement
presents viable avenues to pursue a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in Ukraine.

Mr. President, if you allow me a few seconds,
I should like to just ask two questions of the OCHA
Director, to take advantage of his presence. First, is
the unified registration system for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) that he mentioned being examined
positively by the Ukrainian authorities with a view
to its adoption? Secondly, we understand that winter
conditions in that part of the world can be very severe.
Is OCHA and the rest of the international humanitarian
community putting in place some measures to cater to
IDPs and refugees in case the conflict is not resolved
now and spills over into the winter period?

