The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.

I join others in extending a very warm welcome to
the Security Council to His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and to thank
him for his statement. I would also like to thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen,
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/765).

The visit of the Security Council's mini-mission to
Timor-Leste last week, in which India also participated,
offered Council members an opportunity to interact
with the Government and see first-hand the progress
that the country has made towards sustainable peace
and security. Timor-Leste has made multifaceted
progress since the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in 2006.
The year 2012 has been an important milestone in the
consolidation of democratic transition in Timor-Leste.

This year the country celebrated the tenth
anniversary of restoration of its independence.
Presidential and parliamentary elections were also
held in a calm and stabile security environment.
Timorese police and armed forces have conducted
themselves professionally and in a responsible manner.
We compliment the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) for its efforts aimed at continuing to strengthen
its institutional development and capacity-building. The
final certification ofthe full reconstitution of the PNTL
took place recently, marking the end of the United
Nations police's operational support for the PNTL.

We appreciate the resilience and determination of
the Timorese people and its leadership in firmly taking
their country forward on paths to long-term peace,
stability and development. The active engagement
of all political parties in the democratic process is an
encouraging indicator of their abiding commitment to
democracy. We would also like to commend UNMIT
for its overall support to that end and for making the
Mission a success story.

As stated by Ambassador Baso Sangqu of South
Africa, who led the Council's mission, and as indicated
in Prime Minister Gusmao's letter to the Secretary-
General (S/2012/736), there has been an unambiguous
message from the Timorese people that the country
should no longer remain on the Council's agenda and
that UNMIT should withdraw as planned by the end
of this year. We are particularly pleased that there is
consensus among all stakeholders that UNMIT should
withdraw as scheduled.

As UNMIT draws down, it is important that the
contours of the post-transition United Nations presence
should be finalized in accordance with the wishes and
priorities of the Government. Timorese ownership and
leadership are essential to building on the progress
achieved so far. We have noted with satisfaction that
overall economic growth, including proceeds from
the oil and gas sector, continues to be robust. The
Government's continued focus on infrastructure and
capital development should certainly help to usher in
a rapid socioeconomic transition in the country. The
international community must support the Government
in its efforts to achieve socioeconomic development,
eradicate poverty and strengthen its institutions.

India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute
to its development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence and where we
see complementarities in their application. India has
extended its support to the Government of Timor-Leste
in the areas of socioeconomic development and human
resources development. We are also partnering with the
Government of Timor-Leste within the India-Brazil-
South Africa framework. India fully supports the
Timorese Government's efforts to expand its bilateral
and regional cooperation.

Before I conclude, I would like to express our
appreciation for the leadership shown by the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, during
the transition, and for the dedication of his team in
supporting the Government and people of Timor-Leste.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
