Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing and to welcome him to the Security Council.

Naturally, France endorses the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.

To begin, I would like briefly to refer to the
Lebanese dossier before the Security Council. France
welcomes the success of the legislative elections held
in Lebanon on 7 June, which represents a new, positive
step for that country and its democracy. We hope that
the renewed dialogue will be continued and help
Lebanon to pursue the unity, stability and reform
sought by its people.

Recent incidents in southern Lebanon remind us
of the importance of the full implementation by all
parties of resolution 1701 (2006). We reiterate our full
support for the work of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Any attack on UNIFIL is
unacceptable, and it is important and even essential
that the parties cooperate fully with the Force.

I turn now to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. Rarely
if ever has there been such international consensus on
the nature of a solution to the conflict - the
establishment of a viable, independent and democratic
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders. The statements of the
Israeli Prime Minister on that specific point represent a
first and welcome step, as the ministers for foreign
affairs of the European Union stressed on 15 June.

The task now is to determine how successfully to
engage the various stages leading to that objective.
Those stages are many, difficult to complete and
varied. I shall refer to the three principal stages.

First, daily living conditions must be improved so
that the people do not lose all hope. That will require
the implementation by the parties of their Road Map
obligations. In that respect, the Israeli authorities must
cease all settlement activity, the destruction of homes
and other evictions in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. The issue of settlements is, of course,
critical, and we welcome the stress placed by President
Obama on that point. As President Sarkozy has
recalled, by complicating the prospects for establishing
a Palestinian State, settlement activity does not
contribute to Israel's security but will, contrarily, only
increase the dangers. The authorities of France and the
European Union have sent that very clear message to
the Israeli authorities.

The second requisite development on the ground
involves freedom of movement and access. That
applies not only to Gaza, on which I will have more to
say, but also to the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
lifting by the Israeli authorities of some major
obstacles to movement, in particular in Nablus, is an
important move that must be followed up.

All measures aimed at restoring a normal life for
the Palestinian people must be encouraged. Beyond
their humanitarian and human consequences, such
measures will also help the Palestinians and their
authorities to meet their responsibility to strengthen the
foundations of their future State. In that regard, the
Palestinian Authority must pursue its efforts to
strengthen the security sector and ensure the rule of
law. The pitiless fight against terrorism must also be an
ongoing priority.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, the
consolidation of the ceasefire, encompassing the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), remains a
priority. Resolution 1860 (2009) defined the main
parameters of a permanent ceasefire, including the
opening of crossings and the establishment of
mechanisms to end the smuggling of weapons.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza is most
disturbing. We call for the immediate opening of
checkpoints, in particular to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance and the resumption of
economic activity. Beyond the issues of humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction, we believe that such
closures will perpetuate the political status quo in
Gaza. In addition to those efforts, we continue firmly
to call for the unconditional and immediate release of
Gilad Shalit.

My third and final point involves inter-
Palestinian reconciliation and the role of neighbouring
States. The Palestinians must speak in a single voice if
the peace process is to resume. There can be no peace
agreement with a single party representing the
Palestinian people, or a viable Palestinian State without
Gaza. While talks to achieve inter-Palestinian
reconciliation face myriad challenges, we continue to
support the Egyptian mediation efforts. Of course, the
countries of the region have an important role to play.
At the appropriate time, we will be prepared to work
with a Government of national unity that respects the
basic principles of the peace process and agrees to
resume negotiations with Israel leading to a two-State
solution.

Moreover, we continue to lend our full support to
the Arab Peace Initiative, which must be part of a
comprehensive and lasting solution in the Middle East.
Any step taken or gesture made by States of the region
to demonstrate their commitment to lasting peace,
which necessarily involves good-neighbourly relations
with Israel, is to be encouraged. In the context of the
regional approach, we also believe that the time has
come to move forward on the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of the peace process.

The elements to which I have referred will, at this
critical juncture for the Middle East, determine
progress towards the necessary resumption of
negotiations on a peace agreement on the basis of the
principle of land for peace, the resolutions of the
Security Council and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
international community and the Security Council must
be fully committed, because the situation in the Middle
East is of urgent concern to us all. France and the
European Union have repeatedly shown our readiness
to assist in facilitating negotiations to the maximum
possible extent and to consider guarantees for a
possible new agreement. We note with great hope the
intentions expressed by the new United States
Administration. We must now move tangibly towards
peace, and France is resolved to play its full role to that
end.

