Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia): I would like to
express my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. Your diplomatic skills and wisdom will
no doubt ensure a successful conclusion to the
deliberations of the Council.

I would also like to record my delegation's deep
appreciation to Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana for his
able stewardship of the Council for the month of March.

My delegation welcomes your initiative, Mr.
President, for the Council to have an open discussion on
the question of Afghanistan. Malaysia has maintained that
it is important for the international community to continue
to be involved in Afghanistan until a concrete and durable
solution to the problem in that country is found.

The people of Afghanistan deserve peace, stability
and development in their country. We are concerned at
the worsening humanitarian situation as a result of the
continued fighting among the various groups and the
blockade of Kabul, as stated in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan.

Malaysia had hoped that, following the withdrawal
of the former Soviet Union from Afghanistan, peace and
normalcy would return to that country. Regrettably the
conflict has continued, bringing in its wake immense
destruction and misery for the Afghan people. The loss of
lives and limbs and the various forms of hardship faced
by the Afghan people are certainly uncalled for at a time
when many parts of the world continue to benefit from
the fruits of peace and socio-economic development.

 

The continued rejection by the various Afghan factions
of the peace proposals initiated by the international
community has dampened the prospects for an early
solution to the conflict. Malaysia therefore considers it
critical that all Afghan factions involved in the present
conflict settle their differences amicably and early. They
need to collectively ensure the success of the peace process
to bring about an independent, united and sovereign
Afghanistan. It is our desire to see Afghanistan take its
rightful place in the international community and contribute
towards efforts to promote peace, security and development.
While maintaining the need for concerted efforts -
and, indeed actions - by the international community to
bring peace and normalcy to Afghanistan, Malaysia is
concerned at the rapid escalation of foreign interference in
that country, as reported by the Secretary-General. The
involvement of foreign elements in Afghanistan remains an
obstacle to a peaceful settlement.

We share the view that national reconciliation and
reconstruction would be facilitated in Afghanistan through
the establishment of a fully representative and broad-based
authoritative council. Through such a council, hopefully, all
the feuding factions could eventually work for national
reconciliation, which would bring about urgently needed
peace and stability in Afghanistan. As a first step, the
warring parties need to end the senseless shedding of the
blood of innocent civilians and agree to abide by an
unconditional and durable cease-fire.

Malaysia would welcome any proposal to convene an
international conference to address the Afghan problem.
However, we should bear in mind that only the full
cooperation of all the Afghan factions and full support from
the international community can ensure the success of such
a conference. In this regard, too, we recognize that
countries in the region could make important and useful
contributions.

