Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open debate on
Ebola and for having introduced resolution 2177 (2014),
which was unanimously adopted and sponsored by
more than 130 Member States, including all 15 Security
Council members. I join those who have spoken
before me in thanking our briefers today, namely,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Dr. David Nabarro,
Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola;
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization (WHO); and Mr. Jackson Niamah,
the representative of Medecins Sans Frontieres, for their
insightful briefings and updates on the Ebola epidemic
in West Africa.

First and foremost, allow me to pay our respects to
the 500 victims of Ebola, including the medical staff.
We wish a quick recovery to those patients who are
still fighting that disease. I take this opportunity to all
medical and non-medical personnel, such as Jackson
Niamah, for their selfless dedication to the service of
the affected people.

Rwanda commends the United Nations system for
its prompt mobilization against the Ebola virus. The
WHO, which declared the Ebola epidemic as a public
health emergency of international concern, has launched
an Ebola response road map to guide international
support efforts. Earlier this week, the United Nations
system, as a whole, published an overview of needs and
requirements, which outlines the necessary resources
to effectively address the crisis in the next six months.

In addition to those efforts, we welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to establish a United Nations
mission for the Ebola emergency response, which will
be critical to mobilizing resources in the fight against
Ebola, as well as for the much needed prevention of that
disease in the future.

The efforts of the Security Council in support of
the peace processes and post-conflict peacebuilding
in the three affetced countries, as well as the obvious
security implications of the Ebola outbreak, justify its
due attention and the decision to hold this open debate.
In that respect, Rwanda cannot but agree with the sober
assessement of the Ebola threat contained in the letter
from the Presidents of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone
to the Secretary-General (S/2014/669, annex), warning
that the gains achieved since the end of the civil war,
conflict and stability, impressive as they have been, are
fragile and reversible. We all agree that the impact of
Ebola in the affected countries goes beyond a health
and humanitarian issue, as it has security, political and
socioeconomic implications.

In addition to the efforts of the United Nations
system, we welcome the mobilization by regional
and subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, as well as bilateral and multilateral partners,
such as the African Development Bank, in the fight
against the scourge. We welcome the pledges from
around the world to support the response road map, be it
with financial, human or other resources. As mentioned
by the Secretary-General, Rwanda has contributed to
that global effort.

We in particular thank your country, Madam
President, for the deployment of 3,000 troops to Liberia
to support the containment of Ebola, the establishment
of additional Ebola treatment units in the affected areas
and the assistance of the United States Government in
recruiting, training and organizing medical personnel
in the affected countries.

In order to succeed in curbing the spread
of the disease, there is a need to strengthen the
awareness-raising of the public to avoid the continued
stigmatization of the affected countries and peoples.
In that context, we recall the decision of the Executive
Council of the African Union to urge all countries that
have suspended or cancelled flights to the affected
countries to reconsider their decision, as the Secretary-
General reiterated this afternoon. The decision has
in fact contributed to the further deterioration of
the economies of those countries and a decrease in
humanitarian assistance.

Allow me to conclude by expressing Rwanda's
appreciation to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the troop- and police-contributing countries for
supporting Liberians in the implementation of its
mandate at this challenging time.

