Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Let me thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salame, for his briefing on the situation in Libya and
to assure him that my country, Cote d'Ivoire, supports
his efforts to bring about peace in Libya. I would also
like to commend the staff of UNSMIL on their efforts
in a very challenging environment. I would like to
sincerely thank Ms. Sharief for her relevant briefing
and ongoing commitment to ensuring that the voices of
women and youth are heard in the democratic process
in her country, Libya. Finally, I would like to commend
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden,
Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, on her briefing on
the twenty-seventh report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

Today's meeting gives me an opportunity to
talk about my country's concerns surrounding the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement and
the humanitarian and security situation in the country.
I welcome the international community's ongoing
commitment to assisting the Libyan people in their
quest for peace and stability, in particular since the
signing of the Agreement in Skhirat, Morocco. In spite
of its constraints, that important Agreement remains
the reference framework that will lead the country
to a democratic, credible and inclusive transition
and a sustainable political solution. In that regard,
C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the most recent presidential
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2017/26),
dated 14 December 2017, with regard to the situation
in Libya. The statement reiterated the continuity of the
Political Agreement throughout the country's transition
and enabled the Council to dispel all uncertainty
surrounding the political process and to foster
discussion among Libyan stakeholders.

Similarly, my delegation believes that the support
of the Council for the sequencing of operations detailed
in the action plan should enable the Government and the
people of Libya to lay the foundation for a consensus-
based constitutional reform, which is required for the
successful holding of future elections. In that regard,
the Ivoirian delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
foster political dialogue among the Libyan parties and
to encourage them to resolve, without delay and in the
interests of the Libyan people, all outstanding issues,
in particular the reconstitution of the Presidential
Council and the establishment of a representative unity
Government and a unified army. The political process in
Libya is now at a decisive juncture. All actors involved
in efforts to build peace in this brotherly country must
therefore work together to reach a sustainable solution
to the crisis. There is no other path to peace and security
in Libya. Cote d'Ivoire therefore encourages Libya's
neighbours, as well as France, the African Union,
the European Union and the United Nations, to work
together in order to bring peace to the Libyan people,
which, now more than ever, is within reach.

My country welcomes and pays tribute to the
efforts of the African Union and its commendable
involvement in the search for peace in Libya since the
beginning of the conflict. The Government of cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption of the road map of
the African Union on Libya and the tireless efforts of
President Denis Sassou Nguesso, Chair of the High-
level Committee of the African Union on Libya. Those
efforts led to the holding of the meeting of Lybian
tribal leaders in Brazzaville in November 2017 and to
a meeting of the main protagonists of the crisis, both
of which contributed to strengthening dialogue among
all parties.

My country calls on Africa and Europe to work
even more closely to support the Libyan people's
determination to achieve peace. This important
political progress must be taken into account so that the
national conference planned for next February lives up
to its purpose.

With regard to the humanitarian and security
situation, my delegation remains concerned about the
numerous human rights violations brought about in
large part by the armed militias and terrorist groups,
which are preventing the State from spreading its
authority throughout the country and preventing it from
maintaining order. The security situation in Libya is a
real source of concern for the international community,
which fears that the Islamic State and other terrorist
groups could take root in the country, which has already
seen a proliferation of armed militias. In parallel to the
political process and in order to guarantee its success,
we must also address the issue of armed militias and the
consequences of the jihadists' withdrawal to Libya and
foreign terrorist fighters who were defeated in Syria and
Iraq. The presence of those fighters is a serious threat
to stability and peace in Libya and they contribute to
the destabilization of the Sahelo-Saharan region.

There is no alternative to strongly countering
terrorists, human traffickers and smuggler networks if
we want to sustainably build peace and put an end to
the appalling practice of slavery, the selling of human
beings and the inhumane treatment of refugees, which
our countries have all condemned. In that regard, I
call on the international community to sign the joint
statement of the fifth Summit of the African Union
and the European Union, which was held from 29 to
30 November 2017 in Abidjan, in order to put an end to
this degrading situation and protect the life and dignity
of migrants and refugees.

Before concluding, I would like to express my
delegation's vigorous condemnation of the illicit export
of crude oil, which Her Excellency Ms. Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni just made us aware of in her briefing. This trade
is a source of funding for armed groups, prolongs
unnecessarily the suffering of the Libyan people and
complicates the resolution of the conflict, which is
tearing the country apart. The United Nations and the
Security Council cannot run the risk of allowing that
illicit trade to flourish. We must therefore take all the
necessary measures to put an end to it.

My delegation would like to reiterate its
congratulations to Mr. Salame for the excellent work
he is carrying out under difficult circumstances
in order to fulfil his mandate. We call upon the
international community to provide him, as well as
Libyan institutions and in particular the High National
Electoral Commission, all the support necessary to
ensure the successful holding and outcome of the
electoral process.

