Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg commends the Republic of Korea for
taking the initiative to organize this open debate on
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). Your presence, Sir, bears
witness to the commitment of your country to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for
his briefing.

I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by observer of the European Union.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, and the risk that terrorists
and other non-State actors may acquire such weapons
pose an undeniable threat to international peace and
security. To counter this threat, resolution 1540 (2004),
adopted unanimously 10 years ago, establishes a legal
obligation for all United Nations member

"to take and enforce effective measures to establish
domestic controls to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons and
their means of delivery, including by establishing
appropriate controls over related materials"
(resolution 1540 (2004), para. 3).

Since then, as other speakers have noted, many
States have implemented such measures. They have
often been assisted by other Member States or by
international, regional and subregional organizations
such as the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) or the
International Atomic Energy Agency. In the area
of assistance, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role. As a
clearinghouse, the Committee can bring assistance
requesters and providers together. The Committee's
role is also essential to promoting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) with the aim of achieving its
universality. In this context, we welcome the progress
made in raising the number of national reports to
the Committee, which now stands at 172 out of 193,
representing a rate ofnearly 90 per cent. The submission
and regular updating of national reports are important
confidence-building measures in the fight against all
types of weapons of mass destruction.

Despite progress towards universalization, the
challenges remain significant. Measures to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
should in particular be constantly updated and adapted
to changing technologies, since such technological
evolution can facilitate the acquisition of such weapons
by non-State actors.

To counter the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, close and effective cooperation between
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee is not only desirable but
essential. Cooperation among the three Committees
and their expert groups has helped to create mutually
beneficial synergies. On 18 November, the Chairs of
the three Committees participated - alongside the
Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1737 (2006) (2006) and 1988
2001), and the Chairman of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) - in a joint open meeting. The meeting
sought to raise awareness among Member States of the
measures imposed by the Council, and of the assistance
that the Committees, their expert groups and the FATF
could provide to Member States. It was an example of
cooperation that could inspire the future activities of
the 1540 Committee could.

The importance of resolution 1540 (2004) as an
essential tool in the field of non- proliferation was
highlighted with the adoption on 27 September 2013
of resolution 2118 (2013) on the elimination of Syria's
chemical weapons programme. On that occasion, the
Security Council determined that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere was a threat against international
peace and security. It also decided that Member States
should immediately inform the Council of any violation
of resolution 1540 (2004), so that it could take the
necessary measures in that regard.

Luxembourg is aware of the seriousness of the
threat emanating from the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. For that reason, my country
fully supports efforts towards the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Therefore,
in late 2013, in the context of our chairmanship of the
Forum for Security Cooperation of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Luxembourg
worked for the OSCE to increase its assistance to
Member States in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In our national capacity, Luxembourg is
currently making efforts to reform its export control
system in order to strengthen national mechanisms to
combat the proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction
and related technologies.

By presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, adopted
this morning, the Council renews the commitment
it undertook 10 years ago. It also recognizes the role
of the 1540 Committee and the essential contribution
that civil society, industry and the private sector have
to make. To counter the global threat posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, we must
indeed mobilize all energies.

