Mr. McCully (New Zealand): We start by
congratulating Spain on its leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and on
our common effort to ensure that the non-proliferation
regime that the Committee oversees is able to respond
to today's challenges.

My country has a long and proud record of activism
in relation to the threat and risks ofnuclear weapons. We
have long understood what it would mean for the world,
even in our remote part of the Pacific, ifthe doctrine of
mutually assured destruction were carried to its illogical
conclusion. We have seen the effects - security,
health, environmental and social - of the testing of
nuclear weapons in the South Pacific. We knew that
those threats and risks would multiply if the numbers of
parties possessing nuclear weapons were to grow. Put
simply, our safety and security i and the safety and
security of most United Nations Members - depend on
the effectiveness of international efforts to prevent the
spread of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction (WMD).

These are the reasons why New Zealand was
and remains a staunch supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, even as we
lament the failure of nuclear-weapon States to live
up to their commitments to pursue negotiations on
nuclear disarmament. They are also the reasons why
New Zealand is a strong supporter of the 1540 regime,
which seeks to address the risks of terrorists and other
non-State actors acquiring nuclear weapons, chemical
weapons and other WMD. They are the reasons why we
have supported the efforts led by Spain to upgrade and
expand the 1540 regime to make it more efficient and
responsive to today's realities.

We are disappointed that some Council
members - some permanent members - have limited
the full realization of what had been proposed. Today,
the materials, expertise and technology relating to
weapons of mass destruction are more accessible than
ever before. The Internet readily provides to anyone
information previously held in closed scientific and
military communities. Three-D printers mean that
specialized equipment can be developed anywhere,
and drones bought in a store or online can provide the
means of delivery for a WMD attack.

Terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, have acquired the materials and
know-how to manufacture chemical weapons and have
used them in combat. That was one of the very threats
that the 1540 regime was set up to prevent. We need
to consider how we can curb such developments, while
also being ready to deal with new proliferation risks
as they emerge - as they surely will. That requires
both early action and sustained commitment over the
long term.

One of the frustrations we have encountered
during our term on the Council - and one we met
again in the negotiations on today's resolution - is
the extraordinary aversion of some Council members
to ideas that would seem like simple common sense in
any other context. We as a Council are worried about
the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling into the
hands of terrorists or would-be terrorists. We know that
one of those risks arises when a State may not have
the systems or the capabilities to deal with that threat
and would benefit from more active cooperation. Yet
in the resolution we were unable to endorse the simple
proposition that this Council might take the initiative
to offer such cooperation through the 1540 Committee.

I understand that the objection is that such an
offer might be construed as inconsistent with State
sovereignty, or an unwarranted intrusion into the
internal affairs of the State concerned. That is very
frustrating. If the Council continues to constrain
itself with such overly sensitive notions of sovereignty
and non-interference, it risks becoming increasingly
ineffective and irrelevant. Such an attitude is seriously
at odds with the many strong calls, including by the
Secretary-General-elect, for a much greater emphasis
on prevention.

An issue of particular importance to New Zealand
in today's resolution is the acknowledgement that a risk-
based approach is appropriate when considering the
implementation of the 1540 regime. Our Pacific region
is nuclear-free and strongly committed to preventing
the spread of those weapons. But the small island
developing States (SIDS) of the region do not produce
or export sensitive materials, so the proliferation risk
in their cases is low. Pacific SIDS also have small
administrations with limited capacity to enact and
implement complex 1540 legislative requirements,
which are often not directly relevant to them.

We recognize that mandatory Council resolutions
must apply to all Member States and that, in the case of
the 1540 regime, our non-proliferation efforts are only
as good as the weakest link in the chain. But it is neither
sensible nor realistic to impose the same administrative
and reporting burdens on a country like Tuvalu or
Nauru - countries with populations of 10,000 people,
with no shared borders or proliferation-sensitive
industries - as we do on much larger countries, such
as France or the United Kingdom, Ukraine or Egypt, or
even Uruguay or New Zealand. We are pleased today's
resolution urges the Committee to prioritize efforts
towards specific risks and towards countries and
regions that are the most vulnerable to proliferation.

New Zealand restates its commitment to global
disarmament and nonproliferation efforts and our
support for the 1540 regime. We have been active in
helping our Pacific Island partners understand and
implement their obligations. We have been a strong
advocate of working through regional bodies, such
as the Pacific Islands Forum, and we stand ready to
continue to play our part over the long-term.

In concluding, we commend Spain for today's debate
and its work to make the Council's non-proliferation
regime more effective.

