Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on

your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March, a presidency that has
been marked by dynamism and vigour. That, of course,
is a reflection of the constructive work of the Russian
Federation in the Middle East, as so well illustrated by
the visits to the region by your Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Sergey Lavrov. I also convey my gratitude to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Panama, for the outstanding way in which he led our
Council last month.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his introductory statement. It would be remiss of us, of
course, not to convey our gratitude to the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing to the
Council.

It is my great honour to address this Council on
behalf of the Arab Group, representing the League of
Arab States.

This meeting of the Security Council takes place
at a time when the deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories is well known to all
Council members and, in fact, to the international
community as a whole. That is due to the obdurate
stance taken by Israel and its attempts to extinguish
any hope of a just and lasting peace, in particular
following the renewed momentum created by the
Annapolis Conference.

Indeed, for over four decades now - that is, the
duration of the Israeli occupation - the Palestinian
people have never ceased to aspire to the creation of an
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital and with the return of refugees in conformity
with Assembly resolution 194 (III). Israel has always
worked to undermine those hopes and to prolong the
suffering of the Palestinian people. It has carried out
settlement policies and has intimidated the population.
That is a systematic policy, which is a clear and brazen
violation of existing norms and standards.

Everyone is well aware that the Israeli occupation
authorities, on a daily basis and before the eyes of the
world, engage in practices that run counter to the
provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. That has been accomplished through acts of
aggression against the civilian population and by
prohibiting access to basic services and humanitarian
assistance, which has led to a serious deterioration of
the situation of the Palestinian people, especially in the
Gaza Strip. It is compounded by the settlements policy,
the continued confiscation of lands and the
construction of the separation wall despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.

Not only does Israel destroy the hopes of the
Palestinian people for an independent Palestine and a
stable Middle East, it also is attacks the credibility of
this Organization and its ability to redress wrongs,
restore the rights of Palestinian people and restore
justice. Through its barbarian policies, it has
contributed to weakening the authority and profile of
the United Nations, as well as its credibility. All of that
is unquestionable.

Faced with the situation in the Middle East -
which is the result of Israeli intransigence, its refusal to
work towards peace and the persistent threat to
international peace and security it causes - the world
turns to this Council. The world thus expects this
Council to take urgent measures to force Israel to work
for peace and to put an end to the bloodshed in Gaza
and the West Bank by taking immediate measures to
launch a just peace process that would lead to an Israeli
withdrawal from the Arab territories occupied in 1967
and allow for the emergence of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, in
conformity with the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003)
and General Assembly resolution 194 (111).

It is high time that the Council disprove the
allegations heard worldwide that it is hostage to a
number of its members who have taken a certain
position regarding the conflict and have backed Israel.
It is high time that the Council shoulder its
responsibilities and live up to the trust and confidence
that people place in it, that is, that it put an end to the
daily bloodshed in the Middle East and to the practice
of collective punishment, which runs counter to the
principles of international law and international
humanitarian law and those enshrined in the Charter.
That should enable the Palestinian people to enjoy a
decent life.

The occupied Syrian Golan continues to suffer
under Israeli occupation, as it has since June 1967. The
inhabitants of the Golan continue to suffer from the
inhuman practices of occupation and annexation,

despite resolution 497 (1981). In addition, measures of
collective punishment are being carried out against
Syrian citizens in the occupied Golan, who reject the
occupation and are fighting against it. That is all taking
place in brazen violation of international law, the
Charter and the Fourth Geneva Convention. As
Mr. Pascoe said, the procedures for building
settlements in the Syrian Golan are still being carried
out - they are still being carried out.

The Arab territories in Lebanon continue to suffer
under the yoke of Israeli occupation. Israel is also
continuing its maritime, aerial and land-based
violations of Lebanon's territory in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). It continues to refuse to
provide maps of mine fields and cluster bombs dropped
during the conflict in Lebanon in the summer of 2006.
The impact of that conflict is still felt by Lebanese
citizens to this very day. It falls to this Council to put
an immediate end to the Israeli occupation and to work
towards a withdrawal of Israel from occupied Arab
lands.

Statements made by the members of the
international community here today have reaffirmed
the support of the international community for the
Palestinian people in their fight against the Israeli
occupation. The same is true of statements calling for
the Council to assume its important role in the
maintenance of international peace and stability by
taking all measures necessary to restore peace to the
Palestinian people and to put an end to collective
punishment by forcing Israel to withdraw from all
occupied Arab territories.

I hope that this will not just be a repeat of the
recent past. The Arab Group calls on this Organization
to fully play its rightful role, within the framework of
efforts aimed at strengthening the role of the United
Nations. We hope that the Secretary-General will
participate in the Arab summit to be held at the end of
this month in Damascus. We also call for an end to the
Israeli occupation, one of the last bastions of
colonialism in this century.

