Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Australia, as Council President
for November, for taking the initiative to convene
today's open debate on international cooperation to
combat terrorism and violent extremism. This is a
timely opportunity for us to assess the progress made
by the international community in combating terrorism
and to examine the gaps, fragilities and shortcomings
in our efforts. It follows the conclusion of the fourth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, conducted earlier this year.

There is no doubt that the phenomenon of terrorism
is a danger to the existence of societies, a threat on
the same scale as that posed by devastating natural
disasters. My country has long had to grapple with
terrorism. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is still
attempting to undermine the sovereignty and authority
of our State, taking advantage of the humanitarian,
social and economic situation that we in Yemen must
confront. Yemen calls for international efforts to
establish partnerships and to pool efforts to address
terrorism.

My Government has developed a national strategy
to combat terrorism in accordance with Ministerial
Decree No. 147 of 18 September 2012. The decree
covers several areas of action, including political and
economic issues and money laundering. There is also
a component that focuses on training in the judicial
arena. It provides for raising awareness in the military
and law-enforcement sectors. There is also a project
designed to bring together all the laws on the matter.

In addition, we are facing difficulties because of
the lack of financial resources. Our ministries and
Government agencies entrusted with the implementation
of that strategy are hamstrung by resource constraints.
As is well known, Yemen is undergoing a difficult
political transition, in addition to a very difficult
humanitarian, economic and social situation. Despite
robust military campaigns to eliminate Al-Qaida and
its affiliates in various areas, and notwithstanding some
success in that regard, the political climate remains
unstable. Furthermore, our resources have been
severely taxed and stretched thin because of problems
compounded by the return of displaced persons. That
means that we need our international donors to honour
their commitments. We are still waiting for them to
deliver on their pledges. Furthermore, the Government
of my country has discovered that most Al-Qaida
combatants are foreigners; some 70 per cent of them
come from a wide geographical area. We therefore need
all countries to exchange information to stem the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters from many countries.

We wish to reiterate that efforts to combat
terrorism must address the roots of the problem. Yemen
was one of the first countries to call for addressing the
underlying causes of terrorism's spread. We believe
that poverty and unemployment lead to the spread of
terrorism. Based on the latest assessments, there are
terrorist fighters earning $500 per month, whereas
our Government soldiers are earning a mere $100 per
month.

Despite the many conferences and meetings that
we have had on the economic, social and cultural
underpinnings of terrorism, the international
community should look further into the consequences
of military operations, air raids and drone strikes, and
their impact on civilian areas where terrorists are hiding.
If we are to combat terrorism, we need military, legal
and security monitoring at the highest levels - that is
something that we all know.

Transnational terrorist groups have at their
disposal a wide range of modern technologies that
enable them to adjust to current realities and work
around our attempts to combat terrorism. The solution
can come only through an international coalition to
combat terrorism so that we can effectively stem the
spread of this scourge and ensure that the international
community is rid of it once and for all.

