Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando
and the Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their valuable briefings.

We have followed with interest the efforts made by
the Government of Burundi to conclude the referendum
on the Constitution, which was held on 17 May 2018,
with the participation of the majority of the political
parties. According to the preliminary results announced
nationally by the Independent National Electoral
Commission, 73.26 per cent of voters voted in favour
of the constitutional changes. That is a very high turn
out. Indeed, it reflects the ambitions of the Burundian
people, despite the relative calm prevailing in Burundi
at the time. We hope the presidential elections in 2020
will be conducted in the same environment of calm.

In accordance with that milestone reached in
Burundi, we urge the Government to move beyond
the present stage and make future plans to promote
the well-being of the people of Burundi, whose
security and livelihoods have suffered as a result of
the political instability over the past two years. We
stress the importance of holding an inclusive national
dialogue without preconditions in order to allow for the
expression of the aspirations of all Burundian people.

In that vein, we highly appreciate the concerted
effort made by President of Uganda Yoweri Museveni,
the mediator of the political dialogue led by the
East African Community (EAC), and Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, its facilitator. We hope that the dialogue will
be successful and reach consensus solutions that will
ensure the political stability of Burundi. We reaffirm
the need for the Government of Burundi to engage
with regional and international organizations, namely,
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union and the EAC, to ensure the desired stability.

We have followed with interest all of the efforts made
last year to bring the parties to the conflict in Burundi
to the negotiating table in Arusha. Unfortunately, those
efforts have not been successful. Therefore, we call for
the continuation of such efforts because we believe that
no tangible progress in the political process between
the opposition and the Government of Burundi can
be achieved unless all parties are brought to the same
negotiating table to reach consensus and put an end to
political polarization and establish the rules for law
and security. The only way to achieve such consensus
is for all parties to comply with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which was
signed in Tanzania in 2000.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
voluntary return of the Burundian refugees following
the tripartite agreement signed among the Government
of Burundi and the Government of Tanzania and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. The Burundian authorities must redouble
their efforts to ensure the refugees' reintegration in
society and establish an environment that is conducive
to that objective.

