Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia,
for convening and earlier presiding over this important
open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We also appreciate the briefings by
the Secretary-General and invited speakers.

Chile reaffirms its commitment to supporting
multilateral efforts aimed at non-proliferation and the
prohibition of the use and possession of all weapons of
mass destruction, and we continue to promote the debate
in a broad, transparent and democratic multilateral
space in line with our foreign policy.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) forms the cornerstone of the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, and its
universalization and balanced implementation should
be based on its three pillars. We welcome the fact that
the Open-ended Working Group to develop proposals
to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament
negotiations for the achievement and maintenance
of a world without nuclear weapons, which recently
completed its work in Geneva, has recommended, by
an overwhelming majority, the start of negotiations on
a legally binding instrument banning nuclear weapons
with a view to their elimination, thereby complementing
the NPT. We expect advances in that process and look
forward to the possibility of concluding an instrument
that would ban the only weapons of mass destruction
that have never been explicitly prohibited, despite the
fact that they violate elemental norms of international
humanitarian law.

With respect to chemical weapons, we urge
universal adherence to the Convention that regulates
and condemns their use under any circumstances,
including by non-State actors. Moreover, the
combined threat of biological knowledge, a global
health emergency and the possible use of toxin agents
by non-State actors calls for the urgent creation of a
verification mechanism for the Biological Weapons
Convention. We expect progress in that area at the next
Review Conference on the Convention, which is to be
held in November this year.

The threat of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction is more prevalent than ever before,
and States must therefore redouble their efforts to meet
the obligations of resolution 1540 (2004).

In conjunction with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, we
are organizing the first training course for focal points
in the Latin America and the Caribbean region for the
resolution. The course will be held in Santiago from
24 to 28 October, and we hereby invite the States of our
region to participate through their focal points.

In 2017 we will organize, along with Argentina, the
second iteration of the bilateral exercise on cross-border
radiation safety known as "Paihuen" with the support
of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

Finally, we are completing the steps towards being
accepted as a member of the Wassenaar Arrangement
on export controls relating to arms and dual-use
technologies, which will allow us to improve our import
and export standards regarding military and dual-use
material in alignment with the standards expected from
resolution 1540 (2004). We also support the ongoing
comprehensive review of the resolution.

Finally, our country supports the human security
paradigm that places the individual at the centre of
its priorities, with human rights and international
humanitarian law forming the basis of our understanding
of security, as we will continue to do especially in this
area.

We express our gratitude to Malaysia as President
of the Security Council and to Spain as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) for their leadership and
determination on this matter of crucial importance to
the international community.

