Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and
appreciate his tireless efforts to promote the peace
process in the Middle East.

China has listened attentively to the statements
made by the representatives of Palestine and Israel.
China is greatly concerned about the situation between
Palestine and Israel and by the plight of the Palestinian
people. We are grieved by the large number of casualties
caused by the conflict in Gaza, including civilian
casualties and women and children. We strongly
condemn any indiscriminate use of force or actions that
cause casualties among innocent civilians.

In spite ofthe ceasefire in Gaza, the situation on the
ground remains fragile, and the humanitarian situation
is worrisome. To change the situation once and for all
will require Palestine and Israel to work together with
the rest of the international community. The recurrent
conflicts between Palestine and Israel in Gaza show
once again that a deadlock in the peace talks is bound
to aggravate tension and drag both parties into a vicious
cycle of returning violence for violence. It is also one
more reminder to the international community that
peace talks are the only way out on the question of the
Middle East.

We hope that Palestine and Israel will adhere
to the strategic choice for peace talks and seize the
opportunity offered by the ceasefire to resume as soon
as possible and push forward substantive negotiations,
so as to achieve an early settlement of the question of
Palestine that will eventually create an independent
State of Palestine that enjoys full sovereignty on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

Palestine and Israel live next to each other as
neighbours. Peace between them will therefore require
goodwill from both sides. We call on Israel to put an
end to the construction of settlements in the occupied
territories, release Palestinian prisoners as soon as
possible, lift the blockade on Gaza and create the
conditions necessary for the resumption of peace talks.
We hope that the Palestinian factions will strengthen
their unity and work together in support of the national
consensus Government.

Meanwhile, the legitimate security concerns of
Israel should be addressed. Peace and security should
be enjoyed and maintained by both Palestine and Israel.
At present there is a pressing need for reconstruction
in Gaza, and China is pleased by the positive outcome
of the recent Cairo conference on reconstruction in
Gaza. We hope that the international community will
deliver promptly on its commitments. We hope also
that Israel will cooperate actively with the international
community's relief efforts so as to enable relief to reach
the people of Palestine quickly and smoothly.

The question of Palestine is one in which
international peace and security is at stake. The
Security Council should shoulder its responsibility and
play a role, as is called for. It should push Palestine
and Israel to keep the ceasefire in place so that the
safety and security of civilian lives and property can be
protected, and push also for substantive progress on the
question of Palestine. We welcome the draft resolution
of the Security Council recently distributed by Arab
States and support action being taken by the Security
Council so as to effectively respond to the reasonable
request made by Palestine and other Arab States.
China is a firm supporter and sincere mediator for
peace between Palestine and Israel. China has been
pushing for peace and negotiations between Palestine
and Israel, including the five-point proposal for peace
submitted shortly after the recent outbreak of conflict.
We have also twice provided emergency humanitarian
assistance in cash to the people of Gaza. We are ready
to join the rest of the international community in a
continued and tireless effort to achieve peace between
Palestine and Israel so as to maintain regional peace
and stability in the Middle East.

