Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and also to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene today's debate
between the Security Council, which is in charge
of peacekeeping for the Secretariat, and regional
organizations, as well as the main troop-contributing
countries, which will speak later and which are also key
actors in peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping operations are a key tool at the
disposal of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, regional organizations
play a growing role in peacekeeping, which we must
encourage. We must therefore continue with our efforts
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations,
be it through the Security Council or the Secretariat,
and regional organizations.

The issue of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations inspires four
comments on the part of France. To start with, a
basic observation is necessary. In most of the crises
addressed by the Council, action is undertaken, for the
most part in partnership with regional organizations. It
has become a natural reflex. In that respect, the African
organizations are clearly emblematic, particularly the
African Union (AU). Accounting for nearly 70 per
cent of the Council's action, Africa, indeed, plays a
special role in the work of the Council. In that context,
cooperation with the African Union has become part of
its daily functions.

That partnership has deepened in recent years
to include several areas of work. In the political
arena, several partnership arrangements have been
created, for example, the Council's support in regional
mediation efforts, whether in the form of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan
and South Sudan or the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) mediation concerning South
Sudan. Another example of partnership is the joint
mediation conducted by the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) with the support of
the AU and the United Nations in the Central African
Republic, which, a few days ago, helped in the effort to
work out a ceasefire agreement.

Various forms of AU-United Nations partnership
can also be found in the area of operations, inter alia,
logistical support by the United Nations to support
anti-terrorism actions on the part of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which would fall outside of classic
United Nations peacekeeping efforts. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
is also worth mentioning, as is the African Union's
interim stay with the United Nations in Mali and later,
in the Central African Republic. Such multifaceted
cooperation should be encouraged. Article 52 of the
Charter of the United Nations provides that

"[t]he Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local disputes
through such regional arrangements or by such
regional agencies".

Generally, regional organizations are well suited to
resolving crises, whether through their knowledge of
the situation in the field, their areas ofinfluence or their
self-interest in the stability of neighbouring countries.
A natural complementarity exists therefore between
the United Nations, which embodies peacekeeping's
universal dimension, and regional organizations.

That cooperation also helps in promoting
regional ownership, in this case by Africans, of their
own security. United Nations support enables the
development of capacities, thereby strengthening the
actions of regional organizations. For example, the
Senegalese contingent that is taking over the new rapid
reaction force of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in Liberia
will strengthen capacities that will be used in the
peacekeeping efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States.

France and the European Union fully support
strengthening the regional organizations, particularly
in Africa. Regarding the military sector, France and the
European Union have become military partners of the
African Union. First, in Mali, and now in the Central
African Republic, French and other European soldiers
have conducted actions in support of African Union
soldiers to ensure the protection of civilians under the
mandates contained in the Council's resolutions. In the
Central African Republic, the tripartite partnership
was clearly key to assisting the rapid intervention
before mass crimes could be committed. I would like
here to take the opportunity to salute the courage of
the soldiers of the African Union, European Union and
France, who acted in harmony to protect populations
at risk.

In the financial arena, the European Union is the
largest contributor to African Union operations and
finances 90 per cent of that organization's programme
budget. The European Union's African Peace Facility
is a unique tool facilitating the EU's support of the
African Union when it deploys operations to preserve
peace on the continent. As examples we can cite the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, which have demonstrated the decisiveness of
such support. To preserve that tool, it is also necessary
that African organizations be able gradually to assume
an increasing share of the financial burden of their
actions and that other African partners contribute to the
financing of African peace operations.

Finally, on the diplomatic front, France is studying
its role in terms of its partnerships with African
organizations. In the spirit of close partnership, the
President of the Republic convened on 6 and 7 December
2013 an Africa-France summit on the issue ofpeace and
security in Africa. Its purpose was to define particular
ways to support the AU in coping with crises, whether
via the African Standby Force or the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crises.

The adoption of resolution 2167 (2014), introduced
by Rwanda, is valuable in highlighting, in terms of
policies, the importance of the link between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly the
African Union. We await with interest the outcome of
the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General,
in close consultation with the African Union and
the European Union, on lessons learned regarding
cooperation efforts in Mali and the Central African
Republic and with recommendations for improving
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union. That work will nourish the parallel review of
peacekeeping announced last month by the Secretary-
General and will enhance the Council's efforts in
maintaining peace and security, particularly in Africa.

