Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The killing of the new leader of Hamas,
Mr. Al-Rantisi, as a result of an Israeli missile attack
has led to a drastic exacerbation of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. In Moscow serious
concern is being expressed over possible consequences
of this event and the rising tensions in the Middle East.

On numerous occasions Russia has declared its
rejection of extrajudicial executions and targeted
eliminations. We are not casting doubt on Israel's right
to defend itself from terrorist attacks and to protect its
civilian population. However, that right must be
implemented within the framework of international
law, in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention. Acts
of force of this type cannot result in either a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement or in any shift in the
region as a whole.

Today, on instructions of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Russia, his special representative on the
Middle East settlement, Ambassador Kalugin, was sent
to the region to help promote international and regional
efforts to prevent further deterioration of the situation
and to straighten out the situation in Palestinian-Israeli
relations. During his upcoming contacts with the
parties in the Quartet and the regional parties there will
be discussion of specific modalities for linking the
Israeli plan for unilateral disengagement from the
Palestinians with the road map for a Middle East
settlement.

Russia bases itself here on the need for consistent
implementation of all principles and provisions agreed
on in the road map, which, after approval by the
Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003), received
international legal status. We wish to emphasize that
the modalities for a solution to such sensitive issues as
the final status of the Palestinian territories, the
borders, the fate of the refugees, the problems of Israeli
settlements and East Jerusalem must be determined
through agreement between the sides.

The legal basis for settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict has been defined in resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), which
provide for a regional settlement within the framework
of negotiations and demand compliance with the
principle of the inadmissibility of acquiring territory by
force.

Russia intends to continue to work intensively on
the restoration of the negotiating process, precisely on
this universally recognized basis, which was
established by the United Nations. The world
Organization bears responsibility for the
implementation of the road map. The key to success is
in joint actions. Russia favours the speedy convening
of the meeting of the Quartet at the ministerial level
and with the Secretary-General, at which it would be
possible to discuss issues linked to the Israeli proposals
and the implementation of the road map.

