Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's timely
and important debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his thoughtful briefing to guide
our deliberations.

The negative consequences of the misuse of
arms - small, light or heavy - are well known
and amply documented, as are factors such as illicit
trade, brokering, diversion, lax regulations and the
weak management of weapons stockpiles. Every day,
innocent people, including women and children, fall
victim to the murderous designs ofterrorists, criminals
and insurgents using such weapons. Peacekeepers,
police and security forces bear the brunt of that reality
in the line of duty. Such lethal instruments of violence
are widely available, inexpensive and easy to transport
and to conceal.

We concur that such arms are major enablers of
criminal violence and conflict. The nexus between
organized crime, drug trafficking and the illegal arms
trade adds a layer of complexity to an already daunting
challenge. The United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms, the International Tracing Instrument
and the Firearms Protocol provide solid normative
frameworks for addressing the use, regulation and
impact of such weapons. All States need to intensify
efforts to fully implement those mechanisms.

The Arms Trade Treaty has set global benchmarks
for regulating the transfer of those arms. We hope that
the Treaty is enabled by its States parties to achieve the
goals enshrined in it.

For developing countries, particularly in Africa,
the role of international assistance and cooperation is
critical. It is the principal enabler of global, regional and
national efforts to regulate and prevent the use of such
weapons. We therefore call for stronger commitments
from the international community to mobilize resources
to that end.

The regulation of arms, including through enhanced
controls and improved standards for their transfer, is
essential. The enforcement of arms embargoes imposed
by the Security Council is also vital. Effective marking
and increased cooperation in the tracing of weapons are
also necessary.

However, such mechanisms focus primarily on
regulating the supply side of weapons. There is an
urgent need to develop mechanisms and mobilize the
political will to address the demand side. That means
dealing with unresolved disputes, the root causes of
conflicts, the breeding grounds for terrorism and the
factors behind the rise in organized crime.

The causes of war are even more important to
address than the instruments of war. In order to deal
with the growing and unacceptable human cost that
such weapons inflict, a comprehensive and integrated
approach is required. We wholeheartedly endorse
the Secretary-General's call in his report for "a
multidimensional approach" (S/2015/289, para. 21) that
addresses arsenals and ammunition flows, legitimate
grievances, past and current human-rights violations
and the underlying drivers of conflict.

The current peacekeeping and peacebuilding
toolkit, while valuable and essential, needs to be
supplemented with more strategic and innovative
approaches to conflict prevention and resolution.
That means going beyond managing conflicts or their
manifestations and investing more in preventing and
resolving them. It is perhaps time to initiate a new debate
about the linkages between excessive production, trade
and the use of those arms and their impact on societies.
We know from historical experience that instituting
controls on trade and transfer cannot be separated from
motivations behind the production of arms.

Similarly, arms acquisition by States motivated
by security needs cannot be de-linked from their
production and sale, which is driven by profit and
politics. It remains a grim irony that weapons that propel
and sustain conflicts come from areas or regions that
themselves enjoy peace. Only four countries account
for two thirds of global arms exports, while developing
countries, mainly in the Middle East, Asia and Africa,
are major importers. We need to make the entire chain
of development, production, trade, transfer and the
impact of these arms part of the new global debate.

Pakistan has developed the necessary legislative,
regulatory, enforcement and institutional mechanisms
to regulate the sale, supply, import and transfer of
those arms. An inter-ministerial group addresses those
issues in an integrated manner. We have adopted policy
guidelines for the export of conventional arms and have
established mechanisms to regulate the trade, ownership
and use of these arms. We are also taking additional
measures, including in the areas of enforcement,
imports and licensing. We have regularly filed national
implementation reports on the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects that
outline national measures taken over the years.

Finally, the Council has addressed the issue of
small arms for many years in areas within its purview.
There are potential synergies that can be generated
between the Council and other processes led by the
General Assembly. Given the enormity and complexity
of small arms issues, it would be prudent to leverage
complementarities while being mindful of respective
mandates. We look forward to continuing the debate
during the meeting of governmental experts next month.

