Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to express my
delegation's pleasure at seeing you, Sir, personally
presiding over the Security Council this month. We are
confident that having the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
this prominent position will help promote the agenda
and efforts of the international community to reach
viable solutions to the problems of today, in particular
with regard to the Middle East and Africa. We also
express our great appreciation for the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Japan and the members of
his delegation throughout the previous month. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing earlier.

The United Nations can no longer address the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the question of Palestine as if
it were business as usual. The inability of the Security
Council to carry out its basic duties cannot be allowed
3
to produce disastrous results for our region and its
peoples, namely, aggression, colonization, continued
Israeli occupation and suffering. The United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular are
therefore called upon to rise to the level of the
purposes and principles of the Charter by trying to
implement at least some of the hundreds of resolutions
and decisions adopted in this international
Organization since its inception to put an end to the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, stop its violations
of human rights there and halt its practices that
contravene international humanitarian law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. That is the most
important thing as we discuss the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East in the Security Council.
That is at the heart of the matter. We should not be
sidetracked by the representative of Israel as we
discuss an issue that has been before the Council for
decades.

Arab States endeavoured to establish peace at the
Beirut Summit of 2002 and at the recently held 2008
summit in Damascus. They have also reiterated the
need to establish a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, the principle of land for
peace, the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

Meanwhile, instead of reaching out to the Arab
hand outstretched in peace, Israel responded by
attacking the West Bank and carrying out the J enin and
Nablus massacres, enforcing a blockade on the
defenceless Palestinian people, and by specializing in
killing women and children, desecrating places of
worship, changing the character of Jerusalem and
Judaizing it, carrying out a scorched-earth policy and
collective punishment and mass arrests and building
settlements and constructing the racist separation wall
on occupied Palestinian lands. That is Israel's record
with regard to the item now under consideration, which
is the situation in the Middle East.

Not satisfied with these cumulative, provocative
violations, Israel carried out its brutal aggression
against Lebanon in the summer of 2006 and another
aggression against Gaza recently. This entailed war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which, as the
Council knows, outraged international public opinion.
International opinion now demands with unprecedented
insistence that the Israeli perpetrators of these crimes
be put on trial.
Recently, 16 prominent international personalities,
including senior judges and human rights advocates, such
as Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Ms. Mary Robinson and
Justice Richard Goldstone, sent a letter to the Secretary-
General in which they called for an immediate,
independent international inquiry into Israel's violations
of international law during its recent aggression against
the Palestinian people in Gaza. Richard Falk, the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,
described this aggression as a war crime. In this context,
our delegation will follow the situation carefully, as the
Secretary-General carries out his commitment to forward
to the Security Council the findings of the Board of
Inquiry dispatched to Gaza, headed by Ian Martin, as
soon as possible.

We must not overlook the article that The
Guardian published setting out the first-hand testimony
of Israeli soldiers and officers who participated in the
aggression against Gaza, soldiers and officers who
targeted Palestinian ambulances and medical relief
workers, and who killed 47 among them.

Nor must we overlook the testimony of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. She spoke of a young Palestinian boy, not
even 12 years old, who was used by the Israeli army in
Gaza as a human shield. They placed him in front of an
Israeli tank to protect the tank from Palestinians who
were trying to defend themselves. The outcome was
that the Israelis themselves shot 70 bullets into the
body of this young Palestinian boy.

Israel's continued disregard for the Security
Council and its continued waste of the Council's time
would astonish even forerunners of the theatre of the
absurd, such as Kafka and Kierkegaard, for those who
are interested in such matters. It is now time for this
Council to put an end to Israel's absurdist acts before
this esteemed Council. The question that remains is
this: If the Arab hand outstretched in peace does not
meet a hand outstretched from the other side, what
reason is there to keep this Arab hand outstretched in
peace? Would it please the international community to
see the peace process collapse and its foundations
falter?

The continued occupation of Arab land in
Palestine, the intensified settlement and colonization
activities in the Syrian Golan and in Palestine and
09-28062

Israel's persistence in occupying Lebanese territories
and in refusing to abide by legitimate international
resolutions in order to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East have all led to
an escalation of tensions, an absence of stability and
security in the region and a situation that is
deteriorating in all its aspects. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, is called
upon to hold Israel's leaders accountable for their
repeated crimes, which are legally defined as war
crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of
genocide. What Israel is doing to Palestinians is the
true holocaust.

Despite Israel's desperate attempts to justify its
aggression against Gaza, what it is doing now in the
West Bank and Jerusalem reveals its true intentions
towards the Palestinian people. Israel is not content
with its racist policies and its practices of coercion. It
has escalated its brutal attacks against the residents of
Jerusalem who live close to the Al-Aqsa mosque,
demolishing their homes and displacing them in an
attempt to breach the sanctity and diminish the
significance of the Al-Aqsa mosque and to Judaize the
city of Jerusalem. Israel's decision to demolish
88 homes in the village of Silwan near the Al-Aqsa
mosque and its continued excavations under the
mosque are nothing but an attempt to carry out a
preconceived plan to take control of the mosque and
demolish it. They are deceiving themselves when they
think in such a manner.

An even more repugnant and surreal
manifestation of the conduct of the Israeli occupation
authorities is the fact that these authorities impose a
fine of $20,000 on any Palestinian whose home these
authorities demolish. Their justification is that this
money is to cover the expenses of the demolition. What
does the Council think of that? Israel is thus asking the
Palestinians to pay the price of the bullets it will use to
shoot them. How surreal, how sadistic this is.

It is also strange that the Israeli Government has
issued a decision preventing any Palestinian cultural
activity in Jerusalem, which by an Arab decision was
declared the Arab cultural capital. In parallel, Israel
continues its settlement activities in the occupied Arab
territories and the construction of the racist separation
wall in blatant violation of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Today is also the sixth
anniversary of the assassination of American peace
activist Rachel Corrie, who was run over by an Israeli
bulldozer because she opposed the demolition of
Palestinian homes to build the separation wall.

Most of the world's countries and every United
Nations body have adopted clear positions condemning
Israeli settlement activities, which impede the
establishment of peace, are in contradiction to the
pledges made at Annapolis, constitute a genuine
obstacle to peace and lead to an escalation of tensions
in the region.

Syria reaffirms its steadfast and continuous
support for the rights of the Palestinian people to
regain their occupied land and establish their own
independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital. We
also reiterate the need for an immediate end to the
oppressive blockade against the Palestinian people in
Gaza, for the reopening of all crossings, for the
reconstruction of Gaza and for international guarantees
to prevent Israel from demolishing again the facilities
and infrastructure that are to be rebuilt.

In order to demonstrate its solidarity with the
Palestinian people, Syria took part in the Sharm el-
Sheikh conference and has participated in the
international efforts to rebuild Gaza. Syria reaffirms
the need to restore Palestinian national unity through a
national dialogue so as to strengthen the Palestinian
negotiating position and the resolve of its people. As
Chair of the Arab summit, Syria is striving to achieve
that unity.

Israel continues to refuse to return occupied
Golan to Syria, and to abide by legitimate international
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981). Israeli
actions in the occupied Syrian Golan have exceeded
every legal and moral boundary. It has pursued its
policy of terrorizing and suppressing Syrian citizens of
the Golan, arresting them and placing them in
detention centres in conditions that jeopardize their
lives. In that connection, I would like in particular to
mention our national Bashir Al-Muqt. My Government
has appealed to the Secretary-General and the Red
Cross to save his life. In that regard, we appeal to the
United Nations and the Security Council to pressure
Israel to release Syrian captives, including journalist
Atta Farhat, who was arrested by Israel because of his
nationalist journalistic work, given a show trial and
sentenced to three years in prison.

Israeli occupying authorities continue to
expropriate land and to expand their illegitimate and
illegal settlements in the Syrian Golan. With the
approval of the occupation Government, the so-called
Golan Regional Council on settlements decided to
begin the construction of new housing on 40 dunums of
land near the Israeli settlement of Aniam, which was
established on the ruins of the Syrian village of
Al-Tibah. Representatives from Israeli parties in the
settlement of Qatzrin, which was built on the ruins of
the Syrian village of Kasreen, signed a joint
cooperation agreement to coordinate their efforts to
oppose any Israeli withdrawal from the Golan. The
Israeli army has also recently carried out massive
military exercises in the occupied Golan, employing all
sorts of land, naval and air weaponry.

I would like to remind the Council that the
number of victims of Israeli landmines in the occupied
Syrian Golan stands at 531, including 202 fatalities,
most of whom were children. That is in addition to the
329 injured persons with permanent multiple
disabilities.

Israel continues to refuse to allow the resumption
of family visits by Syrian citizens in the occupied
Golan through the Quneitra crossing point. My country
has sent letters in that regard to the Secretary-General,
the Presidents of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and governmental and non-governmental
organizations, calling for their intervention to
immediately resolve this urgent humanitarian issue. We
have yet to see any success in the efforts of those
parties to support international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

In conclusion, Syria has made the strategic choice
of a just and comprehensive peace on the basis of the
well-known terms of reference for peace, including
resolutions of international legitimacy. By definition,
that entails the return of all occupied Arab territories,
including occupied Syrian Golan, a return to the lines
of 4 June 1967 and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital. The
continuation of the occupation is a contradiction of
peace. By definition, too, that requires mobilizing all
possible means to put an end to it.

