Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Sir, for calling today's meeting.
We warmly welcome Mr. Coulibaly, Foreign Minister
of Mali, to the Security Council. We would like
to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Annadif and Ambassador Skoog for their
respective briefings.

Recently, there has been positive progress in
terms of implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The new Government of the
country is firmly committed to the peace process.
China expresses its appreciation for the efforts being
carried out by the Malian Government and the Malian
people. At the same time, however, the security
situation in northern and central Mali remains grim.
Terrorist activities are rampant inside the country and
in neighbouring areas, which seriously affects the peace
process. The international community should continue
to support the peace and reconciliation process in Mali
and help the country to enhance its ability to provide
for its own security and development.

First, it is necessary to increase input in the
peace process. China hopes that the signatories to the
Malian peace agreement will continue to demonstrate
political will, fully implement the various provisions of
the Agreement and work together to achieve national
development and reconstruction. The international
community should, on the basis of respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country, help Mali to increase its ability to provide
for its own development and governance. The Chair
of the Mali sanctions committee, Ambassador Skoog,
recenlty led the Council's mission to the country and
held talks with various parties concerned. China hopes
that the sanctions committee will play a constructive
role in facilitating the Malian peace process.

Secondly, the security situation in the country
continues to deteriorate. The international community
should, as requested by the Government, continue to
support and help the Government to enhance its security
and counter-terrorism capacity-building so that the latter
can gradually assume the responsibility for maintaining
order and security on its entire territory. It is necessary
to take an integrated approach and, through regional
cooperation, to respond to terrorist activities inside
the country and along the borders. China welcomes
the formation of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which will enable them to
cope and respond to terrorist activities and threats on
their own initiative, and hopes that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the international community
will continue to provide support to the countries of the
region and the Joint Force.

Thirdly, China appreciates and supports the
tremendous work carried out by MINUSMA and
Special Representative Annadif to facilitate the peace
process and to strengthen security capacity-building in
Mali. We hope that MINUSMA will continue to work
in close cooperation and coordination with the Malian
Government so as to help the country to strengthen its
security capacity-building and promote disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

China commends the timely briefing by the
Secretariat on MINUSMA's support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Forces and looks forward to an update from the
Secretary-General's May report in that connection.

The issue of the security of MINUSMA personnel
is deeply concerning. Since the start of this year, there
have been three attacks on peacekeepers, resulting in
the deaths of peacekeepers from Bangladesh, Chad and
the Niger. China offers its condolences to the bereaved
the families and to the Governments of Bangladesh,
Chad and the Niger. The international community
should do more to enhance the safety and security of the
peacekeepers, and we hope that MINUSMA will beef
up its security measures so as to ensure that supplies
and installations for security are in place. At the
same time, we hope that it will continue to strengthen
communications with troop-contributing countries and
donors so as to ensure that it has the equipment and
resources necessary to execute its mandate and ensure
self-protection.

China has more than 400 peacekeepers deployed to
MINUSMA. We will resolutely honour our commitment
to peace in Mali and, with the rest of the international
community, to support the peace and reconciliation
process in the country so as to help it to achieve peace,
stability and development.

