Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): In thanking the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire
for including this important item on the December
programme of work, I would also like to welcome
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, the new Special
Representative for Haiti and Head of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
for her clear, detailed and most informative briefing.
We also assure her that the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is entirely at her disposal, in the confidence that
her academic profile and professional experience will
add great value to the responsibilities entrusted to her.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea is alarmed
by recent events that have taken place in Haiti over
the past quarter, characterized by popular revolts that
have caused loss of human life, numerous injuries
and considerable material damage. Our most heartfelt
condolences go to the Government of Haiti and the
families affected. The July protests targeting fuel
subsidies, as well as more recent ones denouncing
the mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds and a lack
of improvement in the provision of social services,
underscore the importance of a socioeconomic policy
that covers all social strata and demands more from
those responsible for its management.

We note the efforts of President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, and his Government
to resolve that situation through a series of measures,
such as the decision to eliminate subsidies for
petroleum products and the subsequent presentation
of his approach to the Prime Minister to provide all
the necessary support to the relevant institutions, in
particular the judicial system, in the investigation
of complaints concerning the mismanagement of
PetroCaribe funds. Such efforts show his willingness
to positively respond to the demands of the population.
In that regard, we call on the parties involved to remain
calm and support the Government's initiative, which
has opened a space to investigate the complaints that
have been raised.

We welcome the enactment in October of a bill
on the creation, organization and functioning of the
National Council for Legal Aid, which establishes the
legal framework for Haitians to access legal advice,
regardless of their social status. That bill represents an
important milestone in the effort to reverse the increase
in pretrial detentions. The importance of the presence
of women in the State's strategic decision-making
circles must be stressed. To that end, the Government
must achieve the minimum 30 per cent set forth in the
Constitution, and not only in departments traditionally
occupied by women.

As we near the end of the pre-election year, my
delegation urges political actors, civil society and the
Government not to influence action that could incite
the population to violence, with a view to guaranteeing
a safe environment to facilitate the holding of next
year's elections, which will be an indicator for the
stability and development of the country. In that regard,
we commend both the Government's commitment to
holding elections on time and its request for United
Nations electoral assistance.

With regard to the humanitarian situation,
it is important to highlight the important role of
MINUJUSTH and other United Nations agencies,
which, following the earthquake of 6 October,
collaborated on national rescue activities by providing
support to the Haitian National Police in the affected
areas. Similarly, we commend the support provided
during the rainy season, which significantly thwarted
the anticipated increase in cholera cases, with new
suspected cases declining nationally to an average of46
per week in September and the first week of October,
compared with 301 suspected weekly cases during the
same period in 2017.

Despite the efforts of the Government and the
United Nations system in Haiti, we are convinced that
much remains to be done to achieve the objectives of
MINUJUSTH's exit strategy. It is therefore obvious that
important aspects remain difficult to achieve, such as
the adoption and, above all, the implementation of laws
that are considered to be indispensable to strengthening
the rule of law in Haiti. To that end, the leaders and the
general population, with the support of MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team, as well as the
international community, should make continuous
efforts to ensure an effective and safe transition
that ensures sustainable and lasting development in
the country.

