Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour of
delivering the following statement on behalf of all five
Nordic countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden.

First of all, allow me to thank the Belgian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. The group of five small countries (S-5),
namely, Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore
and Switzerland, also deserves praise for its untiring
work in maintaining focus on this very important,
though less media-friendly, aspect of Security Council
reform.

In agreeing to accept and carry out the decisions
of the Security Council, Member States of the United
Nations have conferred a tremendous and historically
unprecedented amount of power and legitimacy upon a
decision-making procedure in which they do not
participate directly themselves. It is therefore of utmost
importance that the Council, when acting on behalf of
all the Member States, take all possible steps to ensure
maximum transparency and interaction with Members
outside the Council. Furthermore, while the absence of
a reform of the Council's membership remains a major
gap in the efforts to modernize the United Nations,
improving the Council's working methods becomes all
the more urgent to secure the necessary transparency,
efficiency and interaction among Member States.

The Belgian concept paper underlines the need

for a clear understanding of the rationale for the

Council's adoption of a specific meeting format. The

Nordic countries share this concern and suggest that,

when appropriate and clear, the President of the

Council could, upon opening the meeting, explain the
rationale for choosing the given format.

It is of the highest importance that the Council be
kept continually informed on political aspects of issues
on its agenda. In this respect, we would welcome
regular opportunities for briefings from all parts of the
Secretariat. In addition to the welcome briefings from
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
we would also like to hear from the Department of
Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
in order to be briefed on political and peacebuilding
perspectives as a complement to the peacekeeping and
humanitarian perspectives already being provided.

The regularity and quality of briefings for
non-Council members has increased. The ongoing
focus on the issue of transparency has made every
member of the Security Council aware of the
obligation entailed by Security Council membership to
keep the wider United Nations membership informed.
On the whole, presidential briefings have worked well.
But more detailed explanatory briefings should aim to
be as inclusive as possible in order to inform all
interested countries about developments on issues
before the Security Council that might affect them.
Iceland, as a small island State, is greatly aware of the
challenges faced by the least developed countries and
the small island developing States in this regard.

Some years back, members of the Council agreed
that interactive wrap-up sessions at the end of a
presidency would be useful so as to increase
transparency and the availability of information
emanating from the Council. Such sessions - some of
them held in public - were potential arenas for
assessing the Council's contribution and for addressing
the issue of lessons learned. Unfortunately, this
tradition was discontinued a couple of years ago, and
the Nordic countries would like to encourage Council
members to take up that practice again. Alternatively,
regular reports of the Security Council to the General
Assembly, with an assessment by each outgoing
presidency, could be instituted.

The annual report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly should be made as substantial and
analytical as possible. The Council could hold an
interactive discussion on the annual report when the
report is considered by the General Assembly.

Transparency should make it easier for
non-Council members that have a real interest in or
knowledge of a matter to make a contribution. Such
contributions are in the interests of all Member States.
In this context, the five Nordic countries would urge
the Security Council to take steps, when possible,
towards making draft resolutions and presidential
statements available to non-Council members as soon
as they are introduced in informal consultations of the
whole.

I would like to pay particular tribute to the work
of the independent website Security Council Report,
which has made a major contribution, since its
relatively recent creation, to transparency and
predictability with regard to the work of the Security
Council. The Secretariat is also to be complimented on
the improvements it has made to the official Security
Council website. The webcasts are also very useful and
should be continued and expanded if possible.

We are also convinced that additional
improvements are needed in the interaction and
information flow between, not only the General
Assembly and the Security Council, but also the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, in order to
implement the much needed, truly integrated approach
to matters related to peace and security. In this regard,
we wish to emphasize our continued support for the
practice of inviting the chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission to brief the Council on a regular basis.

Interaction with regional organizations such as
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the European Union has
intensified. We welcome the emphasis on regional
organizations' increased responsibility and ownership
of efforts to solve regional conflicts. At the same time,
it is important that this approach take place within the
United Nations framework and with the Security
Council's support.

Interaction, transparency and legitimacy in the
working methods and procedures of the Security
Council's subsidiary bodies, particularly the sanctions
committees, are paramount in further strengthening the
protection of fundamental rights of individuals and the
rule of law. The five Nordic countries would like to
recall paragraph 109 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document regarding the necessity of ensuring
"fair and clear procedures for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them, as
well as granting humanitarian exemptions"
(A/RES/60/1, para. 109).

In this regard we welcome the adoption of
resolutions 1730 (2006), 1735 (2006) and, most
recently, 1822 (2008). Those resolutions constitute
important steps in the right direction with regard, inter
alia, to transparency towards both States and
individuals. Further moves towards truly fair and clear
procedures should include the introduction of an
independent advisory input to the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), especially with respect to requests for
de-listing.

Finally, as the Belgian concept paper points out,
efficiency, transparency and interaction are closely
intertwined. The Nordic countries will continue to
contribute constructively to helping the Security
Council function better on all these levels, and Iceland
will, if elected to a seat on the Security Council this
October, seek to carry forward this important work.

