Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Michael Kafando for his briefing on the current
political situation in Burundi. We are also grateful
to Ambassador Jiirg Lauber for his briefing on the
socioeconomic cooperation between the Government
of Burundi and its international partners. We have been
closely following the political developments in Burundi
and we are very much encouraged by the continued
stable security situation in the country.

Following the statement made by President Pierre
Nkurunziza of Burundi on 7 June, we were very hopeful
that the next step would be the relaunching of the
East African Community (EAC)-led Inter-Burundian
dialogue, with the participation of all stakeholders, to
settle the political impasse in the country. We share
the concern raised by the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/1028) about the lack of progress on the
inter-Burundian dialogue, which was expected to be
launched from 24 to 29 October.

As we have repeatedly stated, the political impasse
in Burundi can be addressed only through peaceful,
inclusive and consensual dialogue. Hence, the decision
on the future of the intra-Burundian dialogue, which
has been facilitated by the EAC with the support of
the African Union and the United Nations, on the basis
of the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and the constitution of Burundi, remains
critical in light of the fast-approaching national elections
in Burundi in 2020. In that regard, it is important
that there be engagement between the Government
of Burundi and the international community based
on a realistic strategy aimed at supporting strong
institutions and creating a climate that is conducive
to the conduct of peaceful and credible elections and
the consolidation of recent gains, without backsliding
into the violence of the past. All Burundian parties
need to demonstrate a spirit of compromise in order
to ensure lasting peace and stability beyond 2020.
On the part of the Government of Burundi, it is
important to have an open-minded engagement with the
international community, explaining the plan to create
an environment conducive to the conduct of free and
fair elections in 2020 as well as the commitment to the
spirit of the Arusha Agreement.

The Council should explore new avenues for
re-engagement with Burundi. It is time that the
Secretary-General be fully engaged in cooperation
with the East African Community and the African
Union. In that regard, we take note of the Secretary-
General's call for a thorough discussion in order to
examine the political process so far, learn the lessons
and chart the way forward. We expect that the East
African Community will take the lead on this and come
up with creative yet workable solutions.

Finally, while we welcome and encourage the
work of the Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission in serving as a bridge
for dialogue between Burundi and the international
community, we request the international community
to do more to alleviate the socioeconomic difficulties
and to address the humanitarian situations of the people
of Burundi.

