Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): As much as I am tempted to
speak without my prepared speech, I find that in order to
save time it would be wise to confine myself to my
prepared text.

On behalf of the Government and the people of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, I thank you most sincerely,
Mr. President, for convening this dialogue in the Security
Council on the situation in Africa and the impact of AIDS
and security. The fact that no less a person than the Vice-
President of the United States presided over the
proceedings today underscores the importance your
country attaches to the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Africa. In
this regard, the financial commitments announced by the
Vice-President are welcome.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, deserves
special commendation for his statement, which not only
painted a true and pathetic picture of the scourge of
HIV/AIDS in Africa but also called for urgent
international action to save mankind from the looming
catastrophe.

As my President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, recently
reminded the General Assembly, Africa is bearing the
brunt of this terrible disease, which now kills about 2
million people annually on the continent. Indeed, it has
overtaken malaria as Africa's major primary health-care
problem. In fact, the World Health Organization report
released last November showed that of the 5.6 million
people in the world diagnosed with HIV last year, 70 per
cent were in Africa, and nowhere is the rate of HIV
infection growing faster than in Africa.

The impact of HIV/AIDS is multidimensional. That
it threatens the security of any nation cannot be in doubt.
Demographically, the population is incrementally
decimated or, at best, debilitated. Economically, the
labour force suffers attrition, thereby paralysing national
productivity, economic growth and sustainable
development. It destroys communities by generating social
disharmony. The physical defence of the nation is not
spared either, as the manpower needed to secure nations'
territorial integrity is most adversely affected. Even the
residual population is systematically whittled down
through death from this pandemic. Women and children
are not spared. The worst impact of all is the looming
extinction of entire populations of nations.

It is now scientifically well established that this
killer disease does not respect national boundaries. It thus
poses a serious and real threat to humanity and universal
security. Global statistics have not shown any nation,
developed or developing, to be free from HIV/AIDS. But
its prevalence in Africa, a continent of 53 developing
countries and toddling economies clamped down by huge
external debt overhang and lack of technically skilled

 

human resources, deserves urgent national and international
joint action to find solutions and work towards the
eradication of this global scourge.

What must be done? As one of its new national
priorities, Nigeria has renewed its commitment to the
crusade against HIV/AIDS at various levels. President
Obasanjo has assumed personal leadership of the campaign
against HIV/AIDS in Nigeria. Indeed, the cabinet
committee on HIV/AIDS was inaugurated this morning in
Nigeria. Policies are being reviewed to ensure a more
favourable environment for HIV/AIDS control. More
stakeholders are being mobilized in the response against
HIV/AIDS through the Expanded National Response to
AIDS (ENRA). More funds are being allocated to our
national AIDS programmes. The media awareness campaign
is being intensified at all levels of government, with an
active response from both local and international non-
governmental organizations. HIV surveillance has been
intensified to define the determinants and driving force of
the epidemic.

The Nigerian Government hopes that access to
information and the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, combined with access to curative
drugs, will have a positive impact at the grass-roots level of
society to stem the spread of the disease. It is of the view
that HIV/AIDS-diagnosed persons must not be stigmatized
and treated as outcasts of society. They need understanding
and therefore must be encouraged to be open about their
affliction, as this is the only way to ensure that the problem
is adequately tackled at all levels. Education and
information therefore must play vital roles for the
containment and the subsequent eradication of this global
problem.

Such national efforts as these stand to achieve little,
given the enormity of the pandemic and the socio-economic
and scientific hindrances prevalent in the African continent.
Just as the impact of AIDS is multidimensional, so should
the solution to it take into account not only the aspect of
medical cure but also the concomitant hindrances that
militate against Africa's efforts to rid itself of disease and
develop its people and its economies.

Africa has been ravaged by intractable armed conflicts,
disease, poverty and so on. As if the devastating effects of
those things were not enough, HIV/AIDS has been added
to its woes. The HIV/AIDS pandemic, which threatens
mankind with extinction - and especially today in
Africa - together with armed conflicts, deserves no less
attention from the Security Council than the use or threat of
nuclear weaponry in any part of the world, which is
rightly regarded as a threat to international peace and
security. Nigeria therefore hopes that the results of this
discussion today will mark the beginning of the
establishment of concrete action plans to address this very
urgent world problem.

Encouraged by the goodwill of the global partnership
against AIDS, we believe that the issues of AIDS and
armed conflicts, with all their impact on the African
situation, will be accorded the status of an international
security agenda item, which they deserve and which, we
also believe, fall within the competence of the Security
Council.

