Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Mr. President, let me
start by conveying our heartiest congratulations to you
on your assumption of the Council presidency. I would
also like to pay tribute to Ambassador van Walsum for
his distinguished leadership of the Council in
November.
We appreciate the comprehensive briefing given
by the Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans Corell, on the work
done by the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Secretariat on international terrorism. The
comprehensive briefing note provided by him in
advance has been very useful.

It is indeed a timely initiative to take up the
question of follow-up to resolution 1269 (1999), on
international terrorism in the context of Council
responsibility, a year after its adoption. Information on
progress in different areas, as required in paragraphs 2,
3 and 4 of that resolution is, as we expected, found in
the latest report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document A/55/179 of 26 July and its addendum of 9
October. The scope of our deliberations is therefore
somewhat delineated by the debate in the Sixth
Committee, which had the report of the Secretary-
General before it. Our purpose here is also to express
support for the work of other organs of the United
Nations, Member States and regional and international
organizations.

In the context of the Council's responsibility in
the matter, we shall briefly comment on the follow-up
of some of the provisions of resolution 1269 (1999).

Let us first take up paragraph 2. Three things are
required of all States: full implementation of
international anti-terrorist conventions to which they
are parties, adhering to remaining conventions and
speedy adoption of the pending conventions.

It is encouraging to note the increase in the
number of States parties to the anti-terrorism
conventions. The Government of Bangladesh is now
engaged in examining the relevant international
instruments with a View to early signature, ratification
and accession, as the case may be. Simultaneously, we
are undertaking an examination of the need for and
forms of implementing domestic legislation.

We recognize some progress in the adoption of
pending instruments since adoption of the resolution.
The General Assembly adopted the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism on 9 December 1999. The United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
was adopted on 15 November 2000. Bangladesh
expects to sign that Convention at an early date, upon
completion of the examination process by the
Government.

Two draft conventions have been under
negotiation in the General Assembly's Ad Hoc
Committee. The initiative taken by the Russian
Federation in proposing the draft convention on the
11

S/PVAZAZ

 

suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism has been
highly appreciated. Mr. Corell's briefing has provided
an update and a very pertinent analysis of the state of
negotiations. We regret the impasse over the questions
of activities of national armed forces, State terrorism
and dumping of radioactive waste.

Bangladesh has welcomed the initiative taken by
India in preparing a draft comprehensive convention.
There is a need for an overarching instrument to
provide a possible basis for global consensus for
dealing with terrorism and underpinning effective
international cooperation. We have also expressed
support for holding an international conference and
hope the Ad Hoc Committee will be able to agree on
the agenda of the conference when it meets next
February.

We welcome the progress made over the year in
strengthening international cooperation, as called for in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1269 (1999). We appreciate
the initiative taken by the Secretariat.

Paragraph 4 requires a series of measures by all
States, ranging from prevention and suppression of
terrorist acts and prosecution or extradition to refusal
of asylum to terrorists and exchange of information. A
more substantive and regular review of the
implementation of these and other provisions of the
resolution could be undertaken on the basis of a report
from the Secretariat.

We have noted that the Secretariat intends to
make specific mention of paragraph 5 of the Council's
resolution in the future reports of the Secretary-
General on the subject. For a regular follow-up by the
Council in the areas under its responsibility, we wonder
whether it would be a good idea to have the report of
the Secretary-General issued as a document of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council in View of
the implications of terrorism for international peace
and security recognized by the Council in the
resolution.

Let me conclude by reiterating that, as a matter of
principle, Bangladesh condemns all acts of terrorism,
irrespective of motive, wherever and by whomever
committed, as they Violate the norms of international
law, respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights and affect international peace and
security. We shall continue to contribute to the efforts
aimed at combating international terrorism in all its
forms.
12

