Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia for their briefings.
China pays tribute to United Nations peacekeeping
police officers, who serve under difficult and complex
circumstances, for their dedication and sacrifice.

As a result of the diverse nature of conflicts and
disputes, there has been a marked increase in United
Nations peacekeeping policing mandates in recent
years. China would like to make four points with
regard to ensuring proper conduct in United Nations
peacekeeping police units.

First, peacekeeping police units must strictly
implement the mandate of the Security Council, abide
by the basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping
and respect the sovereignty of the host State. While
assisting the host country with its security-sector
reform and its police capacity-building and training,
United Nations police must fully respect the opinions
of the host country, while also constructively providing
training, advice and other support. Police units must
also formulate work plans suited to the conditions of
the host country, pay attention to communications
and public advocacy and seek the understanding and
support of the public of the host country.

Secondly, efforts should be made to make
peacekeeping policing more relevant. When deploying
a peacekeeping operation, the Security Council should
ensure that the mission's mandate is viable and practical.
The Council must clearly prioritize the mission's tasks,
and not attempt to cover everything in its mandate. The
result of the peacekeeping-policing mandate should be
evaluated in a timely manner. The mandated tasks and
the scope of the deployment should be correspondingly
adjusted in the light of the changes in the situation on
the ground.

Thirdly, there should be comprehensive
improvement in the management of peacekeeping
policing contingents. Peacekeeping operations
should streamline and optimize procedures for their
establishment, deployment and rotation, be more
forward-looking, ensure better planning, optimize the
set-up of the police component and utilize the limited
resources available for maximum results. Concerning
the rotation of police contingents and the transportation
of equipment, police-contributing countries should
be afforded more options and greater freedom. It is
necessary to seek, and pay attention to, the opinions
of police-contributing countries when adjusting the
rotation of contingents

Fourthly, capacity-building in peacekeeping
policing should be strengthened. Peacekeeping missions
should set up complete peacekeeping policing training
mechanisms and ensure that the training helps police
officers fulfil their mandate, implement their tasks and
respond appropriately to various contingencies and
emergency conditions and situations. Furthermore,
peacekeeping missions should explore ways and means
to improve and implement a system of performance
evaluation in order to effectively monitor and assess
the capacity for discipline and the equipment of their
personnel so as to be able to implement dynamic
management and ensure the quality of the police
contingents.

China dispatched its first peacekeeping police
contingent to the United Nations in the year 2000,
and it is now one of the major police-contributing
countries of the United Nations. Last September, in the
course of attending various United Nations summits,
President Xi Jinping announced a number of concrete
initiatives and measures that China will take to support
United Nations peacekeeping operations. China is
ready is undertake joint efforts with the international
community to promote ongoing progress in United
Nations peacekeeping policing efforts.

