Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The

right of every human being to live in lasting peace and
security should be sacred. That is one of the reasons for
the founding of the United Nations. That right lies at
the heart of the purposes and principles of the
Organization, and it is that right from which it derives
its authority and mandate. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict is thus a basic responsibility of the
United Nations. It is also a collective responsibility,
imposed by international humanitarian law. On that
basis, we believe that the dialogue currently under way
in the Council is vital in order to promote the efforts of
the Organization in this area and to bring about further
progress in dealing with this serious challenge.

We welcome the recent report of the Secretary-
General, which reviews developments relating to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict during the past
18 months. We agree with its conclusions that three
issues have emerged that represent a challenge to the
ability of States to protect civilians: sexual violence
and gender-based violence; the illegal commercial
exploitation of the natural resources of States; and the
threat of terrorism.

My delegation would like to make a number of
important points in this respect. First, within the
framework of the commitment to the principles of the
Charter as contained in Articles 1 and 2, including the
political independence, sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of States, which must be respected
by everyone, we would like to stress that the protection
of civilians in armed conflict must not lead to the
disregard of the concept of State sovereignty or of the
responsibilities and powers that States have in their
territory. Balance between those two elements is
necessary; indeed, it is vital, particularly since
international law has dealt extensively with such
elements and determined the commitments, duties and
rights of States and individuals.

Secondly, during the past few years the Security
Council has discussed the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, adopting a number of
resolutions and issuing several presidential statements
on the subject. That reflects the importance that the
Council attaches to this vital issue, which is gaining in
importance because of the growing number of civilian
victims of armed conflicts, compared with numbers of
a decade ago, and the increase in the number of such
conflicts, particularly in Africa, which accounts for
almost half the total number of conflicts worldwide.

What makes matters worse and further
complicates the situation are the changes that have
occurred with regard to the methods used by
combatants and their conduct, whether at the
international or domestic levels, and the growth in
internal, regional and ethnic strife, including ethnic
cleansing, accompanied by the disintegration of
Governmental institutions and a breakdown in the rule
of law and order.

We believe that a major element in the growth of
these tragic phenomena is the fact that countries are not
abiding by the provisions of international humanitarian
law, notably the Fourth Geneva Convention and its two
Additional Protocols, while in some cases governance
and responsible authority are absent as a result of
internal strife. We should like to take this opportunity
to emphasize that a number of international legal
instruments set out elements of international law whose
application goes beyond the parties to such
instruments. The most obvious example of this is the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its two Additional
Protocols, which go beyond the States parties and
apply to the entire international community, setting out
an internationally agreed framework for the treatment
of civilians in armed conflict or under occupation.

Thirdly, on more than one occasion the United
Nations has succeeded in proving that it is able to
intervene effectively to protect civilians, most notably
in the Balkans, East Timor and Sierra Leone. There are
many other situations that have not been accorded the
same degree of importance or in which such
intervention has not been as successful. These include
other parts of Africa and the Middle East.

Despite the increasing awareness of the Members
of the United Nations of the scale of this new challenge
and their agreement with regard to the responsibility of
the Organization, whether through the Security Council
or the General Assembly, for preventing conflict and
resolving it in a peaceful manner, as well as their belief
in the importance of providing protection and
humanitarian assistance to civilians victims of armed
conflict, the international community still has a long
way to go in this respect. A flagrant example of the
failure of the international community, and the United
Nations in particular, is the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories - the West Bank and Gaza -
where the civilian population is suffering daily from
the incursions of the occupying forces, which are
violating the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and its first Additional Protocol. The
suffering of children, women, the elderly and other
vulnerable sectors of society grows worse and longer
day by day. What increases the suffering further is the
fact that medical and humanitarian care is delayed and
access to victims prevented. The fact is that the
occupying Power has actually impeded the work of
those who seek to provide care.

The practices of the Israeli occupying forces and
their continued use of heavy weaponry in densely
populated civilian areas have resulted in a doubling of
the number of civilian casualties, which has led to a
deterioration in the standard of living in all areas, in
particular in the social, economic and health areas.

Egypt strongly condemns and totally rejects this
situation. We cannot accept any justification for such a
situation, regardless of the claims that are made,
particularly since the right to resist an occupying
Power is a sacrosanct right guaranteed by the Charter
of the United Nations and by international law. That
right is complemented by the right of peoples to self-
determination and to independence.

Fourthly, we believe that dealing with the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
accorded the highest priority in the work of the
Organization, and of the Security Council in particular.
We should also devote greater attention to the most
vulnerable areas, notably Africa and the occupied
Palestinian territories. We must also devote greater
attention to the most vulnerable sectors of society,
which lack protection and care.

In this context, Egypt expresses its serious
concern at the increased rate of violence against
women and children during armed conflict and at the
negative economic, social, psychological and physical
impact it has on them. On this basis, and in order
effectively to combat injustice against women, Egypt
last September hosted a conference at Sharm el-Sheikh
aimed at setting up a new international movement for
women and peace. Many prominent international
personalities participated in that conference.

The purpose of that conference was to initiate a
series of activities in preparation for an international
conference in 2004 dealing with the issue of women
and peace. The outcome of the Sharm el-Sheikh
conference emphasized the importance of recognizing
women as an effective element in the settlement of
conflicts and of acknowledging the importance of their
participation in efforts at peacebuilding.

In conclusion, I should like to extend my thanks
to you, Madam President, for convening this meeting to
address this very important issue. I truly did not intend
to speak unless you were presiding. I should like to
emphasize my delegation's support for the

Organization's and Council's efforts in this area and
our full readiness to participate actively in these
activities.

