Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Mr. President, my
delegation first of all wishes to associate itself with the
statement presented by the representative of Papua
New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific Island small
island developing States. Solomon Islands, a small
island developing State with least developed country
status, thanks you most sincerely for organizing this
meeting. This action alone demonstrates how seriously
your country is in taking the lead to address the
adverse effects of climate change.

Countries such as mine, located in a disaster-
prone region, bear the brunt of climate change on a
daily basis. Climate change has redefined our
subsistence economy and our traditional lifestyle; it
has caused irreversible damage to our fragile
ecosystem and the mainstay of our economies in
agriculture and fisheries. It has pushed back the gains
in development by 10 years. Schools and clinics that
were painstakingly built over the years can be washed
away by a tsunami in a matter of minutes, thus
increasing the insecurity of our children and future
generations.

Solomon Islands views climate change not only
as a development issue but also as one of security. We
feel that all principal organs of the United Nations
should be seized of the issue, given this phenomenon's
growing threat to the globe. It is an issue of survival,
especially for small island developing States. In this
regard, we are participating in this debate, and we look
to the United Nations for leadership to garner the
necessary international support in order to act
collectively to address environmental issues on all
fronts. Today we are aware of the acceleration of
environmental degradation and its effect on climate
change, although their correction is a much slower
process.

More people die from the effects of climate
change than from domestic and international wars put
together. The frequency and intensity of cyclones,
floods, earthquakes, tsunamis and droughts have
increased globally. The 2004 Asian tsunami claimed
too many lives in just a few hours. Two weeks ago, my
country, Solomon Islands, was not spared. A tsunami
claimed more than 50 lives, environmentally displaced
5,000 people and forever restructured the geography of
the affected areas. All this occurred within minutes. As
I speak, Solomon Islands is dealing with environmental
refugees who are fleeing their locations, because
portions of the islands have sunk. On other islands,
reefs and coasts have risen up to 3 to 10 metres - not
centimetres, but metres. Fishing grounds have shifted,
reefs have been lost, coastal infrastructure has been
damaged and water and agriculture have been
disrupted, which could well be fanning the flames for
future conflicts?

For a country in which more than 80 per cent of
the land is owned under a customary regime, any
relocation has an impact on the land-tenure system; if
not handled well, the changes could fuel future
conflicts. Today we are accommodating the internal
movement of people. Soon it will spill over into the
international scene, where environmental victims will
not be refugees, but survivors. That fact will redefine
the pattern and push factors of migration. We should
not wait for that day to happen.

Solomon Islands, as delegates are aware, just
came out of an ethnic conflict some five years ago.
This is a complex situation for half a million people
who speak 80 different languages and are successfully
going through a nation-building process with regional
and international support.

Addressing climate change is a conflict prevention
imperative, given the aforementioned argument.

The United Nations and its Member States exist
for one another. But, unfortunately, on the issue of
climate change - despite its global impact - we
remain divided on adopting a common approach to
addressing it as a development or security issue.
Currently the issue of climate change is discussed -

like a comet - in a substantial way once every four to
five years through a conference; and annually through
the Commission on Sustainable Development process,
for two weeks. After that, the issue is revisited after a
l2-month period. No organ deals with it year-round.
That is because, since the inception of the United
Nations climate change process, the issue has received
divided attention from the global community.
Conferences had to be organized to get the issue of the
environment on the radar screen; as soon as such
conferences come to a close, it disappears again.

If we are indeed serious in addressing our
environmental challenges, we must give climate
change as much attention and commitment as we give
to issues such as terrorism. The wider United Nations
system must structurally respond to the call - not only
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, but the Security Council as well. The issue of
the environment needs to be depoliticized; we need to
close the divide that exists; we must build bridges and
streamline our common commitment in implementing
agreed international climate change frameworks. These
agreements have not been matched by resources for the
small island developing States. The Mauritius Strategy
will remain a strategy unless it is financially supported.

Energy remains an important link to today's
debate. It could provide some answers in terms of
cleaning up our atmosphere and addressing our
security concerns. In the case of Solomon Islands,
fossil-fuel imports account for a third of our national
budget - just to provide energy to 20 per cent of the
population. We are aware of the potential of renewable
energy. With the transfer of environmentally friendly
technologies, especially community-based hydro
schemes, we will be in a position to reach the wider
population and, most important, free up resources from
the national budget to meet our other commitments
related to the Millennium Development Goals,
including empowering ourselves to adapt to our
environment.

We need to establish a renewable energy trust
fund targeting the small island developing States if we
are to make any meaningful changes. More important,
the United Nations will be able successfully to impose
environmental governance only if it changes and
adopts an economically based, people-centred rural
community approach, because the resources, the coasts
and everything else belongs to the people. The concept
of carbon credits must receive international support.
Mr. President, I will close by thanking your
Government for the assistance it has rendered in
connection with the recent tsunami in Solomon Islands.
I extend my gratitude also to two other permanent
members of the Council, France and the United States.
I also thank other Members, including Turkey and
Singapore. I include also my own immediate
neighbours Australia, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Fiji and Vanuatu, which have also bilaterally
supported us, and our Pacific neighbours in general.

