Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to express Argentina's satisfaction
at seeing you, Sir, preside over this meeting of the
Security Council at such a critical time for the Middle
East. I would like to convey to you my country's thanks
in particular for being here with us today.

I would like to talk about two issues: the Syrian
crisis and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. With regard
to Syria, Argentina welcomes the progress made in
the recent weeks and days, in particular the meeting
of senior officials of the United States, the Russian
Federation and the United Nations, which opened the
way for the convening of the second Geneva Conference
on Syria. As we are all aware, it is a historic opportunity
to put an end to the conflict in Syria. The process that
will begin there will not be easy. Given the extent
of the hostility among the parties and the amount of
violence and mutual distrust, reaching agreements will
be an extremely difficult task. We appeal to all parties
to avoid any action that could undermine the process
of the Conference. In that context, we endorse the call
by the Secretary-General for a ceasefire, allowing the
United Nations to support peace talks between the
Syrian Government and the anti-Government forces.

In order for the second Geneva Conference on
Syria to be successful, the regional and international
actors supporting both parties in the dispute must be
fully convinced that only a political solution is possible.
As we have said on other occasions, Argentina believes
that peace in Syria depends, to a large extent, on what
key regional or international actors do or fail to do. All
those that have a decisive influence on the parties must
play a role in support of the process, without which it
will be difficult for the second Geneva Conference on
Syria to succeed. We also appeal to all parties to commit
to the negotiating process in order to put an end to a
conflict that has now lasted for more than 33 months,
caused great loss of life and threatens to destroy Syria.

In that context, allow me to say that we are greatly
concerned about the activities of the rebel groups
that maintain links with Al-Qaida, not only because
of the serious terrorist threat but also owing to their
effect on the rest of the region, which could become
a serious threat to regional stability and international
security. In addition, we reiterate that the continuing
supply of weapons to both sides in the dispute has
been instrumental to the increasing militarization of
the conflict. We insist that the provision of arms to the
parties must stop. There is no doubt that the weapons
in Syria are being used to commit Violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

We welcome the progress made in implementing
resolution 2118 (2013) with regard to chemical weapons.
We in particular welcome the ongoing progress made
in eliminating the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic. That is an indication that the
close cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
continues to be fruitful and that the Syrian Government
continues to cooperate with the United Nations Joint
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and its objectives
and upholds its commitment to meet its obligations.

With regard to ending the second phase and for
the next phase, the strong commitment and support of
the international community, including the Security
Council, are required. We reiterate that it is essential,
in that regard, that those States with influence on the
parties, in particular the opposition groups, use that
influence to promote the success of the Mission and, in
particular, to call for ensuring the safety and neutrality
of the Mission and its staff.

We must also reiterate our concern about the loss of
human lives as a result of the Syrian conflict. The vast
majority of those lives have been lost owing to the use
of conventional weapons by both the Government and
the armed opposition. Argentina firmly condemns the
deaths of an unacceptable number of civilians.

We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation of half of the Syrian people, who are in urgent
need of help. In that regard, we welcome the results
of the recent donor conference, held in Kuwait. The
continuing impediments to access for humanitarian aid
make the civilian population even more vulnerable and
exacerbate their already distressing living conditions.
We call on all parties to allow access to humanitarian
aid in accordance with international law and, in
particular, international humanitarian law.

Another distressing element of the Syrian conflict
is the flow of refugees to neighbouring countries and
the serious humanitarian situation that those countries
face as a result. I would like express our gratitude to the
Government and people of Jordan for their commitment
and their efforts to provide assistance and safety to
those fleeing the conflict. Argentina is convinced
that the war crimes, the crimes against humanity and
the serious violations of human rights cannot remain
unpunished. We therefore reiterate that the Security
Council must consider referring the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court.

Argentina views with cautious optimism the fact
that the Palestinians and Israelis are continuing to
participate in the negotiations on the peace process.
However, progress is slow and extremely difficult.
We believe that, in order to make greater progress, it
is necessary to move forward on the basis of the long
and broadly agreed principles, without questioning
the parameters of the two-State solution enshrined in
international law and supported by the vast majority of
the international community. Two States on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with the agreed land swaps, Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States, the necessary
security arrangements and a fair solution to the refugee
issue should be the foundation for any negotiation.

Furthermore, although gestures have been made,
such as the release of Palestinian prisoners prior
to the Oslo Agreement, there continue to be other
developments that are completely incompatible with
the peace process, exacerbate the lack of trust and
do not help towards creating favourable conditions
for dialogue. Those include, in particular, the recent
announcements of illegal settlements on the West Bank
and in East Jerusalem, the approval by the Ministerial
Committee for Legislative Affairs of the State of Israel
of a bill for the annexation of the Jordan Valley, the
marked increase in attacks by Israeli settlers against
Palestinians and the missile launches from the Gaza
Strip and the resulting military responses, as well as
the continual rhetoric of confrontation. We call on the
parties to renew their commitment to the peace process
and to abstain from all action that may undermine
efforts to move forward in the pursuit of a lasting peace.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the coming
months will be decisive in ending an occupation
that has lasted more than half a century and violates
international law. It also is morally reprehensible,
politically unacceptable and strategically unviable.
Argentina wholeheartedly believes in the importance
ofthe international community's meaningful assistance
in the negotiations. The lack of progress or a new
failure in that effort might seriously harm the two-State
solution, with serious consequences. In that connection,
we reiterate our belief that the Security Council must
pronounce itself on the situations I have mentioned,
take concrete steps to complement the negotiations
and show the way towards a two-State solution - for
example, by accepting Palestine's request to become a
State Member of the United Nations, as a follow up to
General Assembly resolution 67/19.

It is for the Council, in compliance with its
obligations, to send out clear messages, and not to
remain indifferent in the face of actions that undermine
regional and international efforts to provide a solution
to the conflict.

