I thank Mr. David Shearer, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Rambang Tai for their briefing. Two years ago, we witnessed the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Unfortunately, we are still far from a satisfactory situation. Despite the formation of a Transitional Government in February, the full implementation of military unification and Government institutions is totally behind schedule. In June, we welcomed the compromise reached by President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar on the allocation of states. We were hoping for a new momentum, which would help resolve the slow movement on transitional security arrangements and ideally bring the country closer to fully implementing the peace agreement. That, sadly, has not materialized. We urge President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar to come to an agreement on the governor of Upper Nile and finally move on to other pressing issues. We remain very concerned about the increase in intercommunal violence, which has increased significantly compared to the same period last year. The ceasefire between the parties to the agreement continues to hold, which is the biggest positive for us, but if the ongoing subnational violence continues, things might take a turn for the worse, possibly, given the additional pandemic and floods, leading to a humanitarian catastrophe. It saddens us to see that high-ranking politicians and military commanders are also fuelling this violence. The current situation gives us a timely reminder about the necessity of the sanctions and the territorial arms embargo. We truly hope that the South Sudanese authorities continue to prosecute and sentence members of the security forces to terms of imprisonment for serious crimes, including sexual violence. It is unacceptable that individuals who have committed grave human rights violations to be appointed to political office without any form of accountability. Attacks against the civilian population cannot be rewarded with various official positions. Impunity must stop. The overall humanitarian situation in the country remains dire, and has worsened due to the pandemic. During the rainy season, the humanitarian situation becomes more problematic, which is why the Government of South Sudan must do everything in its power to help the citizens. This requires keeping the humanitarian assistance and protection flowing, which, during the floods, is a question of life or death. The pandemic should not be used as a pretext to curb the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) or to slow down the implementation of the peace agreement. It is equally sad to see that violations of the Status of Forces Agreement continue. While supportive of the Mission's efforts to adjust its force posture by redesignating protection of civilians sites, we emphasize the need to ensure the safe and a voluntary return and relocation of displaced persons currently in a protection of civilian sites. Last, but not least, I want to thank UNMISS personnel and Mr. David Shearer for all their work in a very testing environment.
