The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/810, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
8/1995/808, letter dated 19 September 1995 from the
charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, and S/1995/812,
letter dated 20 September 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/ 1995/810)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1016 (1995).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.35 pm.

