Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish first of all to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Miyet, for his
briefing. The Chinese delegation notes that there have
been some improvements in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the last time the Security Council
met on this item. The United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and its
International Police Task Force (IPTF) have made
important contributions in that regard. We welcome the
progress that UNMIBH has made in reforming and
training the police force, and the Mission's efforts to
strengthen the country's legal structures. At the same
time, we note that the situation with regard to the
recruitment of police officers from among minority
groups is not yet satisfactory; it is our hope that
UNMIBH's efforts in that regard will continue.

The overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains to be stable, and the Dayton Peace Agreement
is being implemented. This is a source of satisfaction
for us, as these developments are due to the political
will and cooperation demonstrated by the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

However, progress in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement is taking place at a far slower pace
than the international community had expected,
especially with respect to capacity-building in the area
of self-government; reconciliation and harmony among
the different ethnic groups; post-war reconstruction;
and the return of minority refugees. Indeed, a great
deal of work remains to be done by the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We have always believed that a comprehensive
and thorough settlement of the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina lies ultimately with the people
themselves. The international community, in
participating in the reconstruction process, must abide
by the principle that the people themselves should play
the primary role. It must also respect their will and
focus its work on helping them to achieve self-
government and gradually to reduce their dependency
on foreign aid, so as to prevent the re-emergence of
social and political problems once international
assistance is reduced.

I should like to take this opportunity to emphasize
that the achievement of national reconciliation is the
fundamental prerequisite for the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be able to live peacefully and in
harmony. There is still a long way to go before this
goal can be achieved, as extremist and radical elements
continue to exist in all ofthe parties.

The international community, including the
United Nations, must make greater efforts to promote
national reconciliation among all ethnic groups in
Bosnia and Herzegovina so as to ultimately build a
unified, democratic, multi-ethnic and economically
self-reliant Bosnia and Herzegovina.

