The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

At the outset, we thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenea, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for their comprehensive briefings.

We also thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for requesting today's important briefing on
the situation in Ukraine and the commemoration of the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, which were
signed on 12 February 2015, exactly four years ago, by
the leaders of Ukraine, Germany, Russia and France
in an effort to end the war in the country. Regrettably,
four years later not even one provision of the Minsk
agreements has been fully implemented. We therefore
remind the parties that the only way to achieve peace and
stability in the region is through the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements, which remain the basis for
the international community's commitment to finding
a peaceful solution to the conflict.

The situation in eastern Ukraine remains a source
of concern. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine reports ongoing violations of the ceasefire in
the areas ofDonetsk and Luhansk, leading to an increase
in tensions and the exacerbation of the situation in the
east of the country. Reducing tensions and violence in
the region in the east of the country must remain one
of the main priorities for paving the way to a peaceful
solution to the crisis.

The path to stability in Donbas is still long but
it cannot be achieved if the parties do not show the
political will with that first step. In that regard, we call
for a ceasefire and urge the parties concerned to respect
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015). We also urge them
to continue to make use of the means established to
help resolve the conflict, such as the Normandy Four,
the Trilateral Contact Group and other key actors.
Cooperation, efforts and political will are essential to
achieving a peaceful and political solution to the crisis.

Finally, we appreciate the efforts ofthe OSCE on the
ground to uphold the ceasefire and ensure compliance
with the Minsk agreements. We also appreciate the
work and efforts of the humanitarian workers on the
ground and the support of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and his team for humanitarian
assistance in the region to provide vital aid to the
population. In that regard, we call on the parties to take
the necessary steps to comply with their international
obligations to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights.

In conclusion, we believe that a solution to the crisis
in the region can be achieved only by peaceful means
through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations, aimed
at a lasting and just solution that will help to strengthen
harmonious relations among Ukraine's different
ethnic groups. As we have said on other occasions, a
sustainable solution to the crisis in Ukraine can only be
political. The international community must therefore
focus its efforts to that end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

