Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative Ghassan
Salame for his objective briefing. We also thank
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden,
for his report on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
and, more generally, for his responsible leadership of
the Committee.

Russia supports the steps undertaken under the
auspices of the United Nations to assist in stabilizing
Libya. We note Mr. Salame's courage and personal
efforts and appreciate his commitment to getting
results in the work of unifying Libya and stabilizing
the internal situation, which is crucial to improving
the situation in the region as a whole. We do have to
conclude, however, that in spite of all the efforts to
establish an intra-Libyan dialogue, the prospects for
settling the crisis any time soon are bleak. This is no
accident. The situation is very complex, and one of
the reasons for that is the continuing distrust among
the key players in the Libyan political landscape. They
continue to be suspicious of one another, which presents
an obstacle to reaching compromise solutions to
their disagreements. The meeting on 23 April between
Mr. Khalid Al-Mishri, the newly chosen leader of the
High Council of State, and Mr. Aqilah Saleh, Speaker
of the House of Representatives, gives us a certain
degree of optimism. It is very important that the parties
agreed to continue their consultations. We hope that the
negotiation process will overcome the current impasse,
for which Mr. Salame' will personally deserve credit.

The forthcoming elections clearly represent an
important step in resolving the crisis. However, there are
still many issues related to holding them. For example,
there is so far no understanding on the electoral law. In
other words, we urge continued vigilance and holding
to the principle of "first do no harm". Any decisions
and steps taken should be subordinated to the task
of uniting the country, its State institutions, political
forces and security structures. We want to emphasize
Mr. Salame's view that the right conditions must be
established for the elections. In that regard, one of the
main challenges continues to be the establishment of
the legal basis for the work of the national authorities'
institutions following the elections. If the parties
cannot agree on their modalities in advance, the newly
established Government system in Libya may not
be viable.

The situation is complicated not only by a lack of
compromise among the parties but also by security
problems. The terrorist attack of 2 May on the High
Commission for National Elections in Tripoli was a sad
affirmation of that fact. We also have to understand that
a great deal will depend on resolving the issue of the
forces that ended up being sidelined in the country's
post-revolutionary transformation.

There can be no alternative to a negotiated
solution to the crisis. The Libyans themselves must
decide their country's future, through a dialogue and
in a spirit of openness and compromise, based on the
Skhirat agreement reached in Morocco as the only
viable foundation for achieving a long-term settlement.
The future development of the situation will depend
on the success of efforts to restore security, without
which it will continue to be a fertile breeding ground
for terrorists and armed groups using the institutional
vacuum for their criminal activity. The issue of unity
on many levels is also crucially important to the joint
efforts to combat terrorism.

The situation of migrants and refugees in detention
centres remains difficult, and they continue to
encounter various forms of ill-treatment. There has to
be full commitment to tackling that issue. The problem
cannot be solved with half measures. Above all, the
root causes that resulted in people's migration have
to be dealt with, at which point they will voluntarily
return to their homes.

We note that the crisis is a long way from being
settled, and significant efforts will be needed to reach
a durable agreement on the parameters for national
reconciliation. We support the initiatives undertaken
by the international and regional sponsors of the
settlement in Libya, particularly its neighbours Egypt,
Tunisia and Algeria. We note the work being done by
the African Union in the context of its Ad Hoc High-
Level Committee on Libya and by the League of Arab
States. The efforts of foreign mediators and external
actors should be consolidated and as coordinated as
possible, but it is Libyans themselves who must decide
their future. The United Nations should continue to play
a leading role in the political process. For our part, we
will continue to support the Special Representative's
efforts to reach out to all Libyans and to cooperate with
all involved partners. In working to resolve the situation
in Libya, we must remember that the current problems
are the result of the violent overthrow of the Libyan
regime, which destroyed its sovereignty and ignored
the African Union's vital initiatives. Those mistakes
should teach some serious political lessons about the
stability of Libya, its neighbours and other countries
that have been subjected to foreign intervention.

With regard to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
while we greatly value the efforts of the Ambassador
of Sweden and his team, we would like to point out
that on 3 April, at our initiative, the Committee held
a meeting specifically to discuss a leak to the press of
the interim report of the Panel of Experts. In general,
the issue of leaks about the work of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies is extremely relevant and can hardly
be explained only by computer network glitches. We
were also extremely disappointed that the Committee
could not agree on the Chair's proposed compromise
variations of a decision on investigating what occurred.
The demands for greater transparency in the work
of the Council's Sanctions Committees should be
accompanied by a high degree of responsibility.

Russia and Libya are linked by a historically rich
and friendly relationship. We will do everything we
can, in our national capacity and in cooperation with
Libya's political forces and regional and international
partners, to restore Libya and its unity and return it to a
future of steady development.

