Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

The threat that we face from international terrorism
is increasingly diverse, diffuse and unpredictable.
The resilience of terrorist groups and their ability
to regenerate and take on new forms cannot be
underestimated. No better example exists than the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its
predecessor organizations: in 2010 most of the top
leaders had been killed or captured. Now, as others have
already said, ISIL controls great swathes of Iraq and
Syria, has huge assets at its disposal and is attempting
to extend its influence to South Asia, North Africa
and elsewhere. The threat emanating from Al-Qaida,
including in the form of Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
Al-Qaida affiliates, also remains real and potent.

Combating terrorism and violent extremism
requires a long-term, comprehensive approach by the
whole international community. The United Nations
has a central role to play in coordinating international
efforts and ensuring a coherent response, and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides
the essential structure for such work.

The European Union has very close cooperation
with the United Nations, and the recent EU-United
Nations counter-terrorism political dialogue was again
an opportunity to discuss counter-terrorism issues and
ways to build upon our already strong cooperation.
The EU also recently co-hosted in Brussels, with the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, a conference
on assisting the counter-terrorism capacity-building
work of the United Nations counter-terrorism regional
centres, in order to tackle more effectively foreign
terrorist fighters and to counter violent extremism and
radicalization.

The European Union and its member States
welcome the adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). While the international counter-terrorism
framework is robust and appropriate to the challenge,
these recent resolutions have helped sharpen its focus
in some important areas. In that context, we strongly
support action under resolution 2170 (2014) to tackle
the sources ofISIL's wealth and weapons.

We also welcome the report and recommendations
of the Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
(see S/2014/815), in particular on further listing key
individuals and entities and building capacity in affected
countries to ensure the effective implementation of
resolution 2170 (2014). The European Union and its
member States are already active in East Africa on work
to counter the financing of terrorism and stand ready to
support such capacity-building efforts elsewhere.

Within the European Union, in June 2013, we
introduced a range of measures that include improved
checks at external borders under the existing legal
framework and the intensification of our efforts to
dissuade, detect and disrupt suspicious travel. We are
now considering a legal framework to investigate and
prosecute foreign fighters. We would be happy to share
our experiences with others and are eager to learn from
others' experiences. In that context, let me also mention
that the European Union will host in Brussels, at the
end of this month, a conference on foreign fighters,
with regional experts.

The Union and its member States strongly support
action under resolution 2178 (2014), including efforts
to bolster international action to counter violent
extremism.

As the top tier of terrorists is removed or brought
to justice, it is increasingly important that we take
action to ensure that they are not replaced by new
recruits - younger, more technically sophisticated and
more lethal.

Countering violent extremism is often a neglected
part of our collective counter-terrorism work. But it
will remain a focus of EU efforts, as we believe it is
a prerequisite to sustainably tackling the scourge of
terrorism.

Within the European Union, a network has been
established that by now includes approximately 1,000
practitioners dealing with prevention of radicalization
to violent extremism and terrorism. The network has
a special work stream dedicated to issues pertaining
to foreign fighters, and a working group dealing with
online radicalization and counter-narratives. In 2014,
it published a collection of best practices providing
contact details for concrete projects. In 2015, the
network will be integrated into the future network
centre of excellence. In support of those efforts, the
European Union recently adopted a revised strategy
to combat radicalization and recruitment to terrorism.
We have opened a dialogue with Internet companies
to confront online radicalization, and agreed on joint
training for law enforcement, industry and civil society.

We are also developing a package of measures to
help build the capacity of third countries most affected
by the terrorist threat. We are supporting the Nigerian
authorities in their fight against terrorism. We recently
launched a project on countering violent extremism
in East Africa, and an aligned one in South Asia. We
are developing a programme of countering violent
extremist-related activities focused on Syria, Iraq and
countries in the Middle East and North Africa affected
by the Syria crisis and ISIL's activities. We are also
launching a regional initiative on countering violent
extremism in the Sahel and the Maghreb. We are
looking to strengthen the legal regime against foreign
fighters in Middle East and North Africa countries.

Critically, counter terrorism cannot be seen
in isolation from other work. We are working to
mainstream counter-terrorism and countering violent
extremism work into all appropriate EU activities. We
call on the United Nations to ensure that measures to
prevent terrorism and extremism are integrated fully
across its various activities. The European Union also
supports the calls made today to improve the role of
the United Nations. In that context, I would like to
highlight the United Nations work on the ground,
such as through the efforts of Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General De Mistura, whom the European
Union supports. At the same time, the European Union
also believes that the United Nations has the potential
to do more on countering extremism by harnessing its
internal capacity to ensure consistency and coherence
of effort. The European Union and its member States
look forward to further steps in that regard.

Let me end by saying that it is our common
responsibility to ensure that the rule of law and respect
for international law, in particular human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, be essential components
of the fight against terrorism.

