Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Chairmen of the
Security Council Committees related to terrorism for
their briefings today and commend them for their
work.
Brazil has long argued, both in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council, for a
coordinated and multidimensional response to the
challenges posed by terrorism. Today's debate may help
us to reflect on ways to move towards that goal, which
we believe is shared by the broad majority of Members.

An essential element of a strategy to fight
terrorism is strong cooperation among Member States
and between them and international, regional and
subregional organizations. We are pleased that the
work of the Security Council has gradually shifted its
focus from the mere imposition of legal obligations -
important as they are - to greater emphasis on
building the capacity of Member States. For a legal
framework to be truly effective, Member States must
develop the means to implement it.

The activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee reflect this new reality. The Committee has
dedicated much of its work to facilitating technical
assistance to Member States and to organizing events
to train Government officials. It has also strived to
adopt a regional perspective and to avoid preconceived
solutions in dealing with shortfalls. In doing so, it has
duly recognized that countries with different levels of
development require different approaches. Its
Executive Directorate has had, and will continue to
have, an important role to play in that regard. My
delegation supports the extension of its mandate.

Similarly, as highlighted on other occasions, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) has made important strides in the recent past,
especially after the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009).
The conclusion of the review of the consolidated list of
sanctions and the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson are but the most relevant examples. My
delegation welcomes the appointment of Ms. Kimberly
Prost as the first Ombudsperson and pledges its full
support to her.

However, as we are all aware, major challenges
still remain, in particular with regard to due process. In
this critical area of its work, the Committee must
reinforce its dialogue with the wider membership. In
addition, Members should do their utmost to present
their reasons when denying de-listing. Lastly, the
Committee should ensure that its work fully benefits
from the views of the Ombudsperson. To that end,
Member States must provide her with the maximum
relevant information possible. Her opinions must be
fully taken into account in the decision-making
process.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), we welcome the progress that
it has continued to make in implementing its mandate.
We note in particular the importance of taking forward

its cooperation with the other counter-terrorism
Committees and with international organizations,
consistent with the Committee's mandate.

Brazil looks forward to the submission of the
Committee's report and to the renewal of its mandate
early next year. In doing so, we feel that particular
emphasis should be placed on those States whose
capacities for implementation and reporting are
limited. The Committee should mobilize its energy and
resources to ensure that those States receive the
support they need to implement resolution 1540
(2004).

The progress made in the recent past in the three
Committees would not have been achieved without the
competent work, constant leadership and dedication of
their respective Chairs. I join others in commending
Ambassadors Ertugrul Apakan, Thomas Mayr-Harting
and Claude Heller for the invaluable contributions they
have made.

