Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing
this open debate and for the concept note (S/2019/385, annex). We also thank the Secretary-General and our
other briefers for highlighting some of the important
aspects of the protection of civilians.

In September 1974, the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, in a statement
to the General Assembly, said,

"The very struggle of Bangladesh symbolized
the universal struggle for peace and justice. It was,
therefore, only natural that Bangladesh, from its
very inception, should stand firmly by the side of
the oppressed people of the world" (A/PV2243, para. 5).

Indeed, in the wake of what our people endured during
our liberation war in 1971, we attach great importance to
the issue of the protection of civilians during conflicts
within the ambit of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We endorsed the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians and have
incorporated a strong and comprehensive protection of
civilians component in our peacekeeping training and
recruitment guidelines.

The ongoing Rohingya humanitarian crisis once
again reveals to us the inability of the international
community to stand by a persecuted people when they
need them most. Ironically, the height of the crisis
coincided with our collective efforts at the United
Nations to build consensus around the concept of
sustaining peace. On paper, we have been successful
in shifting the focus of peacebuilding largely from
post-conflict situations to conflict prevention. But on
the ground, for the Rohingya people, for example, what
difference does it make? In effect, a crisis in recent
history, with many signs of escalation and relapse since
the 19705, gave us enough early warning to prevent
it. Yet we seriously failed to save a whole ethnic
minority community from persecution, which the High
Commissioner for Human Rights called a "textbook
example of ethnic cleansing".

As a peace-loving nation with an unwavering
commitment to promoting and sustaining global peace,
we are doing everything possible to safely and securely
host the Rohingya community fleeing persecution in
Rakhine state in our own territory. We are also making
sincere efforts to deter and contain the downstream
escalation of the crisis to the regional or international
level. During her address to the General Assembly at
its seventy-second session (see A/72/PV.14), Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina urged the creation of safe
zones in Myanmar's Rakhine state for the protection
of civilians under the auspices of the United Nations
or relevant regional partners. Our Foreign Secretary,
in his statement to the Council in February (see S/PV.8477), elaborated further on the idea of safe
zones, along with other concrete proposals for the
safe, dignified, voluntary and sustainable return of the
Rohingyas and their integration into Myanmar society.
We seek the support of the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, to take due
consideration of those proposals. Such initiatives would
also serve as a critical confidence-building measure for
the Rohingya to return, which is the only practical and
sustainable solution to the crisis.

Our own experiences with the protracted Rohingya
crisis have exposed us to various layers of challenges
regarding the protection of civilians, particularly when
the State concerned is unwilling to discharge its own
responsibility to protect all civilians in its territory. Also,
as one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries in the past three decades, we have experienced
first-hand the relevance of the protection of civilians
mandate as well as its implementation challenges.
Against that dual backdrop, we wish to take this
opportunity to stress six specific points.

First, States should assume the primary
responsibility of identifying fault lines for conflicts,
and driving and directing priorities, strategies and
activities for conflict prevention and sustaining peace,
thereby ensuring the harmonious coexistence of the
various religious and ethnic groups concerned, with
adequate opportunities for growth and prosperity for
all. The United Nations needs to invest more in the field
than in Headquarters in order to build capacities to
detect early warning signs and work more closely with
host Governments and other stakeholders to scale up
its upstream prevention activities to match its enhanced
role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace, as
mandated by the historic twin resolutions (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262).

Secondly, the United Nations must build its capacity
to translate early warnings into early responses through
effective measures to prevent the escalation of violence
against civilians. In that regard, the Security Council's
protection of civilians mandate must the pressed
into application in a timely manner. In doing so, it is
critical to put greater emphasis on strategic analysis
and assessment of risks, including understanding the
core grievances and dehumanizing motives of parties,
if any. Accompanying efforts must be made to find
local solutions by targeting resilience factors and
bridge-builders among stakeholders and developing
nationally owned and focused strategies.

Thirdly, in the case ofthe escalation ofviolence, we
must ensure the unhindered, safe passage ofthe relevant
humanitarian personnel and supplies to minimize
civilian casualties and human suffering. We must
honour our shared commitment to allow the unfettered
access of humanitarian assistance and medical care
during times of natural disasters and conflicts.

Fourthly, Member States must respect their
disarmament commitments across the board, including
those relating to conventional weapons such landmines
and other explosive weapons. The use of such lethal
weapons with the capacity to kill indiscriminately in
the commission of atrocity crimes against civilians is
a serious violation of international humanitarian law,
and the State concerned must be held accountable for
such use.

Fifthly, Bangladesh has supported the women and
peace and security agenda of the United Nations ever
since it played a lead role in the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). We are committed to increasing the number
of female peacekeepers in order to achieve the target
set by the United Nations. We have received first-hand
accounts from Rohingya women fleeing from Myanmar
on how rape and other forms of sexual violence can be
used against women during conflicts. We are more
convinced than ever that women peacekeepers can play
a natural role in protecting their fellow women and
supporting them physically and mentally to overcome
traumatic experiences of sexual violence.

Sixthly, ensuring accountability and justice for
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law is of paramount importance. The
international community and the United Nations should
make appropriate use of the tools at their disposal to
that effect, particularly when it comes to the protection
of civilians agenda.

As a major troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh has vast experience in tackling protection
of civilians challenges in the field. We take a pragmatic
approach to the protection of civilians mandate, both
in practice and through preparedness. We realize that,
mandated or not, there is an inherent expectation of
peacekeepers in the field to protect civilians in danger.
Often, those expectations are unrealistic and are not
matched by adequate resources. Moreover, the situations
on the ground are becoming increasingly hostile and
complex. We therefore reiterate that protection of
civilians mandates need to be realistic and achievable,
and must be backed by viable political strategies and
adequate resources. We must also devise contingency
plans so that the protection of civilians capabilities in
the field are resilient enough to tackle sudden threats,
including asymmetrical ones.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1270 (1999), which gave
the first explicit mandate to protect civilians to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. This milestone year
can be used to reflect upon where we stand when it
comes to realizing the protection of civilians mandate,
with a special focus on the occasions where we could not
apply ourselves. Looking at the millions of persecuted
civilians around the world, looking at the faces of
hapless Rohingya women and children at the world's
largest refugee camp, in Cox's Bazar, we must resolve
to do something that makes sense for them.

