Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy for his briefing and Mr. Antonio for his statement
this morning. I recognize the presence among us of
Mr. Prodi and thank him once again for his work as
Chair of the African Union-United Nations panel.

Costa Rica is convinced that a new era of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations has arrived. Such
cooperation is no longer an aspiration or, much less, a
claim; it is a need, given the array and the nature of the
crises that must be faced by bringing together as many
efforts as possible. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations has received greater
attention by the Security Council in recent years,
particularly cooperation with the African Union.
However dialogue between the two organizations
stands to be strengthened. The Prodi report
(S/2008/813) and the report of the Secretary-General
that we are discussing today (S/2009/470) bear witness
to this. Costa Rica understands the scope of the
cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council; however
we believe that the matters at the heart of that
cooperation must necessarily go beyond the financing
of peacekeeping operations.

In the maintenance of peace and security in
Africa there are shortcomings of which we are all
aware. The hostilities among participants, sometimes
violent, sometimes concealed, are long-lasting and
consume resources essential to the task of building
peace. Still, these are opportunities to show maturity
and capability. Further, there is a wide array of other
possible areas of cooperation that must be
strengthened, such as on issues like conflict
prevention, early warnings and mediation. The cases of
Kenya and Madagascar and the current situation in
Guinea are examples of what is possible and show
clearly how necessary it is to strengthen cooperation.
At this phase in the process of rapprochement and joint
endeavours, the key to effective strategic association
would seem to be found in timelier, deeper interaction
between the two organizations.

Formal contacts between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
should be reviewed. Let us recall that this year the
annual meeting of the councils did not take place due
to a matter of formalities. The format of these meetings
would not seem to be the most appropriate either.
Because of the size of the two structures, the meetings
are not very functional. There is a need for greater
substantive preparation and this must include the
preparation of special envoys, joint mediators and
other senior officials who work directly in the primary
situations of the joint agenda.

On the level of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General aimed at
establishing an official mechanism for consultation on
matters of mutual interest, as well as the
recommendation for the establishment of a team at the
Under-Secretary-General and African Union
Commissioner levels.

Since the foundation of this Organization there
has been a recognition, in Chapter VIII of the Charter,
of the role of regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Because of their
obvious relative advantages, the regional organizations
can be in a better position to act in moments of crisis.
The African Union has done just that on many
occasions, including, most recently in Somalia and
Darfur.

However, beyond merely reacting to crises, the
most important contribution of the regional
organizations to international peace and security is that
of their role as mechanisms of collective security. In its
Presidential Statement of 19 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/43), the Security Council underscored
the relationship among collective security,
disarmament and the development of peoples. The
primary function of regional organizations is to offer
their members real security assurances, allowing them
to allocate their resources to development instead of
diverting resources to arms races.

This issue is particularly relevant in Africa, where
each cent spent on weapons could be better used in
education, health care or other areas promoting the
economic and social development of their peoples. The
African Union must bolster its efforts to vigorously
promote collective security on the continent. The
situations between Chad and Sudan, between Djibouti
and Eritrea and between Ethiopia and Eritrea represent
a call upon the African Union to deploy additional
efforts and to attain greater effectiveness in
maintaining peace and security. There are also
opportunities to strengthen African Union
commitments to development in the economic and
social spheres of the nations ofAfrica.

To conclude, I express my appreciation to the
delegation of Uganda for having prepared the
presidential statement that we will adopt at the close of
this debate. My country supports that statement fully.

