Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome this
opportunity for a candid and constructive discussion
with the Force Commanders. I wish to thank
Mr. Ladsous and the three Generals for their briefings.
I look forward to their responses to our questions.

I would first like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to all the Force Commanders for their service
and leadership, and to the men and women who serve in
and support the United Nations peace operations. They
are all at the sharpest edge of the Security Council's
efforts to preserve international peace and security,
putting their lives on the line in the most challenging
environments. And sadly, as we have seen in places
such as Mali and South Sudan, that dedication comes
at a tragic cost.

The Commanders' insights into the reality on the
ground and the constraints they face are invaluable to
the Council's decision-making on their mandates and,
ultimately, to the promotion of international peace
and security, and I would therefore encourage them to
always be open and frank so that we can provide them
with the best possible support.

That need for ever-greater transparency and
accountability was also a prominent feature of
yesterday's peace operations review panel and, as was
said then in relation to allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, zero tolerance must mean zero tolerance. All
troop-contributing countries must robustly follow up
any such allegations involving their troops and report
back to the United Nations. More broadly, we favour
honest and open communications, including through
meetings such as this one, to create ever-greater
openness about peacekeeping more broadly.

The protection of civilians is an issue that the United

Kingdom cares deeply about. In the darkest moments of
conflict, people all over the world look to the United
Nations and its peacekeepers for reassurance and
protection, and we all have a responsibility to deliver.
To do so, it is critical that United Nations peacekeepers
be prepared to use force, where necessary and within
their mandates, to protect civilians under immediate
threat. The principle of the protection of civilians
is now widely supported by the United Nations and
Member States, yet the question of how peacekeepers
make the decision to intervene and how they choose
to do so still poses huge problems. We therefore need
the Force Commanders' honest assessments of what is
working and what is not, and of what is possible and
what is not. In turn, we will be honest with them about
the resources and equipment we can provide.

I would like to ask the Generals what they and other
Force Commanders need from the Council to enable
their missions to protect civilians effectively. What
more can we do beyond providing more resources,
and how can we work with them to keep their host
Governments accountable for protecting their civilians,
particularly in cases such as that of South Sudan,
whose Government has so clearly failed to provide that
protection so far? A few weeks ago, Rwanda launched
an initiative to encourage all troop-contributing
countries to agree on a set of pledges to better protect
civilians. The United Kingdom considers the initiative
a great step forward, but I would be interested to hear
the Force Commanders' views and those of other Force
Commanders in the Chamber.

Let me turn now to the threat posed by asymmetric
environments, set out so clearly by the Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. As new
challenges to international peace and security emerge,
new technology will have to play a greater role. But,
in order to be effective, that new technology must be
supported by training and exercises and must be used
by troops that come ready and willing to meet evolving
threats. Predeployment training is crucial, particularly
in cultivating the right mindset and skills to confront
asymmetric threats, so that troops stand their ground
when protecting civilians. I am interested to hear the
views on how we can better instil the necessary proactive
and creative mindset needed by all peacekeepers
deployed to modern peacekeeping missions.

In the spirit of openness and transparency, I believe
that it is time for us to have a more honest conversation,
like that begun today, about the national caveats of
troop-contributing countries. I welcome the comments

by Major General Finn. Like it or not, caveats exist
and we need to work and plan around them. That can
happen only if we are clear from the outset about what
we are prepared to allow our troops to do. We must
also be up front about changes in caveats over time,
particularly as the nature of the mission or conflict
changes. Caveats often do not become apparent until
the situation deteriorates, leaving Force Commanders
unclear about What their troops can and cannot do. It
is that uncertainty that leads to problems. In the worst
circumstances, it can lead to command and control
failures that put the lives of troops and civilians at risk.

Let me conclude by asking all the Force
Commanders in the Chamber today what more the
Council and the Secretariat can do to reduce those
caveats and to ensure that they and the mission leaders
are aware of the caveats that remain from the outset.
What more can we do to reinforce the importance of the
chain of command?

I again thank the Generals for their briefings today,
and all the other Force Commanders for coming to
today's meeting. I look forward to hearing their views.

