Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

We warmly welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2007/757)
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1612 (2005), 1379 (2001), 1460 (2003) and 1539
(2004). Widespread and unacceptable patterns of
violations against children are recorded. Armed forces
and armed groups that recruit and exploit children in
armed conflicts are named. Tangible results have also
been achieved.

We fully endorse the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's report concerning child rights
and the role of child protection in future peacekeeping
missions. The five Nordic countries support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the Security
Council give equal weight to all six categories of grave
violations set out in resolution 1612 (2005).
Nevertheless, we are mindful of the need to expand the
efforts of the Working Group, with due regard for
existing resources and capabilities. In view of those
constraints, it has been suggested that priority be
accorded to violations perpetrated with an intent to harm
children.

In that regard, one of the most disturbing chapters
in the Secretary-General's report concerns sexual and
gender-based violence in armed conflict. Women and
girls are the largest and most vulnerable group of
victims. Sexual and gender-based violence is not an
inevitable consequence of war; it can and must be
prevented. In line with the recommendations of the
report of the Secretary-General and the Working Group
on children and armed conflict, we support the
inclusion of gender-based violence among the
violations listed in the annexes of the Secretary-
General's report.

Only rarely are those violating the rights of
children successfully prosecuted. We welcome the
progress made by the International Criminal Court and
the Special Court for Sierra Leone in bringing charges
against individuals suspected of grave violations of the
rights of the child. Nevertheless, increased efforts by
national courts are necessary in order to end impunity
for those who commit crimes against children. It is in
the interest of Governments to cooperate closely with
the United Nations monitoring and reporting
mechanism to bring to justice the perpetrators of such
crimes, for the sake of reconciliation, sustainable peace
and development.

The five Nordic countries, echoing the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, encourage
the Security Council to refer violations against children
in armed conflicts to the International Criminal Court
for investigation and prosecution when national
Governments persistently fail to prosecute such crimes.

We endorse the Secretary-General's
comprehensive recommendation that encourages
Member States to conclude a binding instrument
prohibiting the use, production, stockpiling and
transfer of cluster munitions, which cause unacceptable
harm to civilians. Furthermore, we encourage the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
continue her reporting on that crucial issue.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism has
greatly enhanced the Security Council's ability to
receive reliable and timely information. Its
collaborative nature, embodied in the country-level
task forces, also highlights the importance of dialogue
among the parties to a conflict, the international
community and civil society in furthering the interests
of children affected by armed conflict. To enhance the
relevance of that approach, the Nordic countries
encourage the Security Council to continue to call
upon parties in all relevant situations of armed conflict
to submit concrete time-bound action plans detailing
their efforts to end grave violations against children.
We welcome last week's decision by the Government
of Colombia to take part in the mechanism.
Furthermore, the Security Council should not shy
away from considering effective targeted measures
against those who commit grave violations against
children. We call on the Working Group to explore the
full range of measures to bring persistent perpetrators
to book if, for example, they fall dramatically short of

08-2361]
their own action plan objectives or choose to ignore the
mechanism altogether.

The close interest paid to this Security Council
open debate bears witness to a widely shared
confidence in resolution 1612 (2005) and in the
mechanisms set up in its wake. The removal of parties
to the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire from the Secretary-
General's watch list is one example of the efficacy of
resolution 1612 (2005). Further progress depends on
the willingness to build on this and other successes.
The Nordic countries encourage the Security Council
to ensure that it pays equal attention to children
affected by armed conflict whether the specific
situations are on its agenda or not.

