Mr. Motoc (Romania): I am pleased to begin by
welcoming to this Chamber the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as their Chief
Prosecutors, and by thanking them for their very
thorough presentations on the efforts by the two
international Tribunals over the last six months to
implement their respective completion strategies. We
value the depth and the breadth of the briefings we
have just heard, especially since this is a time of
reflection on the legacy of these landmark international
jurisdictions. I am pleased to report that during the
reporting period Romania continued to take concrete
steps in support of ICTY work in particular.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Judge Fausto Pocar upon his recent
election as President of ICTY and to wish him every
success in his future endeavours.

The apprehension and transfer of General Ante
Gotovina to ICTY custody represents the most
significant achievement of the last six months and, at
the same time, a landmark in the overall activity of the
Tribunal. I should like to commend, in this regard, the
ICTY Prosecutor for her tireless efforts to arrest and
bring to justice the highest-level alleged perpetrators of
the most serious crimes known to mankind, committed
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

The level of cooperation with the Tribunal
extended by Croatian authorities throughout the
reporting period, culminating in their decisive
contribution to locating General Gotovina, sets the bar
high for all the countries in the region that are still
lagging behind to varying degrees in fully complying
with their Tribunal obligations. We note, however,
positive developments in the cooperation by all
countries concerned with the Tribunal, which has
resulted, inter alia, in the surrender to the ICTY of 20
new fugitives over the past year.

Romania also notes with satisfaction that the
number of indictees still at large has been reduced to
six and encourages all relevant actors - States in the
region above all - to step up their efforts to bring the
remaining fugitives to justice. It remains our belief that
their arrest and transfer to The Hague would clear the
path to increased participation by Western Balkan
countries in European and Euro-Atlantic processes.

Regarding the work of the ICTR and its Chief
Prosecutor, my delegation appreciates the information
he has just presented with regard to the most prominent
fugitive indicted by that Tribunal, Fe'licien Kabuga.

We are encouraged to note the significant
progress achieved so far by both Tribunals in
implementing the terms of their respective completion
strategies as set out in Security Council resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). In particular, we
welcome the efforts by both the ICTY and ICTR to
continuously improve the effectiveness of the
proceedings before the two Tribunals and the talks they
conducted with the Governments of relevant countries
on the transfer of cases to domestic jurisdictions.

As repeatedly stated by my delegation, transfer of
cases involving medium- and low-level accused to
national jurisdictions is an essential component of the
completion strategy. While a number of cases have
already been referred to the newly established Special
War Crimes Chamber in Sarajevo and to local courts in
Croatia, no such cases have yet been transferred to
either Serbia and Montenegro or Rwanda. We therefore
encourage the officials of both Tribunals to pursue
their efforts to consolidate the capacities of domestic
criminal justice systems to deal with such cases. We
deem it equally important that all countries concerned
continue the process of adapting their legal frameworks
so as to comply with the existing international legal
standards.

As indicated in the assessment submitted by the
ICTY Prosecutor, one of the main concerns of her
Office with regard to Kosovo-related cases has to do
with the insufficient protection of witnesses. According
to Ambassador Eide's recent statement before the
Council, quoted in the aforementioned assessment,
intimidation of witnesses is a very serious problem in
Kosovo, as it represents a daily challenge for the
prosecution. We also note, in this regard, that 22 out of
the 44 accused currently awaiting trial have been
provisionally released, some of them indicted for
alleged crimes committed in that province. We would
very much welcome the inclusion in the next report to
be submitted to the Council of a separate annex
containing the names of the indictees who have been
released and, eventually, the grounds on which those
indictees have been provisionally released.

