Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should express my appreciation to Mr. Saren Jessen-
Petersen, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
commend the dedication of the entire United Nations
Mission in Kosovo.

I join others in welcoming the current report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. It is yet another
reminder that we cannot give up on our belief in and
insistence on a multi-ethnic Kosovo in which all ethnic
groups can live freely without fear. We commend the
work being done by the Special Representative. We
also share his dedication to ensuring that the situation
in Kosovo does not degenerate, but improves to serve
the aspirations of all people to justice, peace and
prosperity in a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

We are encouraged by progress made by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
implementation of the standards for Kosovo. We note
with concern, however, that, although work on the
standards has intensified, progress in many areas has
been slow and that none of the set eight standards has
been completely fulfilled. It is absolutely essential that
the political leadership in Belgrade and Pristina do
more work and engage in serious dialogue towards the
full implementation of the standards.

It is encouraging to note that there are internally
self-generated signs of political maturity in elections
and Government formation based on democratic
principles. That must be welcomed, strengthened and
consolidated. We welcome the positive commitment of
Kosovo's opposition parties to playing a more
constructive role and to respecting the Constitutional
Framework.
The implementation of the standards remains key
for Kosovo. Thus, new mechanisms and structures
need to be put in place for specific actions with the
potential for providing positive results. The standards
are important, as they address a multiplicity of
concerns that are legitimate, fair and necessary. There
is no alternative to the standards and they should not be
renegotiated.

We urge greater efforts to be made to obtain the
cooperation of the Kosovo Serb community with the
Provisional Institutions, since that remains a major
hurdle to constructing the necessary institutions of
governance under the Constitutional Framework. At
the communal level, more deliberate initiatives are
required to promote incremental measures for more
inter-communal trust, interaction and accommodation.

The progress made in the area of local
Government reform is commendable and needs support
so as to increase the pace of the devolution of authority
at the local level. Local communities need to be
encouraged to make full use of this opportunity to
enrich their cultural identities and aspirations while
overcoming politically motivated ethnic divisions.

We encourage the measures, albeit still limited,
that have been taken in promoting gender equality,
including the filling of obvious gender gaps and the
revisiting of legal issues, together with the
development of an action plan for gender equality.

We note that the security situation has remained
stable and that the safety of minorities has improved
slightly. None of us can rest until all the people in
Kosovo are secure and at peace with themselves. That
freedom of movement has remained delicate is a source
of concern that requires urgent attention. Kosovo Serbs
who consider themselves at risk need to be reassured of
their freedom.

Efforts directed at infrastructure development,
humanitarian assistance, the reconstruction of
buildings, the supply of reliable electricity and the
strengthening of monetary institutions are crucial in
addressing Kosovo's economic difficulties. We urge
efforts by all, including international partners, donors
and relevant agencies, to enhance the assistance that
Kosovo and its people need for their future.

Lastly, we recognize that the President of Serbia,
Boris Tadic, paid a visit to Kosovo last week - the
first visit by a President of Serbia since the inception
of UNMIK in June 1999. We welcome such visits and
hope they will serve to build confidence among the
people of Kosovo. We hope that Belgrade will continue
to be more forthcoming and supportive in the ongoing
efforts to build bridges between the majority and
minority communities in Kosovo and to enhance
mutual trust and accommodation. We commend the
assistance of the UNMIK police to the Kosovo Police
that helped in making the Visit successful.

