Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to say at the outset that it is a great pleasure for me
to greet the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium in
his capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). It is a
pleasure first of all because France and Belgium have
very close ties; in fact, I would say that there are very
deep affinities between our two countries. It is also a
pleasure because my country is committed to the
OSCE. Moreover, a number of our diplomats have left
their mark on the history of the OSCE. We are very
pleased that Mr. Marc Perrin de Brichambaut, a
compatriot of ours, is the current Secretary General of
the OSCE.

Why is the relationship between the OSCE and
the United Nations, the issue that brings us here today,
important? First of all, may I say - perhaps by way of
background, but I nevertheless think it useful to
mention - that the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is a model of a bold and
innovative approach to diplomacy. Those of us who
still remember the days of East-West division - and
especially of the division that existed in Europe at the
time of that major ideological conflict - also recall
the Helsinki Final Act. The Final Act represented a
diplomatic revolution for numerous reasons, but for
two reasons in particular.

First, the Final Act was a successful exercise in
constructive ambiguity. For us as diplomats, that is
worth taking note of, given the great usefulness of
constructive ambiguity. It should be said that that was
possible thanks to people themselves, who were able to
grasp the potential of the work done by Governments
and diplomats.

The Helsinki Final Act was also important in
another respect: it was the first time that human rights
emerged as a major element in and of themselves vis-a-
vis relations among States. It was also the first time
that the now-fundamental idea was voiced that there
was something beyond States and sovereignty, namely,
human rights.

The Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as the OSCE was then known, took another
diplomatically bold step by reinventing itself after the
fall of the Berlin wall. That too is a lesson that bears
learning. The same protagonists, along with new
members, were able to adopt new permanent structures
and to reorient the very mission of the organization. It
was no longer just a matter of trying to overcome
division; the organization also had to establish and
expand common values. But the OSCE did not stop
with that achievement: some time ago - like the
United Nations - it undertook a reform effort to better
adapt itself to the challenges of Europe today.

The relationship between the United Nations and
the OSCE is important for other reasons that have to do
with the agendas of our respective organizations. As
Mr. De Gucht has pointed out, the OSCE is currently
working in the area of conflict prevention and crisis
management. Members of the Council will have noted
that the various situations to which the Minister
referred do not overlap exactly with those being dealt
with by the United Nations. Kosovo, however, is one of
the major issues we share; and we of course hope that
our two organizations will carry out the necessary
coordination and cooperation in that regard.

In other areas, however, the OSCE deals with
matters that have been referred to as frozen conflicts.
We should recall that, although Europe may appear to
be a very fortunate and stable region as compared with
other continents, it nevertheless harbours areas of
tension - often deep-rooted and long-standing. It is to
the OSCE's credit that it is dealing with those crises. It
is proper that they are being addressed by a regional
organization, and not being transferred to the United
Nations. That is a good division of labour that we
should maintain.

On the other hand, if we consider the thematic
aspects of the agendas of our respective organizations,
we can see that they overlap to a very significant
extent. One of the basic purviews of the OSCE is
human rights, which are, of course, a major concern of
the United Nations.

Arising out of the issue of human rights are those
of democratization and the monitoring of elections,
which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium duly
addressed in his statement. Those are tasks and
processes with which we in the United Nations, and
particularly in the Security Council, are frequently
involved in the context of managing post-conflict
situations.

The Minister referred to the rule of law, which
has been a major concern of the Security Council for
some years now. He spoke of the fight against
organized crime. I am aware that there has been very
practical cooperation between the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the OSCE, both of
which are headquartered in Vienna.

I also note that, with respect to the fight against
intolerance, racism and anti-Semitism, the United
Nations might usefully be inspired by the work that has
been done in those areas by the OSCE. The same goes
for the struggle against human trafficking, which the
OSCE has only recently begun to address but which
has already yielded fruit. The issue is an extremely
important and painful one, on which more active
cooperation would be most useful.

In brief, it is clear that my country strongly
supports the Belgian chairmanship of the OSCE. With
his usual modesty, Mr. Karel de Gucht noted that
Belgium intends to be an honest broker. We feel sure
that it will be much more than that. It can also count on
our support in strengthening the ties between the
United Nations and the OSCE, particularly in the areas
that I have outlined.

Mr. De Gucht is here representing both Brussels,
the capital of the European Union, and Vienna, which
is certainly the secret capital of Europe in its broadest
sense, which includes America and Central Asia. We
are fully confident that, in Brussels and in Vienna,
Belgium will successfully discharge the important
mandate entrusted to it this year.

