President Basescu: This month of September
marks an important moment. This is an opportunity not
only to affirm our common objective to make the
United Nations work better, but to be a part of its
actual reform.

I see a great degree of consistency between the
work of the Security Council, which has become more
involved in development issues and human rights
concerns, and our main deliberations in the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly. These two
meetings should therefore lead to mutually reinforcing
conclusions and recommendations. Today's meeting
aims to take the international response to acts of
terrorism to a new level. That threat is, indeed, the
critical security issue at the beginning of this new
century and millennium.

The Security Council was remarkably quick in
responding to the post-9/11 realities that so
dramatically changed our world. Its championing of
counter-terrorism as an integral part of its
responsibilities towards international peace and
security is the most significant feature of its work. Yet
the Council's contribution to that global effort is still a
work in progress. The recent strikes against London,
Sharm el-Sheikh and Baghdad and throughout
Bangladesh are reminders that, without an enduring
security net, there can be no safe haven.

I would like to make four points relating to
Romania's approach to fighting terror.

First, there is no culture and no religion that
generates or endorses terrorism. We are at a stage when
we are fighting the consequences of terrorism, but
seldom its real causes. It has become clear that the
world has to face a new ideology - one that respects
neither States, nor societies, nor cultures, nor human
rights: the ideology of terror. It is my belief that that
ideology is the new enemy of humanity.
The solidarity and action of like-minded United
Nations Member States could offer us solutions to fight
that threat. The Security Council and the United
Nations share a great responsibility in developing such
policies.

Defending against security threats is not limited
to taking a stand at one's own border, but includes
going to where the challenges originate and eradicating
them with sustainable action and investment. This is
why Romania is working together with its allies and
partners in sustaining ongoing stabilization and
reconstruction processes in Iraq and Afghanistan. Ours
is a significant investment in a wide range of United
Nations-mandated and United Nations-authorized
operations, and we therefore have a very high stake in
their successful outcome.

Secondly, Romania has begun chairing the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). That resolution is a true
attempt to reduce and eventually eliminate the weak
spots in our defence against the most worrying form of
terrorism: weapons of mass destruction. Reducing
proliferation risks should concern all Member States.

Thirdly, the global antiterrorism effort can be
sustained only by action taken at the Security Council
level. It has to be an undertaking by the United Nations
as a whole. Every Member State should be supported
in developing belts of defence and proper response
capabilities in the face of terrorist threats. In doing so,
we should not overlook activities such as the illicit
traffic in human beings, arms and drugs, which can
fuel the resources of terrorist networks and regional
conflicts. In many parts of the world - including two
of the regions close to Romania, namely, the Western
Balkans and the Black Sea region - that often occurs.

Fourthly, Romania's experience in South-Eastern
Europe and the Black Sea region indicates that in the
case of conflict management, regional action is also
decisive in handling responses to transnational threats.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is called for in the field of combating
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

Romania is a catalyst for dialogue and
cooperation in its region and is keen to share its
experience at the international level. During the period
of its current mandate in the Security Council,
Romania has actively and constantly promoted deeper
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that the time has come to
take global-regional cooperation to its full potential.
The international community should be able to address
each and every security challenge, anywhere, by better
pooling together existing resources and capacities for
responding to violence.

