Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me add my voice to those who have congratulated you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I would also like to thank our United States friends for their very effective presidency, which allowed us to have the last 10 days of 2019 without Council meetings, and I welcome the new members of the Council. Allow me to start by congratulating Mr. Mohamed Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for West Africa, on his briefing and by expressing appreciation for the report of the Secretary- General (S/2019/1005). Germany fully subscribes to what Mr. Chambas said and to the content of the Secretary-General’s report. I am very impressed by the many positive words spoken around the table. For our part, it was very significant to hear the Ambassador of the Niger speaking so positively about the work of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and its staff, since his country is one of the most affected. We also support those, such as my French colleague, who said that they support UNOWAS and want to the strengthen it materially and financially given the fact that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as mentioned in the report, takes an integrated and holistic approach — a formula that was first used today by our colleague from the Dominican Republic, as well as by others. We agree with what Mr. Chambas said with regard to such an approach being crucial to conflict-prevention. By way of a few examples of the Special Representative’s efforts, I would highlight the facilitation of national dialogues, assistance regarding institutional and constitutional reforms, the promotion of human rights and the inclusion of the gender perspective in his work. With regard to the situation in West Africa, it is not necessary to repeat what has already been said in that regard. There have been positive developments in some countries, such as the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Senegal and Liberia, including with regard to elections and other issues. However, there has also been a significant increase in the number of lives lost. The figures given by the Special Representative, including with regard to displaced persons, were tragic. In December we discussed the root causes of conflicts and violence in Africa (see S/PV.8685). In my intervention, I would like to highlight the most important points from our perspective. The first factor, which has been highlighted by many speakers around the table, is climate change and its security implications. Climate change leads to an increasing scarcity of resources and scarce resources lead to conflicts between herders and farmers, as was highlighted in the report. Scarce resources create a breeding ground for violence, violent extremism and terrorism and cause migration. The second factor is gender inequality. In that regard, I would like to commend my colleague from South Africa, who has just made a very passionate appeal for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Progress has been made in the work on gender parity. I would also like to highlight the African Women Leaders Network initiative, which, in my view, does very important work. Progress has been made in some countries, including the Niger. Gender equality and women’s participation are not goals in themselves. The effective and equal participation of women in decision-making processes increases the possibilities for sustainable peace and security, and there are statistical studies in that regard. The third issue is human rights violations, which occur far too often at the hands of terrorists as well as in the context of counter-terrorism measures. In that connection, like Mr. Chambas, I too would like to cite the Secretary-General saying that counter- terrorism measures must gain the trust and support of local populations, which I see as key. In counter- terrorism measures disrespect for human rights drives marginalized peoples to violent extremism. My fourth point concerns school closures. Terrorists often target schools in their actions and schools are closed for security reasons. That is one of the saddest developments that we have witnessed in the Sahel region and beyond. Education is key to combating the root causes of radicalization, violence and poverty. Depriving children of their right to education is at the root of future problems. Let me conclude. We need to take an integrated approach, as is being done, and we are very much in favour of strengthening UNOWAS. We also believe, as my British colleague said, that we have to see how the efforts of all the United Nations agencies can be streamlined so that they can work together in the most effective way. In that context, I see the Resident Coordinators as having a very important task. We need collaboration, as is being undertaken, and I would highlight collaboration with regional partners, the Economic Community of West African States, the Group of Five for the Sahel and so on. Here I would point to my South African colleague who just stressed that issue. I would also like to take up one point made by my Belgian colleague, Marc, with regard to the exchange with the Peacebuilding Commission and support for the Peacebuilding Fund, which I also see as very important. Finally, primary responsibility for all development in the region lies with individual Governments. They have to build trust in their State and in State institutions; provide basic social services to their population; ensure the rule of law and respect for human rights; engage with civil society; and, in particular, integrate women and young people.
