Mr. Gebru (Ethiopia): Let me join other members
of the Security Council in congratulating Cote d'Ivoire
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month, and we assure you, Sir, of Ethiopia's support
and cooperation. We also congratulate China on the
successful completion of its work during its presidency
for the month of November.

We extend our sincere condolences to the United
States of America on the passing of former President
George H.W. Bush.

We thank Special Adviser Khan for his first
briefing on Da'esh accountability in Iraq. It was under
Ethiopia's presidency that resolution 2379 (2017) was
adopted, with a view to ensuring the accountability of
members of Da'esh for their crimes in Iraq, including
cases that may amount to crimes against humanity. The
adoption of the resolution was an appropriate response
to the request made by the Government of Iraq calling
for the assistance of the international community in
ensuring the accountability of members of Da'esh for
the crimes they committed.

Through its commission of acts involving murder,
kidnapping, hostage-taking, suicide bombings and the
destruction of cultural heritage, Da'esh has committed
very serious crimes that may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide. We will never
forget the loss of our compatriots who were mercilessly
massacred by Da'esh in Libya, and that is one of the
reasons that we supported the adoption of resolution
2379 (2017): to hold members of Da'esh accountable for
the crimes committed in Iraq.

In that regard, we support the establishment of
the Investigative Team, headed by a Special Adviser,
to support Iraq's efforts by collecting and preserving
evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide committed by Da'esh.
We believe that that should be done with full respect for
the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes
committed on its territory.

We note that the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh formally began its work and submitted its
first report (see S/2018/1031) on the basis of resolution
2379 (2017). We also note that the Special Adviser
briefed the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. Furthermore, we note his
visit to Iraq and the series of engagements with senior
officials from the executive, legislative and judicial
branches of Government at various levels, as well as
with survivors, civil society groups and members of
different communities.

In the light of the severity of the crimes committed
by Da'esh and the magnitude of the challenge the
country faces, Iraq will need appropriate technical
support and capacity-building. It is important that
Member States, as well as regional and international
organizations, provide appropriate legal assistance and
capacity-building to the Government of Iraq in order
to strengthen its courts and judicial system. Let me
conclude by expressing our full support for the efforts
aimed at ensuring the accountability ofDa'esh members
for all of the crimes they have committed, not only in
Iraq but also in other parts of the world.

