Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to welcome you, Madam, and to express my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you preside over this
meeting. I should like also to welcome the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway. My delegation
would like also to thank the Secretary-General for his
introductory statement and the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs for his statement. We
thank also the Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for his statement.

The international community, and in particular
the United Nations, has long been concerned at the
situation of civilians in armed conflict. This concern
has been exacerbated by the changing nature of inter-
State conflicts.

Aware of their responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, world leaders made
a commitment, through the Millennium Declaration of
September 2000, to strengthen the protection of
civilians in complex emergency situations. The
Security Council held several debates on the topic and
adopted resolutions and declarations.

On this International Human Rights Day, my
delegation welcomes the submission of the third report,
which stresses in particular the three key measures on
guaranteeing access to vulnerable populations, the
separation of civilians from armed elements, the
restoration of the rule of law and the promotion of
national reconciliation. The report also notes the
existence of three emerging problems: the exacerbation
of gender-based violence, the exploitation of conflicts
for commercial purposes and the rise of terrorism in
situations of armed conflict.

My delegation supports the 21 practical measures
contained in the report under consideration, which, in
many ways, strengthen previous recommendations.
However, it must be emphasized that questions related
to women and children, among others, should be
considered within the framework of a comprehensive
approach to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

With respect to the key measures, it is desirable
to consider the establishment of a multidisciplinary
group that would carry out a comprehensive study of
all the recommendations in order to integrate them into
a more functional and uniform framework.

Regarding the emerging problems, we welcome
the work that has been done by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the question
of sexual exploitation in refugee camps. That study
should be widely disseminated in order to allow the
various actors to take the necessary measures.

My delegation is also concerned by the questions
of the commercial exploitation of conflict and
terrorism. We agree with the need to take punitive
measures, although, to be effective, these must apply to
all individuals and entities involved in this
exploitation.

We believe that the question of terrorism
seriously complicates the task of dealing with armed
conflict. We would like it to be the subject of an in-
depth study by the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which could, in conjunction with the Policy Working
Group on the United Nations and Terrorism, make
useful recommendations.

We welcome the finalization of the road map for
the protection of civilians, which takes into account the
various aspects of the management of affected
populations before, during and after conflicts. This
document, along with the aide-memoire adopted last
March, are key instruments in understanding questions
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

As we have seen, the efforts of the United
Nations have made it possible to establish points of
reference for norms relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Today, our duty is
effectively to implement these norms. In this respect,
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat all
have a decisive role to play.

We would like also to welcome the holding by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of
workshops in South Africa and in Japan, which made it
possible to stress the importance of regional action, the
need to involve regional institutions in the protection
of civilians, and the need to raise the awareness of
officials and of leaders of civil society. We would like
to encourage the holding of such workshops in other
regions.

We support the United Nations agencies in their
efforts to draw up a manual on the terms of
engagement with armed groups in order to facilitate
coordination and to make negotiations more effective.
The same applies to the elaboration by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, in cooperation with
the Member States, other United Nations agencies and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, of
specific measures relating to the disarmament of armed
elements, as well as the identification, separation and
internment of combatants.

We also welcome the recent publication by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of
the Agenda for Protection, which contains a wide range
of measures designed to preserve the humanitarian
nature of asylum.

We are also pleased at the outcome of the work of
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, which is
charged with developing comprehensive strategies
concerning the rule of law in the context of
peacekeeping operations, whose final report and
recommendations were approved at the end of last
September.

Furthermore, we note with satisfaction that the
United Nations, acting in conjunction with a number of
partners from the humanitarian community, is already
implementing several preventive and corrective
measures designed to strengthen and enhance the
protection and treatment of vulnerable persons caught
up in complex emergency situations.

I cannot conclude without reiterating that the best
way to protect civilians in armed conflict is to prevent
such conflicts in the first place and to set up an
effective and coherent peace-building programme.
Within this framework, the Security Council, which has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must further stress
conflict prevention and vigorously support efforts made
towards that end.

