Mr. Annabi: As it is rather late, I will try to be
brief and will be ready to revert at a later stage with
additional replies to some of the questions that I might
not address now.

We have, of course, taken note of the concerns
that have been expressed by Ambassador Lavrov and
the representative of China regarding the holding of the
municipal elections, and we will certainly convey these
concerns to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The regulation that has
been adopted to govern the conduct of municipal
elections makes it clear that the announcement of the
date of the municipal elections will be made by the
Special Representative after consultation with the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Special
Representative in charge of institution-building. In
making that determination and setting the date, they
will, of course, pay careful attention to all aspects,
including security conditions and other aspects that
may disrupt the holding of a credible and fair election.

On the discovery of the weapons caches and the
reports that the Albanians have demanded the return of
these weapons, I mentioned the statement by Mr. Ceku,
the head of the Kosovo Protection Corps, welcoming
the discovery by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) of these
weapons, and therefore I am not aware of any intention
on the part of KFOR to return those weapons to
whomever they may have belonged.

As regards Mr. Thaci's refusal to participate in
the Joint Interim Administrative Structures, in view of
the conclusion by Mr. Kouchner of a Joint
Understanding with Bishop Artemije regarding security
conditions for the Serb minorities, Ambassador Lavrov
asked what Mr. Kouchner's response was.
Mr. Kouchner has made it clear that this Joint
Understanding is aimed at improving conditions for
minorities, and for the Serb minority in particular, and
he pointed out to Mr. Thaci that the position they have
taken may be seen by the international community as
opposition to ensuring security for the minorities, and
that may, of course, have negative consequences for the
assistance that the international community is
extending to Kosovo. He has therefore urged Mr. Thaci
to reconsider and to cooperate with UNMIK in creating
an environment in which better security conditions can
be put in place for all communities in Kosovo.

As regards the issuance of identity cards, these
provisional identity cards, issued by UNMIK as people
are registered, contain UNMIK symbols with
information appearing in both Albanian and Serbian
Cyrillic script. These identity cards are strictly for use
within Kosovo and do not contain any reference to
citizenship. There may have been one or two isolated
mistakes at the very early stage of UNMIK regarding
the issuance of birth certificates, but that has been
corrected, and we are not aware of any identity cards
referring to citizenship. Clearly, they do not contain
reference to citizenship and are not delivered for that
purpose.

On the establishment of liaison offices in Pristina,
the purpose of these liaison offices of certain Member
States in Pristina is essentially to organize and
coordinate the cooperation between UNMIK and the
international donor community. They are not intended
to be diplomatic missions. They are not regarded as
diplomatic missions, and certainly the privileges and
facilities that may be extended to them will be
construed in a way that makes that point clear. Again, it
is essentially to facilitate cooperation between UNMIK
and the donor community.

As regards the question by Ambassador Levitte as
to the outstanding requirements for personnel in
UNMIK and the measures that have been taken to
replace those who may be leaving at the end of their
term and in the course of the summer,

(spoke in French)

I would like to mention, in that respect, that last month,
during Mr. Kouchner's visit, we distributed an
exhaustive report on the need for additional personnel,
with descriptions of the posts. I therefore think that
Member States have accurate information available on
the needs that continue to exist. With regard to
replacement and rotation, we have, as mentioned here,
delegated the maximum responsibility to UNMIK on
the ground to proceed with these replacements and to
inform us of their needs. In fact, we have just
appointed as Director of UNMIK Administration Mr.
Da Costa, who was the head of recruitment for
peacekeeping operations, to personally ensure that
recruitment takes place as quickly and as
comprehensively as possible. Of course, we will call
Member States' attention to new or additional needs
which might be pointed out to us by the Mission.

(spoke in English)

As regards the efforts being made by UNMIK to
persuade Mr. Thaci and the Kosovo Democratic Party
to return to the Interim Administrative Council, I can
assure Ambassador Hasmy that this is something that
Mr. Kouchner is actively working on. He is in touch
with them to persuade them that it is in their best
interest to participate in these structures, because their
refusal and the motives invoked for their refusal to
participate may be counterproductive and counter to
their own interests. So he will continue his efforts to
persuade them to participate, just as he has worked
actively to persuade the Serbs to also participate.

On the issue of the designation of a special envoy
for missing persons, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is currently exploring
the conditions under which this can be done. We will
keep the Security Council informed of developments. I
do not have more information on this issue at this
point.

Turning to the question raised by the Ambassador
of the Ukraine and to the issue of the establishment of
the Kosovo war and ethnic crimes court, this court has
not yet been established. We have been consulting with
the Legal Office, with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in this
regard. The ICTY has confirmed publicly that there
would be no conflict between this proposed court and
the ICTY. This war and ethnic crimes court would deal
with crimes committed in Kosovo, but the ICTY can
request that any crime committed during the war in
Kosovo be directed and referred to it.

I regret the delays regarding the deployment of
the special police unit from Ukraine. I will, of course,
look into it. These deployments involve a complicated
process. The unit needs to be ready, and I welcome
your confirmation that the unit is ready. We need to
send teams to visit these units, to discuss the
arrangements and the equipment they need to have. We
try to coordinate these visits so they can cover several
countries at the same time. That sometimes creates
some delays, but of course it is based also on financial
considerations, to try and avoid unnecessary expenses.
Finally, we have to have in place the necessary
structure to accommodate them when they arrive in
theatre. So we need a combination of these three
different conditions in place to be able to affect the
deployment. We will do what we can to activate this in
cities in UNMIK's interest.

Finally, on the question regarding regulation on
the municipalities, there is indeed a regulation which
will establish the numbers, names and boundaries of
the municipalities, which is being finalized. I totally
agree with you that one does not go without the other.
In other words, the regulation on the conduct of the
municipal elections cannot be implemented without the
issuance of the regulation on the boundaries of the
municipalities. This regulation, as I said, is being
finalized and will be adopted soon.

That, I think, covers some of the main questions.

