Mr. Me'rime'e (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation would like to convey its
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency and also its very sincere thanks to Ambassador
Li Zhaoxing for the way in which he conducted the work
of the Council last month.

The Council's adoption of resolution 984 (1995), a
few days before the opening of the Review and Extension
Conference of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), is an act of
particular importance, whose scope is not lost on any
delegation. The resolution reflects the common desire of the
nuclear Powers, permanent members of the Council, to
respond to the aspirations of the international community
and promote the universality and indefinite extension of a
Treaty which is now more than ever the very cornerstone
of the non-proliferation regime.

The resolution which has just been adopted is intended
to be a global, collective and concrete response to the
legitimate aspirations of the non-nuclear-weapon States in
the context of the post-cold-war period.

First and foremost it is a global response, for, unlike
resolution 255 (1968), the text that the Council has just
adopted involves both positive and negative security
assurances.

It is also a collective response, since for the first time
since the appearance of nuclear weapons the five Powers
recognized as such by the NPT have been in a position
not only to co-sponsor such a resolution, but also to a
large extent to harmonize the contents of their national
declarations. The five Powers afford all non-nuclear-
weapon States parties to the NPT harmonized negative
assurances, thus reinforcing their security.

Finally, it is a concrete response, because, for the
first time a Security Council resolution specifies the
measures which the Council may take, in the event of
aggression, in the areas of settling disputes, humanitarian
assistance and compensation to victims.

The resolution which has just been adopted by the
Council would not exist without the national
commitments made by all the recognized nuclear Powers.
The fundamental importance of the joint declarations of
6 April by the permanent representatives of the five
permanent members at the Conference on Disarmament
prompts me to reiterate what was said then.

First, with respect to negative assurances, France
reaffirmed that it

"will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-
weapon States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, except in the case
of an invasion or any other attack on France, its
territory, its armed forces or other troops, or against
its allies or a State towards which it has a security
commitment". (S/I995/264, annex, p. 2)

France thus makes clear, for the benefit of the States
which are signatories of the NPT, the guarantees it gave
in 1982.

The declaration made on 6 April in Geneva is also
a very important step in so far as, for the first time,
France pledges to give positive assurances to all non-
nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT, in order to
indicate its determination to alert the Council should these
countries be attacked or threatened by nuclear weapons.

In the course of the numerous consultations in the
preparation of this draft, concern was expressed as to
whether the joint commitments made by the nuclear
Powers concerning the so-called positive assurances could
ensure the matter's being brought before the Council. On
this point, France's declaration should dispel any
ambiguity or apprehension. It states:

 

"France considers that any aggression which is
accompanied by the use of nuclear weapons would
threaten international peace and security. France
recognizes that the non-nuclear-weapon States parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons are entitled to an assurance that, should they
be attacked with nuclear weapons or threatened with
such an attack, the international community and, first
and foremost, the United Nations Security Council,
would react immediately in accordance with the
obligations set forth in the Charter.
"Having regard to these considerations, France
makes the following declaration:

"France, as a Permanent Member of the Security
Council, pledges that, in the event of attack with
nuclear weapons or the threat of such attack against a
non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, France will
immediately inform the Security Council and act
within the Council to ensure that the latter takes
immediate steps to provide, in accordance with the
Charter, necessary assistance to any State which is the
victim of such an act or threat of aggression.

"France reaffirms in particular the inherent right,
recognized in Article 51 of the Charter, of individual
or collective self-defence if an armed attack, including
an attack with use of nuclear weapons, occurs against
a Member of the United Nations until the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security." (ibid., p. 3)

The fact that our Council has pronounced itself very
clearly on this resolution, which calls for universal
adherence to the NPT and emphasizes the need for States
parties to the Treaty to fully respect all their obligations,
bears witness to the desire of the members of the
international community to work to strengthen the non-
proliferation regime.

On the eve of the Conference on extending the NPT,
whose indefinite extension, I would recall, France firmly
advocates, this vote seems to my delegation to be a
particularly encouraging sign. For their part, the permanent
members of the Security Council, in presenting this
resolution, have assumed the responsibilities incumbent
upon them as nuclear-weapon States concerned about
fulfilling their obligations under the NPT.

