The Secretary-General: I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency President Ilham Aliyev of
Azerbaijan.

I thank the Security Council presidency of
Azerbaijan for having convened this timely debate.
Next month, the General Assembly will conduct the
third review of the United Nations Global Counter-
2

Terrorism Strategy, adopted six years ago. The issues
that we will discuss today can contribute to a good
outcome of that review.

Terrorism is a significant threat to peace and
security, prosperity and people. The international
community continues to pursue a robust and
comprehensive response.

Collective efforts have disrupted attacks and
disabled terrorist networks. But recent attacks in
Afghanistan, Iraq, Nigeria and Yemen have
demonstrated that the threat is still formidable. Terrorist
organizations continue to look for new havens, adopt
new tactics and seek new targets.

Today I would like to make three points.

First, we need to focus special attention on
conditions that are conducive to spreading terrorism. In
the Sahel region, for example, instability and violence
have recently increased, in part as fallout from
developments in Libya. The fact-finding mission I sent
last December has provided a valuable assessment of
the situation in the Sahel and the impact of the crisis in
Libya on the region, along with recommendations for
mobilizing international support, building capacity and
improving coordination among key stakeholders.

Secondly, we must pursue the integrated approach
to terrorism and violent extremism embodied in the
Global Strategy. That means countering the appeal of
terrorism, strengthening capacity-building and
protecting human rights as a central part of our
response. It means resolving differences peacefully,
providing education and job opportunities, promoting
development and intercultural dialogue, and addressing
the grievances that terrorists exploit.

It also means promoting respect for human rights
and respect for the rule of law, which are integral to
any sustainable counter-terrorism approach. The
Council and the General Assembly both have endorsed
this principle. Countering terrorism also means
recognizing and alleviating the suffering of victims.

My third point is actually a request. I urge
Member States to make full use of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The bodies
created by the Council have played a critical role in the
Task Force; these include the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee and the expert staff of the
1540 Committee. The Task Force is a valuable tool for
12-32940
creating an integrated response for capacity-building
and for sharing best practices.

In combating terrorism, the international
community must also work as one. That is why I hope
that Member States will decide to create the position of
a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator to
promote better coordination, collaboration and
cooperation among all players.

The newly established United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre, within the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office, serves a critical
role in supporting Member States in all areas under the
four pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

I am grateful for the contribution of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia for the creation of the Counter-
Terrorism Centre, and I would like to encourage all
participants to contribute to our efforts.

I will be participating in the Advisory Board
meeting of the Centre early in June.

By working together in undertakings ranging
from strengthening law enforcement to tackling the
underlying drivers of extremism, we can greatly reduce
this major threat to peace and security.

I wish the Council a productive debate.

