Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Today the United
Nations has gathered to debate threats to international
peace and security. It is fitting that the President of
Croatia, His Excellency Mr. Stjepan Mesic', is presiding
over this discussion. Croatia has suffered enormous
trauma and has been devastated by the threats to its
peace and security. I express my felicitations to His
Excellency for not only presiding over this debate, but
for also giving us, in his first address, the benefit of his
experience in this matter.

Today, as we discuss this important issue, we are
troubled by two very tragic events that resulted in the
indiscriminate killing of innocent civilians in Mumbai,
India, and a few days later in Peshawar, Pakistan.
These horrific devastations were thousands of miles
apart, yet they have a discernible imprint of common
purpose. They remind us of the common threat posed
by terrorism and of our common birth and destiny.

I condemn these incidents and condole with all
concerned. The President of Pakistan asked me to
convey to the Council the pain in India as he perceives
it:

"We can identify with India's pain. I am
especially sympathetic. I feel this pain every time
I look into the eyes of my children."

Today, in the New York Times, the President of
Pakistan has stated to the world his intent that Pakistan
is committed to the pursuit, arrest, trial and punishment
of anyone involved in those heinous attacks. Pakistan
will take action against non-State actors found within
our territory, treating them as criminals, terrorists and
murderers. Not only are the terrorists not linked to the
Government of Pakistan in any way, we too are their
targets and we too continue to be their victims. The
President then goes on to say very empathetically, "But
we caution against hasty judgments and inflammatory
statements".

The words of the President have today been
converted from commitment to action. The New York
Times has carried an article describing "Pakistan raids
militants linked to Mumbai attacks", in which I
specifically quote the Army Information Department of
Pakistan as saying, "We have started intelligence-led
operations against banned militant outfits and
organizations today". That is a very important
statement, as it shows that all arms of the Pakistani
Government are moving in coordination and cohesion
towards punishment of those who seek, in any way, to
destroy the peace of our neighbours and of our own
country.

So Pakistan has cast the proverbial first stone. I
was a little surprised by the strong denouncement by
my friends in India at the Security Council today, but
then I view it under the domestic political
considerations of the moment. But I do ask, is it
warranted? Is there anything that we are not willing to
do with you, within reason? The President of Pakistan
clearly stated to India and the world that "the best
response to the Mumbai carnage is to coordinate to
counteracting the scourge of terrorism". I think this is a
very important offer. The world must act to strengthen
Pakistan's economy and democracy, help us build civil
society and provide us with the law enforcement and
counter-terrorism capacities that will enable us to fight
the terrorist activity effectively. He further goes on to
say that India and Pakistan and the rest of the world
must work together to track down the terrorists who
caused mayhem in Mumbai, attacked New York,
London, Madrid and also destroyed the Marriot Hotel
in Islamabad in September.

We did not wish to raise any issues, but by
jumping to conclusions, I would request that my
friends in India recall that when the Friendship
Samjhauta Express - I do not want to raise this, but I
am just giving this as an example - was burned down,
with Muslim passengers killed on their way to
Pakistan, fingers were pointed hastily at Pakistan.
Later it was proved that an Indian Army colonel was
involved.

Similarly - not a point I would have raised
today, but under the circumstances - with regard to
Kashmir, Pakistan, despite its domestic situation, is
exercising restraint in international forums, and that is
how we would have liked to have seen the aftermath of
the Mumbai incident as well. We are all aware that the
Kashmir situation is the root cause of all the problems
between India and Pakistan. Would it not be a good
time to do away with the root cause by pledging to
resolve it, not just with words but with deeds and
actions, as we have done today in Pakistan, and get that
problem away from us all?

How should we proceed? I would say, let us
recommend to each other to stop all negative
campaigns against each other, that India must help
resolve even the religious aspect. Some of those here
may not be aware that in the Northwestern frontier
province, where that matter has taken root in a very
deep way, there is a very strong quarter of society led
entirely by the mullahs. These mullahs owe their
obeisance to the mullahs in Deoband, India. I do not
say this as a criticism or to point fingers - I have a
very good suggestion.

What I would like to say is that if senior clerics
from Deoband, who wield great influence in the North-
West Frontier territories of Pakistan and in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas, would come to

Pakistan, get together and, in their tremendous
knowledge of religion, offer a fatwa in Pakistan against
the suicide bombings and the killing of Muslims that
are happening in Pakistan and even in India, I think it
would have a very important effect in the North-West
Frontier province. In fact, the most powerful politician
from that province happens to be Maulana Fazul-ur-
Rehman, who also owes his obeisance to Deoband,

So we can help each other, we can be with each
other, and we can use each other's facilities - the last
idea being perhaps the most important, and which has
not yet even been considered.

I would also like to give the Council a few
glimpses of measures being undertaken today in
Pakistan.

First, the Government of Pakistan has already
initiated investigations on its own pertaining to the
allegations of the involvement of persons and entities
in the Mumbai attacks.

Secondly, after the designation of Jamaat-ud-
Dawa under resolution 1267 (1999), the Government,
on receiving communication from the Security
Council, shall proscribe Jamaat-ud-Dawa and take
other consequential actions, as required, including the
freezing of assets. A plan is being prepared to ensure
effective Government supervision, as required by this
body and others of the various welfare organizations.
An intelligence-led operation, strongly supported by
law enforcement agencies, is already under way to
arrest the individuals alleged to be involved in the
Mumbai attacks. No training camps for Lashkar-e-
Tayyiba or any entity of this nature shall be allowed on
the territory of Pakistan.

The aforementioned measures, which are in
process, constitute further proof of Pakistan's
determination to take action and not to allow its
territory to be used for terrorism. The Pakistan
Government's ability and capacity to take strong
measures requires the understanding and full support of
its friends, the United Nations and its Security Council.
In addition to our proposal of a joint commission and
investigations, we have now proposed that India
receive the highest possible level delegation from
Pakistan to sort out these affairs and ensure that
matters are further improved in the future.

But now let me come to the real focus of this
debate. I feel that our object is to improve and
strengthen international cooperation and coordination
in the fight against terrorism. In the broader fight
against terrorism, the pre-eminence of operational
measures can never be challenged. However, to ensure
the total defeat of terrorists, we need to formulate
comprehensive strategies.

We believe that a simplistic approach to resolving
intricate problems will create more problems. The first
and foremost need of the time is that we promote
international harmony, in which this Council can play
an exceedingly important role. We must reject efforts
aimed at creating new divisions, clashes and schisms.
The human thirst for justice, however misperceived it
may be, can be better quenched through political
means than through force.

We must therefore promote political solutions to
long-standing unresolved conflicts; here I would cite
the situations in Kashmir and Palestine. Though these
conflicts are unique in nature, they present similar
challenges and opportunities. We should be encouraged
by the dividends of the political solution of the
Northern Ireland issue achieved through the Good
Friday Agreement and follow in the same direction.

I would like to underscore the need to strengthen
democracies and to create an all-inclusive environment
of support to fight the menace of terrorism. It helps to
isolate those who promote their cause through force
instead of debate and dialogue. It promotes the sense of
social participation and mainstreams the fringe
elements. The sinister terrorist masterminds take pains
to identify and sabotage nascent friendships. If we
succumb to their designs and actions, they repeat their
actions. If you get closer after the destructive actions,
they are discouraged. So the need is to get closer. A
consistent pattern of response based on divisions will
not only expose our weaknesses, but encourage the
evil. We need to stand united in the hour of crisis,
taking that stance as an important element of our
counter-terrorism strategy, to further cement the
relationships aimed at fighting this menace.

For the long-term resolution of international
terrorism and security issues, we need to look into all
root causes of international terrorism and security-
related matters. These issues have been covered in the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which was unanimously adopted by the General
Assembly. We need to implement the Strategy in a
balanced and comprehensive way.

Last but not least, we have to sincerely and
effectively address the capacity-building needs of the
partner countries. A partnership in which we are
reluctant to share critical equipment and technologies
will lack trust and amount to disarming those fighting
against terrorists. This could not only result in
undesired casualties, but would also prolong the war.

