Mr. Ruggiero (Italy): This meeting of the
Security Council is both timely and crucial, a few
hours after the fall of Kabul. I listened with great
interest to the presentation of Mr. Brahimi following
his recent mission to the region. In taking the floor, I
will limit my remarks to three main considerations:
first, Italy's commitment to the fight against
international terrorism; secondly, the urgency of
creating under the aegis of the United Nations and,
notably, Mr. Brahimi, a political process aimed at
establishing in Afghanistan a broad-based, multi-ethnic
and balanced administration; thirdly, but equally urgent
and important, the need to develop a strategy for
humanitarian assistance to the population both inside
and outside Afghanistan.

Italy has pledged to the coalition against
international terrorism ground troops, naval units and
air forces, and the Government's decision has been
supported by an unprecedented display of
parliamentary consensus: over 90 per cent of the
members of the Parliament. The current military
actions - fully legitimate under the United Nations
Charter and relevant Security Council resolutions -
are targeted at bringing to justice the perpetrators of the
terrorist attacks and eradicating the Al Qaeda network
and those who provide assistance to the terrorists and
harbour them. Italy believes that every effort should be
made to reduce further suffering of the Afghan civilian
population, the victim for years of a humanitarian crisis
aggravated by the policies of an undemocratic and
isolationist regime, and to limit to the maximum the
loss of innocent lives.

Italy fully subscribes to the principle that the
future Government of Afghanistan should be
representative and express the broad, multi-ethnic
composition of Afghan society. As the European
Union's presidency stated earlier, we encourage and
support Mr. Brahimi in continuing his efforts with the
aim of forming a political alternative to the Taliban
regime. The democratic future of Afghanistan should
remain in Afghan hands. In the present circumstances,
it is critical to assure parallel improvements in the
rapidly evolving situation in the region and in the
progress of the inter-Afghan dialogue. Italy therefore
stresses the need to assist the Afghan people in
urgently building a comprehensive political solution
involving also personalities from among the
diaspora - a solution that gives a voice to every
component of Afghan society and contributes to
regional peace and stability.

Italy is also assisting the United Nations with its
own efforts, as a member of the European Union and as
the current presidency of the G-8.

Adequate conditions must be promptly created to
prevent a security vacuum, and they should accompany
political developments. A proper security framework is
an indispensable element for stability and also for the
distribution of humanitarian assistance. In fact, we
consider that humanitarian efforts should be
intensified, particularly for the internally displaced
persons. Italy has so far allocated more than $30
million in response to the appeals of various
humanitarian organizations. We have also increased our
aid to countries that shelter large numbers of refugees.

Together with the United Nations, we are
studying how to better assist reconstruction once peace
has returned to the region. We intend to consider as a
matter of priority projects that can be quickly
implemented to benefit the local population,
particularly in the agricultural sector, and those
projects that promote crop replacement with the aim of
eradicating the plague of drugs. The donor community
must be mobilized in a clear intervention strategy
encompassing the transition from the emergency phase
to reconstruction and rehabilitation.

Italy stands ready to consider offering additional
resources needed to allow a better future for the people
of Afghanistan, who have been crushed by years of
civil strife. A coordinated effort is essential, since there
can be no lasting peace without creating the conditions
for a sustainable and peaceful development.

