Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for its
initiative in convening this meeting on Somalia, and to
thank Mr. Simmonds for presiding over our discussion.
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing, and to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.

Somalia now has a historic opportunity to make the
transition from turmoil to stability. A breakthrough was
recently made in the peace process. The transitional
period has ended smoothly, and the first elected
Government and Parliament in 22 years have been
formed, starting the process of rebuilding the State. The
security and humanitarian situation has also improved,
and China welcomes those developments.

We also know that Somalia still has a long way
to go to achieve lasting peace and development. The
Government is still facing many difficulties and
challenges in maintaining stability and promoting
reconciliation and development. The security and
humanitarian situations remain fragile. Somalia must
not falter in its efforts to address those issues, while
the international community must also continue to
provide strong support. For now, we should focus on
the following aspects.

First, in order to make tangible progress in the peace
process, we should support the Government's efforts to
enforce the provisional Constitution, implement its six-
pillar policy and speed up State institution-building,
particularly in the areas of security and the judiciary,
and to promote a functioning Government capable of
administering the entire country effectively.

National reconciliation is the only way that Somalia
can achieve long-term stability and security. We urge
opposing groups in Somalia to renounce violence
and join the political process unconditionally and as
soon as possible. We hope that the parties will put the
interests of the State and people first, and that in a
spirit of solidarity and reconciliation they will temper
their differences through dialogue and consultations,
so they can work together to maintain the unity and
stability of the State as well as its economic and social
development.

Secondly, in support of the efforts of regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
address this issue, China commends the efforts made
by countries in the region and regional organization
towards achieving peace and stability in Somalia.
We hope that in dealing with these issues, the United
Nations and the international community will
strengthen their coordination with those countries and
the relevant regional organizations and take full heed of
their opinions. The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) plays a vital role in maintaining security
and stability in Somalia, and has made sacrifices and
an important contribution to that cause. The United
Nations and the international community should
increase their support to AMISOM. and provide it with
sustainable and predictable funding.

Thirdly, the United Nations and the international
community should play a positive and constructive
role in resolving this issue. We hope that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) will
be deployed as soon as possible, that it will strengthen
its coordination with Somalia and the relevant parties
in the international community and carry out its work
according to the Council's mandate. We hope the
international community will continue to increase
the attention and support it gives Somalia and to
provide support and assistance for efforts aimed at
peacebuilding and reconstruction, particularly the
Government's capacity-building efforts. We welcome
all efforts on the part of the international community
to resolve this issue successfully, including the second
London Conference on the issue, held in early May.
We also reiterate that the international community
should fully respect the sovereignty and independence
of Somalia, and that its various components should
strengthen their coordination with one another while
making full use of their respective advantages.

China follows developments in Somalia closely.
We are a firm supporter of the peace process there
and have provided assistance, within our capacity
to do so, to Somalia and AMISOM. Along with the
international community, we stand ready to make
our due contribution to achieving lasting peace and
reconstruction in Somalia.

