Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate and for preparing the concept note on the
Security Council's working methods (see S/2011/726, annex).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We welcome the improvements in the
implementation of the July 2006 note by the President
of the Council (S/2006/507) and the overall progress
that has been made in improving the working methods
of the Security Council. We acknowledge that the
implementation of the note is an important contribution
to enhancing the efficiency and transparency of the
Council's work.

A welcome development has been the significant
improvement the Council has shown in increasing the
number of its public meetings, and the greater
frequency of public briefings by special envoys and
representatives. We also commend the increased
interaction between the President of the Council and
the general United Nations membership. While these
measures are modest, they are nonetheless important
steps towards improving the Council's work and
ensuring greater transparency and accountability.

More, however, must be done to ensure that such
developments translate into substantive and meaningful
engagement between the Security Council and the
general membership, and that the views of the latter are
reflected in the Council's actions. My delegation also
welcomes the increased interaction between the
President of the Council and the Presidents of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

There is growing recognition of the linkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The Council,
in our view, has thus gained from its increased
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
This interaction should, however, translate into a
reflection of the Views of the PBC in the Council's
consideration of peacekeeping mandates. Similarly,
interaction with troop-contributing countries has
increased and meetings have been scheduled well in
advance of Council meetings. My delegation has also
appreciated hearing the views of force commanders in
their briefings to the Council during the year. A further
challenge is ensuring that these measures are
implemented and made permanent. In that regard, we
support the call for formalizing the Council's rules of
procedure in order to improve its transparency and
accountability.

There has been some progress in enhancing and
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU). Nonetheless,
challenges still exist in achieving the desired
complementarity in the areas of conflict prevention,
management and resolution between the United
Nations and the African Union. We are of the View that
the President of the Security Council could interact
regularly with the President of the African Union Peace
and Security Council on issues that are on the agendas
of both Councils. The two Councils could further
benefit from more interaction and substantive
discussion on a regular basis. In that regard, the use of
video technology could be successfully deployed to
regularize such interactions between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.

In conclusion, we are of the view that minor
changes to the working methods will not necessary
address the more fundamental issue that affects the
legitimacy and credibility of the Council, which is
linked to the fact that the current configuration of the
Council is unrepresentative, in particular in the
permanent category. We think that we must therefore
speed up the process of reform of the Council to make
it more representative.

