Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I join
others in welcoming the presence among us of Deputy
President Zuma. I thank you, Deputy President, for
your report, and I thank your country for leading the
regional African Union effort in Burundi. The African
Union mission in Burundi is clearly paying a key part
at this moment. Peace is at a crucial juncture. We heard

a much more positive report than we might have
expected 12 months ago. The parties in Burundi appear
serious in their pursuit of peace. That improvement
could very well last, but significant hurdles remain.
Security within the country is vital if the peace process
is to come to a successful conclusion: security covering
the political and military integration which is going to
be necessary. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration are going to be crucial, and Burundi will
need help on those aspects, on the political aspects,
and, very important, on the economic side.

In short, the United Kingdom believes that what
we need is an integrated approach by the international
community covering political and security issues;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
military; the economic development of the country; and
much more. The obligation on the international
community is all the greater because the Africans -
within Africa as a whole and within the region - are
producing their own solutions. The view of the United
Kingdom is that, when that happens, they require, and
we are obliged to give, support to those solutions.

With regard to the United Nations, we believe
that a focused intervention is necessary, covering all
those areas and involving all the instruments and
elements within the family of the United Nations,
including - crucially, as we have heard - the role of
the Economic and Social Council: in short, an
integrated, coordinated approach that tackles the needs
of Burundi and avoids a repetition of some of the
disasters we have seen previously. There is a lot of
good to build on, and we are obliged to do that.
I am confident that this is what is being planned
and considered by the Secretariat. The United Kingdom
would welcome advice in due course on exactly how
the international community and the United Nations
can respond to the present situation. How can we best
support the total effort needed - but especially, how
do we best secure the peace process; how do we
reinforce the efforts being made on the ground, which
demand our support? If that means a peacekeeping
operation, then the United Kingdom is very open to
that. Let us look at a spectrum of the possibilities: what
is the considered advice, worked out in consultation
with those most directly involved?

There is clearly a need for extra resources and
extra capacity to reinforce the African mission and to
deliver all the things that Burundi deserves.

I am pleased to announce that the United
Kingdom, bilaterally, will now give a further $3.4
million to support the mission currently in place in
Burundi and to support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts. That would be
in addition to what is being done by the European
Union.

