Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation proposed the
convening of today's meeting in this open format, with
the participation of all interested States, in order to
consider ways of improving the humanitarian situation
in Iraq under the devastating sanctions that have been
in place for so many years, as well as the question of a
comprehensive post-conflict settlement in the Gulf
region on the basis of relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Resolution 1352 (2001) of 1 June clearly defined
the main goal of possible changes in the Iraqi
humanitarian programme: facilitating trade and
economic ties between Iraq and the rest of the world.
Accordingly, we participated in work on various
possible ways of improving the humanitarian operation
and very seriously considered all the various proposals
made, including the draft resolution submitted by the
United Kingdom.

I must say frankly that the deeper we get into the
details of proposed changes in the sanctions regime,
the more our doubts grow as to the feasibility of the
concept enshrined in that draft and its political viability
vis-a-Vis the prospects for a lasting settlement in Iraq.
One basic element is that the system proposed in
the draft resolution leads us away from the task of full
implementation of Security Council resolutions on Iraq
and basically requires the freezing of the current
situation, in which sanctions are preserved with
unacceptable consequences for the people and
economy of Iraq and no progress is made on
disarmament. Specifically, the key elements of the
United Kingdom draft appear to lead not to easing the
very harsh economic situation of Iraq, but rather to
tightening the sanctions.

Many questions are raised by the authors'
proposal of a "goods review list" for deliveries to Iraq.
Until recently, the Security Council proceeded on the
premise that, in order to ensure that Iraq did not resume
its programme of weapons of mass destruction, it was
quite sufficient to have the so-called "1051 list",
including in the post-sanctions period. That list is
already in effect and a procedure in place for its regular
review. Such a review has just been carried out by the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the revised list requires
further study. In any event, we believe that the list will
continue to be applied on the basis of resolution 1051
(1996).

It is now being said that the authors of the new
concept regard the "1051 list" as inadequate. They
want to include in their "goods review list" goods from
the so-called Wassenaar Arrangements. Those
Arrangements, however, which bring together a limited
group of countries on a voluntary basis, are already
being applied in practice, inter alia, in respect of Iraq.
Giving those Arrangements a "sanctions status" under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations would
have very serious legal and political consequences.

Above and beyond the Wassenaar Arrangements,
a third part is being proposed for this "goods review
list", in which there would be a list of additional
products also subject to monitoring for delivery into
Iraq. Included in this third category are goods defined
in such a way that it would be possible, via very
vague procedures for considering contracts, to block
projects that are essential to the recovery of the energy,
oil, industrial and other areas of Iraq's economy. An
analysis demonstrates that this list of goods would not
be broader, but would be rather more prohibitive. Its
approval could undermine prospects for the industrial
development of Iraq.

The draft resolution contains nothing investment
or economic projects f and not only infrastructure
projects - which runs contrary to resolution 1352
(2001) in respect of facilitating economic ties with
Iraq. There is also total silence concerning the fate of
the Memorandum of Understanding between Iraq and
the United Nations, on which the humanitarian
programme has been based to date. It would therefore
appear that this new scheme is to be introduced without
Baghdad's consent, and that is utterly unrealistic.
Moreover, it is contrary to the decisions of the Council
concerning the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

Overall, the concept that has been put together
changes the very essence of the humanitarian
programme of the United Nations, politicizes it and
makes it and UNMOVIC into an instrument for
applying sanctions pressure. Attempts to use the
humanitarian operation to resolve tasks unrelated to it
would bury all hope for a resumption of ongoing
disarmament monitoring in Iraq and the legal lifting of
the anti-Iraq sanctions, pursuant to Security Council
decisions.

The perpetuation of sanctions can make the
situation in the Gulf much worse. Given the conditions
of the crisis in the Middle East, this would raise
regional tension to a qualitatively new level of danger.
Neighbouring States of Iraq and other States of the
region already see this new concept as a threat to their
new socio-economic and political stability. We are also
concerned that, as a result of introducing these so-
called "smart" sanctions, serious damage could be done
to the legitimate trade and economic interests of many
countries, including Russia.

We feel that the adoption of the proposed draft
resolution on smart sanctions would be detrimental to
averting the humanitarian catastrophe, devastate the
Iraqi economy and work against a post-conflict
settlement in the Gulf region.

Taking account of all these factors, we cannot
agree to this draft resolution, which seems
unadoptable. This certainly does not mean that Russia
is not prepared to discuss further questions of how the
humanitarian operation functions. However, such a
discussion must not be politicized and must be geared
towards reaching agreement on measures that would
genuinely improve the humanitarian programme in
order to undertake tasks that are truly humanitarian.

At the same time, Russia feels that we must delay
no longer the resumption of Security Council work on
a comprehensive settlement of the Iraqi problem.
Everyone knows that this work was interrupted because
of the hasty adoption of resolution 1284 (1999), which
contained too many gaps and too much ambiguity that
made the resolution not implementable in its current
form. Since then, we have consistently advocated
creating the necessary conditions and mechanisms for
implementing the resolution, but some States members
of the Security Council did not want that. The deadlock
that has arisen as a result made us unable to implement
the Secretary-General's initiative concerning a
comprehensive dialogue between the United Nations
and Iraq on all pending problems.

We regard the status quo as unacceptable, so
today we have introduced a specific proposal that
contains clear criteria for suspending and then lifting
sanctions that are tied to the deployment in Iraq of the
ongoing monitoring and verification system on the
basis of implementation of existing resolutions of the
Security Council. We are convinced that there is simply
no alternative to this comprehensive approach if we all
want to achieve a lasting settlement around Iraq and in
the entire Gulf region that is strictly in accordance with
resolutions of the United Nations.

