Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Mr.
President, I join the previous speakers in
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency this month and in thanking you for
convening this open debate today.

The nexus between terrorism and proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) has become one
of the most pressing international security issues facing
the international community today. The recent
revelation of the existence of an extensive clandestine
international network for the procurement of nuclear
equipment and technology, and the thriving illicit
trafficking of WMD related materials through this
network demonstrates the real danger of WMD falling
into the hands of terrorists. Yet, this emergent threat to
international peace and security has not been
adequately addressed by the existing WMD and non-
proliferation regimes.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the initiative of
the Security Council as a milestone in the efforts to
close the gap between the new realities of the twenty-
first century and the existing international non-
proliferation regimes. While fully supporting the
rationale behind the initiative and the thrust of the draft
resolution, the Republic of Korea would like to share
some of its observations in this regard.

We know that, as a matter of principle, the normal
and most appropriate way to establish new non-
proliferation obligations or to supplement the existing
non-proliferation regimes, is to negotiate new treaties,
or to amend the existing treaties within the framework
of treaty-specific bodies. Nevertheless, given the
urgency of this dire challenge and the amount of time
for a negotiating process involving all Member States,
it is fitting and timely for the Security Council to
address important loopholes in the existing non-
proliferation regimes. We must add, however, that the
Security Council's legislative authority should be
exercised with caution, and in exceptional circumstances.

We believe that the adoption of a new resolution
will bolster and strengthen the existing export control
regimes and contribute to the establishment of a
universal system of export controls governing the illicit
trafficking of sensitive items and technologies. We
hope that the guidelines and standards being
implemented under the existing export control regimes
will provide useful reference for the committee to be
established by the resolution in discharging its duties.

Since the new resolution would obligate all States
to take domestic measures, including the adoption of
national laws, the language of the draft resolution must
be clear and unambiguous, to avoid any
misinterpretation or discrepancy in its implementation.

We are of the view that the implementation of the

resolution at the national level must be ensured through
a monitoring mechanism. In order to ensure the
effective implementation of the resolution, it is
important to avoid any inconsistency between the
duration of the monitoring mechanism and the life of
the resolution itself.

In concluding, the Republic of Korea assures the
Council of its unwavering support for its efforts to
address the dangerous linkages between global
terrorism and the proliferation of WMD.

