Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on a very important topic. This
debate enables us to maintain momentum on this issue
as we approach the high-level meeting to be held on
24 September. I also want to thank the Secretary-
General for his personal commitment, for his
participation in this debate and for his report on the
subject (S/2011/634*).

Justice and the rule of law clearly constitute a
sine qua non precondition for people living together in
community, whether on the international or national
plane. That is particularly true in countries in conflict
or emerging from it. In that context, the Security
Council's exercise of its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security is
essential to solidifying the primacy of law in
international relations, to minimizing the risks of
conflicts erupting and to preserving peace and security
around the world.

In this debate, my delegation would like to focus
on the following fundamental aspects. First is the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach to

12-2096]
the restoration and consolidation of the rule of law in
conflict or post-conflict situations. Far from being a
purely legal question, strengthening the rule of law is
inextricably linked with different political, economic
and social factors. Building the rule of law should be
an integral part of the political process. Most previous
speakers have focused on the political will to establish
the rule of law. It must be integrated into the process,
not separated from it, so that they are mutually
reinforcing.

While it is true that strengthening the rule of law
in such situations is a precondition for moving from
conflict to peace, a fundamental element in
guaranteeing sustainable peace, the long experience of
the United Nations in conflict prevention and
resolution teaches us as well that the absence of
development is at the heart of a large number of
conflicts on the agenda of the Council.

In this enormous undertaking it is crucial that
United Nations efforts be effectively coordinated, in
order to combine efforts in a coherent way. That aim
will require the adoption of a strategic approach within
the whole of the United Nations system, in order to
harmonize actions undertaken. The role of the Security
Council is to interact with other competent bodies in
the United Nations, so as to pursue and strengthen
complementary and interactive relations that it already
has with them, in particular with the International
Criminal Court, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council.

The second point that my delegation would like
to stress is the importance of placing national
ownership at the centre of all international efforts
aimed at consolidating the rule of law. That involves,
of course - as other speakers have underlined -
respect for the principles of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. In that context, the efforts
of the international community are not aimed at
substituting for those of States but, rather, at
contributing to the elaboration and implementation of
national strategies that are focused on the principal
elements of the rule of law. In that regard, it is crucial
to ensure the support of local populations for
programmes aimed at establishing or consolidating the
rule of law, and the United Nations must contribute to
the efforts of Governments to establish mechanisms
and instruments that will enable them to respond to the
real needs of their peoples.

12-2096]

In societies ravaged by conflict, the fragile state
of national institutions represent a major obstacle to
the strengthening of the rule of law. It is therefore
essential that the international community have at its
disposal the resources necessary to enable it to support
national efforts to re-establish national institutions.

Complex peacekeeping operations, whose civilian
mandates have expanded considerably, provide support
to basic institutions, including judiciary bodies, civil
administration and public services, so as to enable
post-conflict countries to re-establish normal living
conditions. In that regard, the rule of law is today an
essential component of missions, and we take note of
the important progress made in activities related to the
police, judiciary and penal fields in post-conflict
countries. When it is so mandated, the rule of law
element of peacekeeping operations plays a supporting
role and does not substitute for national efforts.
Cooperation with host countries is therefore crucial to
the success of such a complex mandate and is closely
linked to security. It goes without saying that security
and the rule of law are two fundamental pillars without
which post-conflict States will be unable to move
ahead in the context of a dynamic of lasting peace.

The third and final element on which I should
like to focus is the emergence of new threats to
international peace and security, in particular
transnational organized crime, all types of trafficking
and terrorism, which represent genuine threats to the
rule of law. The case of the Sahel region is a perfect -
and worrisome - example in that respect.

We agree with the approach suggested by the
Secretary-General in his report regarding the
importance of finding regional solutions to the problem
of transnational organized crime and to capacity-
building at the national and regional levels. The
Council, which periodically considers those threats,
should also undertake specific assessments of the
impact of those threats on the rule of law. In that
regard, we encourage the increasing use by the United
Nations of organized crime assessments in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

My country, which has established an Equity and
Reconciliation Commission and which intends to bring
to justice those whose human rights violations have
been documented and proved, is deeply aware of the
importance, value and benefits of transitional justice.
Morocco's new Constitution has enabled it to further
strengthen its commitment to the rule of law and
respect for human rights.

As a member of the Council, Morocco remains
prepared to participate in all efforts made by the United
Nations to ensure the effective and universal
strengthening of the rule of law.

