Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me start, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency and by reaffirming our
full support. Also, I take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Kafando and his team for their successful
presidency during the complicated month of
September. My thanks go also to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings and for all their
endeavours to improve compliance with the mandates
relating to Guinea-Bissau.

Moreover, I thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this debate in a format that enables all
Members of the Organization to benefit from the
briefings and to consider all the statements to be made
by Council members and by the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, to whose statement
we shall listen carefully after Council members have
spoken, and not before, as we thought had been
adopted as our normal practice. My delegation had
understood that this discussion had been completed and
that, as a general rule, Council members would first
hear the representative of the country concerned before
making their own statements. It appears that this matter
will need to be taken up again in consultations.

In our View, the convening of today's debate is a
direct result of a broad call, made just a few weeks
ago, for the Council to apply, judiciously and
rigorously, the standard that public meetings should be
the rule, not the exception. I take this opportunity, Sir,
to pay tribute to your presidency for the openness you
have displayed in this regard and to the other members
of the Council for their flexibility.

Our debate should give us an opportunity to
recognize the efforts of the Government of Guinea-
Bissau and the Peacebuilding Commission in adopting
the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-
Bissau. In our View, that is a step in the right direction.
Only a process reflecting national priorities, based on
internal dialogue and strengthened by the cooperation
of all stakeholders - certainly including the
international community - can help to overcome the
enormous challenges facing the people of Guinea-
Bissau. We agree with and support the assessment
made by Ambassador Viotti that this is not the end of
the Peacebuilding Commission's engagement, but
rather the beginning of another, very important stage.

My country is concerned to note that the situation
on the ground remains extremely fragile. If there is a
place where the linkage between the pillars of security,
development and human rights is absolutely
indisputable, it is Guinea-Bissau. The Council should
continue to seek the necessary political support so that,
in close coordination with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), can
fulfil its mandate in a creative, coordinated and
effective manner.

We have followed very carefully the political
events of the last few months, and we are concerned at
the deterioration we see in relations among the
different parties, which reached the point that the
Government party decided to withdraw from the
political and government stability pact that was signed
last year. The results came quickly.
On the other hand, the intent to stage a coup that
the authorities discovered in August, apparently led by
the Chief of Staff of the Navy, shows the fragility of
the institutional progress achieved and demonstrates
the magnitude of the challenges that must be overcome
in implementing a broad security sector reform. Costa
Rica would suggest making a priority of that
component of the peacebuilding plan, so that the rule
of law can be strengthened, the bases for institutional
development can be established, and legal economic
activities can be facilitated.

A State that, like Guinea-Bissau, is fighting to
consolidate itself finds its best ally in a system of
institutions that is stable and worthy of trust by its
users. Therefore it is essential to attack corruption at its
roots and take the needed measures to strengthen the
fight against organized crime. In that context, regional
efforts developed recently should have the full support
of the entire international community.

Costa Rica reiterates its support for the regional
conference on drug trafficking and organized crime
being organized by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in Praia, Cape Verde at the
end of the month. We await the results with interest.
The threat of organized crime while institutional
development is only emerging can be attacked
successfully only through a coordinated fashion among
all the States affected. The regional approach must be
robust and effective, as Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe has said.

This Council, UNOGBIS and the Peacebuilding
Commission should act together to ensure results in the
short term that can be sustained over the long term. For
that reason, Costa Rica Views with interest the
Secretary-General's recommendation on creating a
panel of experts to investigate the identity and
activities of those involved in the drug business and
drug trafficking. However, we consider - and we must
stress this - that we need more details with regard to
the implications, the concrete objectives and the scope
of the proposal, including the links that, it is hoped,
that panel of experts would have with the other
institutional efforts deployed in Guinea-Bissau,
especially with the sovereign Government of the
country. In that sense, we endorse the words of the
Permanent Representative of South Africa.

Although the elements of security and justice are
basic for peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, the catalyst
for change doubtless is democratic legitimacy. Costa
Rica believes that the electoral process of next
November is essential in peacebuilding. The very high
number of voters who registered in the process - 94.6
per cent - is an encouraging sign that shows the
importance of those legislative elections for the people
themselves. Therefore we call on the Government and
other political actors to participate in a frank and
permanent dialogue that will strengthen achievements
and allow for an electoral process that is transparent,
peaceful and inclusive.

This Council needs to send a clear message to the
people and Government of Guinea-Bissau, one that
will tell all the actors involved in the future of that
country that the Security Council is following the
situation closely and, more importantly, will do
everything possible for it to take the path of
development, good governance and the rule of law.
Thus Costa Rica wishes to thank the delegation of
Burkina Faso for presenting a draft presidential
statement, which we are studying in detail and expect
to endorse.

