Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging this important meeting. I
wish also to thank Mr. Annabi for the comprehensive
briefing that he gave this morning. It was clear from
the briefing that good progress has been made on a
number of fronts in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, although there
remain some issues of concern. Those concerns include
the security situation in the East of the country and the
dire humanitarian situation. We are particularly
concerned about the suffering of innocent women and
children.

In that connection, my delegation welcomes the
aid provided and the pledges made by the international
community aimed at alleviating the humanitarian
situation and helping the economic recovery of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend the
United Nations Children's Fund for the important work
that it is doing in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We call on the international community to
continue, and to expand, its assistance, given the
seriousness of the situation and the large-scale
destruction that took place during the war.

It is important for all the parties to fulfil their
commitments and obligations in accordance with the
terms of the Lusaka Agreement and relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, the continued
occupation of Kisangani by the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie is deplorable; the
Security Council should do everything in its power to
ensure that the city of Kisangani is demilitarized, as
called for in resolution 1304 (2000).

As indicated by Mr. Annabi this morning, the
withdrawal of Namibian troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is on schedule and is proceeding
well.

My delegation welcomes the successful outcome
of the preparatory meeting of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, which took place in Gaborone, Botswana. My
delegation is happy to note that the parties were able to
agree on a venue and date for the dialogue. We trust
that women and groups representing them will actively
participate in the forthcoming meetings. In that regard,
we commend the facilitator of the dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, for his untiring efforts to make the
dialogue a success.

My delegation welcomes and fully supports the
forthcoming visit of the Secretary-General to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region in
general. We trust that this visit will provide a further
impetus to the peace process. We also welcome and
support his new Special Representative, Mr. Ngongi,
and wish him all the best in his work. We pledge our
full support to him.

My delegation furthermore hopes that the
Security Council will soon approve the phase III
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
that, when considering the mandate and size of
phase III, it will take full account of the enormity of
the conflict and the vastness of the country. We believe
that the Council must act swiftly to support the positive
developments in the peace process.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes once again
to pay special tribute to the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Morjane, for the commendable work that he has done
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo peace
process.

