Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia.
A little more than a year has passed since the
election of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo in Somalia. The new Government was able to
develop an effective plan of action, including financial
sector reform, job creation, a social cohesion policy,
conflict resolution and security sector reform. We
commend and support the efforts and the political
will of the Federal Government of Somalia and of
the federal member states for strengthening ties and
for promoting State-building and peacebuilding by
initiating dialogue on defining a federal model. At the
same time, it is important to follow up with steps to
formalize agreements on the division of powers, the
management of resources and the sharing of revenues.

We welcome the efforts of the National Independent
Electoral Commission to conduct nation-wide
consultations aimed at identifying the optimal electoral
model. To build on that, the electoral legal framework
needs to be adopted so as to organize the 2020-2021
universal elections.

We remain concerned about the continuing attacks
by Al-Shabaab on the Somali National Army (SNA) and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the causing of civilian casualties, which is exacerbated
by inter-clan violence. The AMISOM. troops who
provide secuity on the front line play a critical role
in the restoration of State authority. However, the
predictable and sustainable funding of the Mission
remains a challenge for its adequate operationalization.

We welcome the efforts of the Federal Government
and the regional Governments to continue the work on
the integration of the regional armed forces into the
Somali National Army and the police as an integral
part of the national security architecture. It is vital that
international partners continue to provide coordinated
support for building the capacity of the SNA in more
coherent manner.

We also commend the Federal Government of
Somalia for finalizing the transition plan. Realistic
time frames and conditions are necessary to comply
with the outlined priority tasks and benchmarks. In
implementing that comprehensive agenda, the Federal
Government faces a number of serious problems. In
particular, the financial situation is acute. There is a
need for a coordinated approach on the part of national
and international actors in order to establish effective
cooperation and confidence-building measures between
the Federal Government and the member states.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention
of members to my visit to the Horn of Africa last week
in my capacity as Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea. A report will be presented in
the near future. In the meantime, having observed it
at first hand, we acknowledge the work of the United
Nations country team and the European Union in
promoting local peace initiatives, peacebuilding and
national reconciliation.

