Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
ofthe European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

I would like to thank the Republic of Korea for
having taken the initiative to discuss this very important
topic in the Security Council. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their briefings.

It is very timely to address the issue of the protection
of civilians because, while there have been some
positive developments, many concerns remain. Despite
the progress, we need to continue our efforts to translate

normative progress into concrete improvements in the
protection of civilians on the ground.

Let me start by expressing that the EU is appalled
by the increasingly deteriorating situation in Syria,
which is primarily due to the unprecedented use of
force by the regime. The EU also condemns all attacks,
including terrorist acts that indiscriminately target
civilians.

The EU remains deeply concerned about the
widespread and systematic violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that, according to
the independent international commission of inquiry,
may amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The EU recalls that all those responsible for
such crimes must be held accountable and that there
should be no impunity for such violations and abuses.
The EU has repeatedly stated that if concerns about war
crimes and crimes against humanity are not adequately
addressed on a national level, the International
Criminal Court should deal with the situation. The
Security Council can refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court, as requested in the
letter from the Permanent Mission of Switzerland of
14 January 2013 (S/2013/19, annex), at any time. The
EU calls on the Security Council to urgently address
the situation in Syria in all aspects, including that issue.

Strengthening accountability is an important
element in enhancing compliance by the parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations.
National authorities have the primary responsibility to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Where national
authorities fail to take the necessary steps to ensure
accountability, the Security Council can, as appropriate,
play a more proactive role.

In more general terms, the frequent failure of parties
to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations under
applicable international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and refugee law to respect and protect
civilians is a concerning trend. We call on all parties
to armed conflict to respect fully their obligations,
including by securing humanitarian space and ensuring
access to humanitarian assistance for those in need.
The situation is serious in many countries, including in
Afghanistan, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and elsewhere, where
civilian populations, in particular women and children,
continue to be subject to various forms of extreme
violence, causing a grave humanitarian crisis with huge
displacements of populations.

With regard to the situation in Mali, the EU is
alarmed by allegations of human rights violations and
calls on the Malian authorities to make investigations
into the matter. The EU stands ready to provide
appropriate support to combat such abuse. It stresses the
importance of complying with international law and,
in particular, reminds the Malian authorities of their
primary responsibility to protect civilian populations.
All perpetrators of human rights violations must be
held responsible for their actions. The EU welcomes the
decision by the International Criminal Court to open
an inquiry into violations and encourages the Malian
authorities to cooperate.

Stressing accountability is key. But the need for
accountability and justice, sadly, applies to situations
in which there has been a failure to protect civilians and
crimes have been committed. In addition to bringing
perpetrators to justice, we strongly believe in early and
decisive action to try to prevent such crimes from being
committed and in the need to forcefully remind the
authorities responsible of their primary responsibility
to protect civilians or be held to account. There is
also much room for improvement in the way that the
United Nations system responds to early warnings and
evolving situations, as underlined in the recent report
of the Secretary-General's internal review panel on
United Nations action in Sri Lanka, which described
a systemic failure in adequately responding to human
rights violations and ensuring the protection of
civilians. The fact that the United Nations, to its credit,
has commissioned and made public a report of that kind
opens the way to reviewing and improving the response
of the United Nations system to such situations in the
future.

The EU wishes to express its grave concern for
the continuous attacks against, and other interference
with, medical personnel and facilities and the increased
threats to journalists in situations of armed conflict.
Experiences from recent conflicts raises the question
of how the principle of distinction is implemented in
practice, in particular when conducting warfare within
densely populated areas. We furthermore continue to be
very preoccupied by the humanitarian impact of the use
of weapons in densely populated areas. We take note
of the view expressed by the International Committee
of the Red Cross that the use of explosive weapons
with a wide impact area must be avoided in densely
populated areas. That issue should be addressed in a
more systematic and proactive way.

An important factor in regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is the ongoing negotiation
on the arms trade treaty. We are deeply convinced that
the arms trade treaty has the potential of contributing
to the improvement of living and security conditions
of hundreds of thousands of people around the
world - mainly civilians, women and children in
particular - by ensuring that arms are traded in the
most responsible way. At the final United Nations
Conference, in March, we hope to achieve a treaty that
sets the highest common standards for the regulation of
the international trade in arms, while also combating
illicit trafficking, thus reducing human suffering and
improving international peace, security and stability.

The mandates of many peacekeeping and other
missions have included protection-of-civilian activities
for a number of years. Many challenges remain in terms
of the effective implementation of such protection
mandates that we need to continue to address.
Mission-specific comprehensive strategies are a very
useful tool to facilitate such tasks. Reporting on the
protection of civilians by missions is key not least to
keeping the Council and troop-contributing countries
informed about the situation on the ground. In that
regard, the EU looks forward to the completion of the
guidance on reporting on the protection of civilians, as
requested in resolution 1894 (2009).

In many ways, training is the cornerstone of
improving the protection of civilians by missions. In
that regard, the EU welcomes the establishment of
protection-of-civilian training modules to better prepare
peacekeepers for that task. It is important that those
training modules also cover humanitarian principles
and the basic norms of international humanitarian law.
In order to make progress, it is up to Member States to
ensure that their peacekeepers receive proper training
before deployment. We also welcome the fact that
mission-specific and tactical-level predeployment and
in-mission training modules are under development.
For its part, the EU has also integrated that dimension
in its training programmes. In addition, the EU training
mission in Mali will, for instance, include training on
human rights, the law of armed conflict, gender, child
soldiers and the protection of civilians.

Implementing protection-of-civilian mandates
also requires better planning support to missions,
harnessing lessons learned effectively and
improving the understanding of how to support
host States in protecting civilians. Also decisive are
effective dialogue and better coordination between
protection-mandated missions and the humanitarian
organizations undertaking protection activities. We
note with satisfaction a recent comparative study
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support on the coordination
mechanisms in United Nations peacekeeping missions
related to the protection of civilians. The relevance of
the whole-of-mission approach is clearly demonstrated
by such findings. At the same time, the neutrality
and independence of humanitarian activities must be
maintained to ensure adequate access.

The Security Council should continue to request
the Secretary-General to explicitly report on the
implementation of protection-of-civilian mandates by
peacekeeping operations. The protection of civilians
should also be a standard benchmark against which we
measure the success of a peacekeeping operation.

Let me end by saying that we need to focus our
efforts on making sure that we translate normative
progress into concrete improvements in the protection
of civilians on the ground.

