Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I did not plan to take the floor either, but my
colleagues have left me with no choice. Yes, of course
rule 37 is an important one, and we are obliged to keep
to the designated agenda item for the meeting that we
are discussing, but insisting that the representative of
a country that is directly affected by the agenda item
we discussing today does not have the right to give his
view of the situation, and of its genesis and current
and future state as his country sees it, shows a lack
of respect for that country's legitimate representative.
1 want to point that out to the Council once again.
And yet it is no secret. We know perfectly well that
the countries that have just made statements lack any
respect for the legitimate representatives of the Syrian
Government - more than that, their attitude to them is
totally disrespectful.

Let us grant the countries that we invite here under
rule 37 the right to say what they consider to be essential
on the agenda item that we are discussing today.
Incidentally, I saw no deviation from the issues we are
discussing today in the statements by the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic. Perhaps the countries that
just took the floor did not like something he said, but
this is one of those cases where responding with "the
truth hurts" is the adage that applies.

I would suggest to the countries that spoke with
such impassioned support for abiding by the rules of
procedure and our meeting's agenda that they listen very
carefully to the words that we heard today not only from
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic but from
many other delegations. They show that our versions of
what has happened, what is happening and what may
happen in Syria are divergent, to put it mildly. In our
statement we called on countries, including those that
have opposed us today, to put aside their differences
and work together so that we can, finally, arrive at a
political settlement in Syria, which is what we all so
desperately want.

