Ms. Stener (Norway): Let me first say that
Norway is part of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, and therefore of course fully
adheres to the statement made a little earlier by the
representative of Switzerland. We are very pleased
to see the steady progress achieved in the working
methods ofthe Security Council during the past decade.
We would like to thank Japan for its tireless and fruitful
efforts as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions of the
Security Council. We also welcome the most recent
edition of what is known as the Green Book.

To maintain momentum in that process, it is
necessary for the Security Council to continuously and
periodically conduct constructive debates on its working
methods. We would like to thank Kuwait for organizing
this tenth annual debate on the working methods of the
Security Council at the start of its membership as an
elected member of the Council. Kuwait can count on the
support and cooperation of Norway in its chairmanship
of the Informal Working Group.

We recognize the need to strike a balance between

gaining the support of the wider United Nations
membership and enabling the Council to take prompt
and effective action to maintain international peace and
security. We are convinced that the full implementation
of the agreed measures described in note S/2017/507
in the daily business of the Council will be crucial to
maintaining that balance. We call on all members of
the Security Council to put those measures into effect
without delay.

In particular, we welcome the note's reference to
the importance of annual joint consultative meetings
and informal dialogues with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and of the Security
Council's intention to regularly seek the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We are encouraged by the transparency and
inclusivity that guided the process of selecting a new
Secretary-General last year, the momentum for United
Nations reform that is currently energizing the work
of the Secretariat and Member States, and the ongoing
efforts to reform the Security Council. A relevant and
strong United Nations requires an efficient, transparent
and inclusive Security Council to meet today's
challenges to international peace and security and to
improve global governance.

I can assure the Council that Norway will contribute
to a constructive dialogue among Member States with a
View to achieving further progress.

