Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of Argentina
would like to thank you for having organized this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
as well as for the document you have prepared in order
to inform our deliberations. We would also like to
thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing to the Council.

The end of the last century once again brought
before the eyes of humankind the horrible realities of
genocide, the atrocities of war and massive attacks
against civilian populations. The Security Council
reacted by placing this issue on its agenda and by
creating a legal framework to address the matter
through resolutions on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, namely resolutions 1265 (1999) and
1296 (2000). At the same time, new concepts were
discussed that questioned the idea of a State's absolute
sovereignty in the face of the commission of horrifying
criminal acts. Argentina participated in the elaboration
of both resolutions and, in 2000, stated in the Council
that the principle of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of States should be balanced against the
principle of non-indifference to massive violations of
human rights and humanitarian law.

Five years thereafter, the United Nations
produced two important decisions that reflected the
evolution of this significant issue. First, the 2005
World Summit Outcome distilled the rich debate of
previous years by adopting the concept of the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. In that document, our leaders indicated their
readiness to take collective action in the Council, in a
timely and decisive manner, against such grave
situations.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 1674
(2006) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
was the second significant development with regard to
the issue. That resolution completed and updated the
legal framework established by resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1296 (2000).
Both elements, the responsibility to protect and
the new Council resolution on the protection of

civilians, mark the beginning of a new phase in the
actions the international community should take in this
area.

To date, the Council has followed up on the issue
by holding semi-annual debates such as the one we are
having today. It has also attempted to include the issue
in the mandates of various missions.

After more than five years of following that
approach, we believe that the Council should improve
its mechanisms for addressing the subject on a regular
basis and to that end consider the creation of a specific
mechanism for the systematic follow-up of the
protection of civilians in each of the situations on its
agenda. That would allow an adequate and
individualized evaluation of each case, facilitating the
consideration of appropriate measures for each conflict
on the basis of a list of options that could include,
among others, the proposals formulated by
Mr. Egeland. A mechanism with such characteristics
would also entail greater interaction with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs regarding the
information that the Council receives on this subject.
That aspect has special importance, we believe, at the
moment when civilians are first affected by a crisis, at
which time the preventive actions that the Council may
deploy play a very important role.

Such a mechanism would allow, in brief, a more
integrated implementation of the provisions of
resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000) and 1674 (2006).
In that regard, it is useful to recall that those
resolutions also include provisions regarding the
conditions in which the United Nations lends
humanitarian assistance, such as those regarding access
of humanitarian personnel to affected populations or
the security of humanitarian personnel.

The idea of developing a mechanism for a case-
by-case analysis on the basis of an initially thematic
focus is not new and is already being successfully
implemented in situations of children in armed
conflicts.

In the case of protection for civilians, the
consideration of such a mechanism could also
represent an initial step towards the implementation of
the final part of paragraph 138 of the outcome
document of the 2005 summit, which indicates that the
international community must support the United
Nations in establishing an early warning capability
regarding the responsibility to protect.

