Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Afghanistan wishes
to thank Her Excellency Foreign Minister Margot
Wallstrom of the Kingdom of Sweden and her delegation
for convening today's important debate, and we hope
that this meeting will mark the start of a new phase
in United Nations efforts to embed conflict prevention
at the core of the Organization's peace and security
architecture. We are also particularly grateful to
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his visionary
and inspiring briefing earlier today.

Toda we witnessed yet another bloody day in my
country. The Taliban committed multiple terrorist
attacks in the Kabul, Kandahar and Helmand provinces
of Afghanistan. Based on the most recent reports,
approximately 135 people, mostly civilians, including
women and children, were killed or wounded in the
carnage. Among the wounded are our Governor of
Kandahar province, the Ambassador of the United
Arab Emirates to Afghanistan and a number of other
diplomatic colleagues. We pray for those who lost
their lives and wish those who were injured a speedy
recovery. Let me thank Ms. Wallstrom for extending
her message of support this morning to the victims and
to the Government and the people of Afghanistan.

Today's attacks in my country and the views
expressed in this debate illustrate in clear terms that
sustaining peace is a complex undertaking that requires
consistency across multiple lines of effort. It also
highlights that the United Nations is simultaneously
preoccupied with an unprecedented number of security
and humanitarian crises and that more focus is needed
to overcome current conflicts and prevent those of
tomorrow. A glimpse at the current international
landscape reveals that violent extremism and terrorism
feature dominantly in several conflict settings around
the world. We believe that terrorism can be defeated
only through a multidimensional approach that focuses
on both its internal and its external drivers.

The United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism constitutes a key preventive tool
for addressing some of the internal drivers of violent
extremism at the societal level, above and beyond
security and military measures. However, the United
Nations must also pay greater attention to some of
the external drivers of such phenomena. The cycle of
violence and insecurity in Afghanistan and our part
of the world is inextricably linked to the presence of
sanctuaries and safe havens in the region, from which
and in which extremist groups are sustained and enjoy
an incessant flow of political, financial, material
and logistical support for the continuation of their
malicious activities.

In that light, the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, should devise a viable approach to identify
situations where elements in some State institutions
facilitate violence and extremist activities by
non-State proxies as a means to advance their foreign
policy agenda.

The sustaining peace agenda goes hand in hand
with the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and provides a key tool by helping to prevent conditions
that may give rise to conflict and instability, such as
poverty, lack of development and dire humanitarian
conditions. Consistent with SDG Goal 16, the continued
partnership of the international community with fragile
States remains crucial for helping States to implement
their national development goals.

National dialogue, mediation and reconciliation
aimed at fostering understanding aimed at preventing
conflicts, as well as resolving them through peaceful
means, are other important components of the conflict
prevention and sustaining peace agenda. In our case,
the Government of National Unity is making every
effort to ensure lasting peace for our peoples. In that
effort, we are reaching out to reconcilable elements
within Afghan armed groups who are willing to give
up violence and embrace a new future as peaceful and
law-abiding citizens.

We are pleased that our peace efforts enjoy broad
support from regional and international partners,
which is imperative for the success of our endeavours.
Neverthless, it is imperative, whether in our case
or any other peace process, that the principles of
national leadership and ownership be fully upheld, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including the principle of respect for the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
In that context, we have expressed strong reservations
with regard to open declarations by some in our region
about their contacts with armed opposition groups
active in Afghanistan, conducted without the consent
of the Afghan Government. Let me reassert that any
kind of talks on the situation in my country has neither
any value nor legitimacy without the participation
and approval of our Government, which is the most
democratically elected Administration in the history of
our nation.
What are the additional steps required by the
Security Council and within the United Nations system
to bolster existing efforts and how can current preventive
tools be better utilized to prevent conflict and sustain
peace? The United Nations is well positioned to help
address the trust deficit associated with harmful State
rivalries, which often lead to conflict and wherein some
actors go to all lengths, including the use of violent
proxy forces, in the pursuit of political, security and
economic objectives. That phenomenon is predominant
in our region. The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, can play an important role in
addressing the root causes and structural drivers of
conflict, and in furthering efforts to foster mutual
trust and confidence for common gain at the national,
regional and international levels.

Unity and consensus in the Council, along with
efforts to ensure justice, are imperative for conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Far too often, a lack
of consensus in the Council has blocked the effective
action needed to avoid the exacerbation of a particular
conflict and to create fertile ground for healthy
dialogue on the peace and negotiations front. Moreover,
strengthening the United Nations early-warning system
requires greater coordination among the relevant
United Nations offices to monitor fluid and conflict-
prone settings in order to identify viable approaches to
averting potential crises.

In conclusion, we hope that the year 2017 will mark
the start of a new era of beneficial efforts by the United
Nations to place prevention and the sustainability of
peace at the forefront of its efforts to ensure a more
peaceful and prosperous international landscape for
humankind as a whole. We fully support the vision of
the Secretary-General, presented today, on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace and we look forward
to working with him on its implementation.

