Major General Serra: It is an honour for me, as
Head of Mission and Force Commander of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), to be
given this opportunity to address the Security Council
today on the challenges of leading a composite force
towards common operational goals.

I shall elaborate on the subject of my presentation
by first outlining aspects of the complexity of UNIFIL.
I shall then turn to some of the key challenges inherent
in a composite force, how those may impact the
implementation of UNIFIL's mandate, and possible
ways to address them. Let me first underline the
complexity of the Mission.

As of June, the total military strength of UNIFIL
stood at approximately 12,000 soldiers, from 39 troop-
contributing countries. UNIFIL also has an important,
albeit small, civilian component, consisting of about
1,000 civilian staff, including approximately 660
national civilian staff members. In addition, I can also
count on capabilities provided by the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization Observer Group
Lebanon, which is composed of 48 military observers.
Both military and civilian components work closely
together in implementing the Mission's mandate under
resolution 1701 (2006). It is also important to mention
that, in addition to ensuring close collaboration among
the different components, the Force works in close
cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, carrying
out an average of 10 to 12 per cent of operational
activities jointly every day.

The UNIFIL area of operations can be considered
very small - 64 kilometres in width and 40 kilometres
in depth, totalling 1,026 square kilometers - and
bordered by the l20-kilometre-long Blue Line to the
south and south-east. The Litani River, in the north, and
a 34-kilometre-long coastline along the Mediterranean
Sea, in the west, define the shape of the area of
operations. With the exception of the Plain of Tyre, the
terrain is undulating, with a series of steep hills and
deep valleys, making it an area very difficult to control.
The area of maritime operations extends 110 nautical
miles from north to south along the Lebanese coastline,
and approximately 45 nautical miles east to- est, for a
total size of 5,000 square miles.

As members are aware, in an effort to ensure
that the Mission is configured more appropriately to
fulfil its mandated tasks, UNIFIL is in the process of
implementing the recommendations of the strategic
review that was conducted by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations pursuant to resolution 2004
(2011).

In implementing the military capability study
conducted from 27 November to 7 December
2011, UNIFIL is reviewing the possibility of troop
adjustments, in coordination with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, with a view to having
leaner but no less capable forces, while ensuring that
the Force's ability to discharge its mandated tasks is
preserved and consistent with the priorities identified
by the strategic review.

UNIFIL also continues to work closely with the
Lebanese Armed Forces through the strategic dialogue,
with a View to increasing the capacity of the Lebanese
Armed Forces to assume effective and sustainable
security control of the UNIFIL area of operations and
Lebanese territorial waters.

The focus remains on leveraging all those initiatives
towards achieving a move to a permanent ceasefire.

I shall now turn to the specific challenges ofleading
a composite force towards common operational goals.

First, I would like to reflect on the multinational
nature of UNIFIL and some of the key lessons learned
in that regard. Surely, there are challenges in leading
and coordinating troops from 39 different countries
from the continents of Africa, Asia, Europe, Central
America and South America. Above all, however,
multinationality is an added value. It is a testimony to
the concerted efforts of nations to promote stability in
southern Lebanon. In order to ensure interoperability
and sound cooperation among military personnel, it
is important to ensure that members of the Force are
able to communicate among themselves - in our case
in English. Also, the diverse backgrounds and varying
approaches that troops bring from their past national,
regional or non-UnitedNations multinational operational
experiences tend to bear on the way they tackle
operational challenges. That reality has highlighted the
need for a comprehensive doctrinal body, comprising
manuals, policies and standard operating procedures.
The United Nations generic infantry battalion manual,
recently developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations - a battalion being an infantry unit with
manpower of about 750 troops - provides an essential
tool for troop contributors, both during predeployment
preparations and in operational employment.

Secondly, in building multinational forces, a
capability-driven approach to generating resources
is essential. Our focus in UNIFIL will be on
quality-oriented strategies, instead of quantity.
Interoperability of material and equipment is required
to maximize operational efficiency. Clear operational
standards would also help new contributor counties to
develop national capacities in order to serve in UNIFIL
or similar United Nations peacekeeping operations.

As was highlighted in the recently conducted
strategic review, a third challenge lies in the integration
of the civilian and military components, both within
the Mission and in securing better integration of efforts
among UNIFIL, the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon and the United Nations country team. In
order to strengthen and institutionalize the relationship
between the political and military leadership of
UNIFIL, a civilian has been appointed as Deputy
Head of Mission and a comprehensive and integrated
Mission planning mechanism is being instituted. For
that purpose, an integrated Mission planning team led
by the newly appointed Deputy Head of Mission has
been established.

Fourthly, it is essential to accommodate
multinationality in the composition of land forces.
Currently, UNIFIL land forces consist of nine
manoeuvre battalions, seven of which belong to a
single troop-contributing country and two of which can
be considered multinational, namely, the Irish-Finnish
battalion and the Spanish battalion with a small unit
from El Salvador. Based on experience gained on the
ground, I can say that the ideal solution would be to
have homogeneous battalions. But a multinational
battalion with different nationality sub-units, at the
company level of around 150 troops, would also be
manageable and very effective. Multinationality below
that level is recommended only for specific tasks,
such as in the case of the Slovenian "human terrain"
detachment, consisting of 11 troops, together with
the Italian brigades, or the Timor-Leste team, also
composed of 11 troops, dealing with logistic support
within the Portuguese engineer company.

A final challenge relates to the UNIFIL Maritime
Task Force, which currently comprises nine ships from
six different countries, supported by two helicopters.
The rotation periods of ships differ by country, ranging
from one month to two years. To improve efficiency and
institutional knowledge, it will be useful to standardize
the rotation cycle of maritime units to a minimum level
of from four to six months.

As concerns interoperability, the effectiveness of
the maritime component depends on clearly identified
capabilities, equipment and training. Due to the fact that
troop contributors have different types of equipment
and procedures in communications, the Maritime Task
Force has no common means for data exchange and
uses commercial satellites as a primary means to meet
minimum military requirements.

In conclusion, multinationality can be a factor of
strength for United Nations peace operations and will
work as a force multiplier if certain conditions are met.
The key words are unity of command and synergy of
efforts.
At this point, please allow me to convey to
members how greatly the Mission has benefited from
the unwavering support it has received over the years
from the Council. Nearly six years since the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006), we are witnessing the calmest
period in southern Lebanon in many years. That is
largely due to UNIFIL's deterrent presence and close
collaboration with the Lebanese Armed Forces, the
Government and the people of South Lebanon.

The Lebanese Armed Forces have proved to be
a reliable institution, able to bring together all of
Lebanon's confessional groups. Cooperation with
the Lebanese Armed Forces remains at the core of
UNIFIL's mandate, with a View to improving their
capabilities to eventually take over the tasks mandated
in resolution 1701 (2006). However, notwithstanding
the success of military operations, ultimate success is
contingent upon effectively addressing the roots of the
conflict through a political process. It will therefore be
vital to take advantage of the window of opportunity
that UNIFIL's presence has created, to make progress
towards the establishment of a permanent ceasefire and
a long-term solution.

Very soon, the Council will discuss the extension
of UNIFIL's mandate. As Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, I count on the continued
support of the Security Council in maintaining
the Force's ability to discharge its mandated tasks,
consistent with the priorities identified by the strategic
review. Being optimistic about the future is inspiring;
the rest is knowledge, resources, goodwill and hard
work.

