Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing. The United States welcomes the continued
role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
fight against impunity for atrocities committed in
Darfur. We note the progress made in the proceedings
in the Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain and Saleh
Mohammed Jerbo Jamus case and we hope that trial
will be the first of several concerning the situation in
Darfur.

At the same time, it remains clear that the
Government of the Sudan is still not cooperating with
the ICC to execute the outstanding arrest warrants in the
Darfur cases, despite its obligations under resolution
1593 (2005). The subjects of those warrants remain at
large in the Sudan and continue to cross international
borders. The United States stands with the many States
that refuse to admit those individuals to their countries
and commends those who have spoken out against
President Al-Bashir's continued travel. We oppose
invitations, facilitation or support for travel by those
subject to ICC arrest warrants in Darfur, and we urge
other States to do the same.

As the Prosecutor notes, there have been continued
instances of non-cooperation. On 26 March, the Court
issued a decision that the Republic of Chad had failed to
comply with its obligations when it welcomed President
Al-Bashir for a visit, his fourth visit to Chad since the
ICC issued a warrant for his arrest, on 4 March 2009.
Then, on 25 and 26 April, Chad hosted Minister of
Defence, Abdel Raheem Hussein and, on 11 May, Chad
again hosted President Al-Bashir without any attempt
to arrest him. The United States would welcome
discussion of follow-up on the ICC's decision, which

was referred to the Council.

The Prosecutor's report comes amid ongoing
developments related to Darfur that are of great concern
to the United States. The United Nations independent
expert on the situation of human rights in the Sudan
has noted that the Government of the Sudan has not
upheld its commitments in the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur to establish credible local justice and
accountability mechanisms, nor has it made the Special
Court for Darfur operational or requested international
observers from the African Union and the United
Nations for the Court.

Despite the conviction in February of six
Popular Defence Forces soldiers accused of killing a
community leader in Abu Zereiga, the latest report
(S/2013/225) of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) expresses serious concern about the lack
of accountability for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Darfur. Furthermore,
the United States is deeply concerned about the
increasing violence in Darfur, including reports of
aerial bombardments targeting or indiscriminately
affecting civilians, sexual and gender-based violence
and other crimes and continuing attacks on UNAMID
peacekeepers. As a result, the United States estimates
that 300,000 people have fled fighting in all of Darfur
in the first five months of this year, which is more
than the total number of people displaced in the past
two years together. Moreover, humanitarian access to
those large numbers of affected populations continues
to be problematic due to restrictions imposed by the
Government. On 19 April, one peacekeeper was killed
and two were injured in an attack on the UNAMID team
site in Muhajiriya by individuals wearing Sudanese
army uniforms. We condemn in the strongest terms
those continuing attacks on UNAMID peacekeepers
and the Sudan's failure to prosecute those responsible.

The escalating violence and deteriorating human
rights and humanitarian situation in Darfur must be
reversed. Ensuring accountability for serious violations
of international law must be part of that effort.
Continued impunity for crimes in Darfur has sent a
message to Khartoum that there are no consequences
for violence against non-combatants, a lesson it has
applied tragically not only in Darfur but in the two
areas as well. The Banda andJerbo case is an important
test, but the Government of the Sudan has much more
to do. The Council must insist that the Sudan fulfil its
obligations.

