The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has not spared Somalia. COVID-19 is undercutting our collective efforts in the country and undermining the progress that the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states have made. We have set up an COVID-19 response task force within the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which is working closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the central Government and the Governments of the federal member states in all AMISOM sectors. It is with admiration that we witness the effort Somalia is making to contain terrorism, build peace through dialogue and reconciliation and develop the country through State-building, reconstruction and recovery - despite the disruption of COVID-19 in Somalia and its potential to derail the implementation of the country's outstanding priority tasks. In that context, I would like to highlight developments in three key areas: Somalia's economic recovery, inclusive politics and security. In October 2019, at the Somalia Partnership Forum, the Federal Government committed to continuing its stringent economic reforms as part of its debt relief efforts. The country needs to overcome important economic hurdles, however, if it is to fully cancel its debt. To achieve its next milestone, the Federal Government must now embark on new short-term targets, which include providing food assistance to about 5.2 million people, addressing the needs of those in internally displaced persons camps, educating people who are not in school and creating around 400,000 jobs each year. That is a daunting task if we take into account the adverse conditions brought about by the combination of terrorism, recurrent natural disasters and the impact of COVID-19 on Somalia's economy. Already there are indications that remittances are declining, trade is dropping and household incomes are facing a downward trend. If the trend of decreasing revenues continues, due to COVID-19, a potentially more worrisome concern is the risk that the Federal Government will struggle to meet some of its obligations. As partners of Somalia in our common endeavour to help the country remain on its feet and progress, we need to envisage ways to help Somalia overcome those trends and meet the conditions to be eligible for full debt cancellation. While the Federal Government does not yet fully enjoy cooperative relations with all of its federal member states, in recent months we have witnessed a degree of readiness to move forward on key national issues. I take note, with satisfaction, of the Federal Government's role in strengthening its technical cooperation with the federal member states' line ministries to ensure that important must-not-fail priorities are achieved. In February, after hosting a consultative conference, the Puntland President announced his intention to pursue dialogue with Mogadishu. In conjunction with other initiatives under way, we hope that this will lead the Federal Government and federal member states to begin articulating a common vision for Somalia. In addition to the encouraging signs of a much-needed national dialogue in the near future, we have also seen progress in reconciliation and dialogue efforts at both the State and local levels. In Galmudug, the deployment of AMISOM troops in Dhuusamarreeb has contributed to the creation of a conducive environment for the holding of a successful all-clan reconciliation conference and to substantial progress in state formation. The process saw elections take place in February and, more recently, we witnessed the formation of an all-inclusive Galmudug cabinet and a peaceful transfer of power from former President Haaf to the new incumbent, President Qoor Qoor. We welcome these significant developments, and we are optimistic about the future of Galmudug and the ability to build on those important steps. In Jubaland, we take note of the recent developments that saw the Jubaland leader and Ogadeni opposition figures reach a settlement that led to mutual recognition and cohabitation. Nevertheless, we insist on the need to go further to ensure that all clans come together in an all-Jubaland stakeholder congregation to find a lasting solution to the political, social and economic problems that continue to besiege that federal member state. At the local level, similar reconciliation efforts were also promoted in April as part of a push to end violent clan conflicts. In Lower Shabelle, the swift intervention by the South-West President saw put an end to conflict between the Gaaljecel and Shanta Caleemood clans. And in Galmudug, a similar approach by the new Administration resulted in a cessation of hostilities between the Wagarda'a and Habar Gidir clans. Work to prepare for elections continues. In that context, I would like to applaud the commitment of the joint parliamentary ad hoc committee on elections and the tireless efforts of the National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC). Despite the COVID-19 disruptions, both the Committee and NIEC have opted to continue most of their work through technological platforms. Pursuing that option enabled the critical drafting of recommendations to complement the national electoral bill passed in February. In addition, I commend the vital work of the National Electoral Security Task Force. In adverse conditions, the Task Force increased its activity, which recently led to an agreement on its terms of reference and the adoption of the concept of security for voter registration. We also see additional progress as the Task Force held a two-day workshop in March to conduct assessments on the ability to create secure areas across Somalia and to make plans for starting to map potential voter registration centres. It is abundantly clear that holding national elections is a top priority for Somalia. From my engagement with key election stakeholders, I am also convinced that they too view this as a matter of necessity and urgency. The recent return to Mogadishu of the two Speakers of the Federal Parliament is an encouraging sign, and it will enable the report of the NIEC's Chair to be delivered on 27 May. I am concerned, however, that despite genuine efforts to prepare for elections, there are outstanding and potentially contentious issues that must be immediately and effectively addressed. Those include making the electoral law implementable and ensuring a 30 per cent quota for women representatives and the adoption in Parliament of the amendments to the political parties law. But above all, Somalia's election will require the political support and involvement of all federal member states. This is urgent as time is running out. I therefore call on all stakeholders at the Federal and regional levels to overcome their challenges and to allow the presence and effective action of the National Independent Electoral Commission in all federal member states so that credible, free and fair elections can take place. During the reporting period, there were tangible security gains in degrading and disrupting Al-Shabaab's operational capabilities across Somalia. On 16 March, through Operation Badbaado, Al-Shabaab was dislodged from the bridge town of Janaale in Lower Shabelle. The recovery of Janaale represents a serious blow to Al-Shabaab, as the town was a strategic stronghold for the group's operations in Lower Shabelle and Mogadishu. Janaale was also a hub for manufacturing improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs. Beyond Janaale, targeted operations by AMISOM and Somali security forces in Bula Xaaji on 20 March destroyed enemy positions and considerably reduced the group's capabilities. In line with resolution 2472 (2019), AMISOM completed its mandated drawdown of 1,000 troops by 28 February without handing over or collapsing any of its forward operating bases. In doing so, they have consolidated the gains made over the years and have protected the population from Al-Shabaab. As agreed at the Kampala operational coordination committee meeting, each troop-contributing country assumed all expenses related to maintaining its forces in the forward operating bases that were to be collapsed. The implementation of phase one and two of the transition plan has seen AMISOM and the Somali security forces conduct several joint operations as part of efforts to disrupt and degrade Al-Shabaab. Nevertheless, much work remains if we are to fully implement the tasks in both phases of the transition plan by December. However, the current pace of generating well-trained, well-equipped and regularly paid Somali security forces may not be enough to reach the goal of producing a critical mass of Somali forces capable of taking over from AMISOM by the end of 2021, or to preserve the gains made over the years with so much sacrifice. That fact alone calls for the urgent reconsideration and readjustment of the way and pace in which all stakeholders involved in supporting peacebuilding and State-building efforts in Somalia - together and individually - implement the tasks outlined in the Somali transition plan. AMISOM's effectiveness in the theatre of operations should be seen in the broader context of several actors, each with a specific role in responding to Somalia's fundamental problems of terrorism, political disagreements, lack of reconciliation and economic underdevelopment. In that connection, the comprehensive approach to security, which underpins the implementation of the transition plan and outlines the division of labour into five strands, remains the most viable vehicle to ensuring that all fundamental aspects of the Somali crisis are taken into account and effectively tackled. The comprehensive approach to security may be reviewed if necessary so as to ensure maximum effectiveness. In that regard, such a framework would ensure that all actors have shared responsibility and help overcome the challenges related to poor coordination and coherence, erratic information sharing and lack of trust and mutual accountability, which are all serious obstacles to our joint endeavour in Somalia. The current rate of force generation is too slow and, if left unchanged, will take several years to reach the threshold for an effective transition. The recent successes in Lower Shabelle under sector 1 were possible only because of the generation of national forces that relieved AMISOM forces and created mobile units. In the coming days, the Council will consider AMISOM's mandate renewal. On 7 May, the African Union Peace and Security Council, in its communique, renewed AMISOM's mandate for 12 months. But, as the Council deliberates on AMISOM's mandate renewal tasks, a key focus will be the future engagement of Somalia's key security investors, particularly the need to base that future engagement on a comprehensive independent assessment. As members of the Council are aware, the African Union Commission is currently undertaking its own comprehensive assessment of what future support the African Union will provide to Somalia through AMISOM beyond 2021. In addition, we are exploring options that will allow other key international partners, including the United Nations, to better realign their support to Somalia. To achieve this, and as agreed at the recent high-level virtual meeting on Somalia, there must be consensus on formulating a comprehensive approach to Somalia's stability and security, and, as noted earlier, acommitment by all of Somalia's security investors not only to revising and updating the transition plan but also to taking into account its implementation modalities for all stakeholders.
