Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Let me take this
opportunity to express our deep sympathy to the
Governments and peoples of India and Pakistan for the
earthquake disaster they have just suffered.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report of 16 January on the situation in
East Timor. We also thank Mr. Vieira de Mello, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor, for his important briefing. We very much
appreciate also the briefing by Mr. Malloch Brown, the
United Nations Development Programme
Administrator; Mr. Klaus Rohland, the Country
Director of the World Bank responsible for East Timor;
and Mr. Luis Valdivieso of the International Monetary
Fund. We warmly welcome the presence at this
meeting of the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, a
distinguished freedom fighter and member of the
Transitional Cabinet of East Timor. We thank these
people for their important statements this morning.

It is indeed very heartening to read the report of
the Secretary-General. Viewing the current situation
against the backdrop of the recent traumatic history of
East Timor, one feels extremely gratified to note that
not only have peace and calm now been firmly
established in the country, but the people of East Timor
are heading towards achieving their cherished goal of
independence, shortly and in a systematically well-
prepared manner. Mr. Vieira de Mello and his United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) team, who are working diligently and
imaginatively to implement the UNTAET mandate,
deserve to be complimented highly for doing such a
great deal in so little time. We also thank the
Government of Indonesia for facilitating the process.

We see in the plan worked out by the United
Nations Transitional Administration to take East Timor
to independence in the next few months a blueprint for
a successful new and democratic nation. We are
pleased that the plans of UNTAET are proceeding
according to an established time-frame in spite of many
challenges. We are particularly happy that the people of
East Timor have been fully involved in the decision-
making process from the very outset. We also note with
satisfaction that the people of East Timor are being
trained and organized to take charge of the
administrative machinery and the institutions so Vital
for the success of a newly independent and democratic
nation. This is a crucial factor in the preparations for
the independence of East Timor.

We are sure the people of East Timor understand
that with independence they will have to shoulder
collectively as well as individually the responsibility
for the well-being of all the people of their new nation.
In this regard, the great responsibility always lies with
the political leaders, who by their own examples are
expected to inculcate in the people a culture of respect
for the democratic process and the institutions of the
nation. We are glad to note that a multi-party political
structure is envisaged for East Timor. We welcome
this, as such a system works on the basis of
accountable governance and responsible opposition.

We believe that East Timor is now poised to
engage in the electoral process necessary for the
concretization of its independence. We wish that all
East Timorese, including those who currently find
themselves in West Timor as refugees, will be able to
participate in the process, which must be inclusive. In
this regard, we invite the Government of Indonesia to
extend all the cooperation possible to facilitate the
early return of the refugees, whose return home is
being obstructed by the militias in West Timor. We
further invite the Government ofIndonesia to enter into
early discussion with UNTAET to finalize a definite
date for the independence of East Timor.

Finally, my delegation wishes to thank all the
countries that are supporting the work of UNTAET
through the provision of manpower and technical and
financial support. We also express our appreciation to
all the agencies of the United Nations system for the
valuable work they are currently performing in East
Timor. We recognize in particular the work done by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. We have no doubt that the larger
international community and the international financial
institutions will come forward to contribute liberally to
facilitate the process under way leading to the
independence of East Timor, as well as for the
development agenda of the country after independence.

My delegation supports the extension of the
mandate of UNTAET for a further period of 12 months,
until 31 December 2001, as recommended in paragraph
52 of the report of the Secretary General of 16 January
2001.

