Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Ukraine very much
appreciates and supports Argentina's initiative in
organizing today's open debate. Your presence in New
York, Mr. Minister, attests to the importance that your
friendly country attaches to the issue of the protection of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel. I wish also to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Bertini of the World Food
Programme for their thorough insights into current
problems in this area and for their thoughtful suggestions.

My country is a staunch supporter of and an active
participant in United Nations peacekeeping activities. For
Ukraine, the issues of the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel are of top priority.
Unfortunately, like all other troop contributors, my
country has also experienced the bitterness of human
losses among its peacekeeping personnel. Over the past
seven years of Ukraine's participation in 15 United
Nations operations and missions, 18 Ukrainian
peacekeepers have laid down their lives. More than
50 servicemen have suffered wounds and disabilities.
Therefore, today's debate has immediate practical
significance for my country.

We have witnessed an interesting debate at this
meeting. We have also heard a number of ideas about
how to ensure and enhance the security and safety of
those who, by the nature of their service, are called to
discharge their duties under the most difficult and
dangerous conditions and in situations where they often
face enormous challenges. I can add hardly anything new
to what has already been said. My delegation is pleased

 

that those ideas are largely reflected in the text of today's
draft presidential statement and that the Council remains
quite united in this respect.

I wish to thank Ms. Frechette for providing us with
detailed information as to what steps are currently being
undertaken by the Secretariat in order to strengthen the
security and safety of United Nations personnel in conflict
zones. In this connection, I would like to briefly comment
on some of the points that we consider particularly relevant
and important in the context of today's debate.

The recent expansion of United Nations peacekeeping
activities, in particular the launching of the United Nations
operations in Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone and other
areas, as well as recurring acts of violence - including the
most recent ones mentioned in the statement of the Russian
delegation - against United Nations, associated and
humanitarian personnel, render the issue of extending the
scope of legal protection to all categories of such personnel
timely and acute.

Seven years ago, in View of the increasing number of
losses among United Nations and associated personnel,
Ukraine, together with New Zealand, initiated the
elaboration of the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, which was finally
adopted in 1994. Its entry into force last year represents
significant progress in strengthening the regime of
protection of people in the service of the United Nations
operating in conflict zones under the mandate of the
Security Council or General Assembly. We are satisfied
that, in its draft presidential statement, the Council makes
a number of references to that international instrument and
encourages all States to become party to and respect fully
their obligations under the Convention.

It is, however, clear that the Convention is far from
adequate for ensuring the same level of protection to
categories of United Nations and associated personnel
engaged in operations other than those specifically
authorized by the Security Council or the General
Assembly, including locally recruited staff. In this regard,
my delegation shares the View of the Deputy Secretary-
General on the need to consider ways to extend the scope
of legal protection for United Nations and associated
personnel on the basis of the 1994 Convention. In this
context, we wish to express our support for the elaboration
and adoption of an additional protocol to the Convention.
Let me once again join all those who upheld the idea of
inviting the General Assembly to pursue this task as
expeditiously as possible.

Sharing the concern expressed by the Deputy
Secretary-General, I would also like to stress the
importance of yet another aspect of enhancing the
physical protection of United Nations, associated and
humanitarian personnel: the need to ensure respect by all
parties in conflict zones for the rules of international law,
including international humanitarian law, as well as for
the neutral and impartial character of the work of such
personnel. This requires the establishment and
improvement, both nationally and internationally, of
effective implementation and enforcement mechanisms
which would provide solid guarantees against the
impunity of those responsible for attacks and other acts of
violence against United Nations, associated and
humanitarian personnel. It is indeed appalling that
Governments continue to be unable or unwilling to
assume their responsibilities in this regard and that only
a few offenders have been convicted of these crimes since
1992. In this connection, we cannot but emphasize the
important role that the International Criminal Court could
play in performing the crucial function of bringing to
justice those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law. In this context, I would
like to recall that just a few weeks ago, on 20 January,
Ukraine became a signatory of the Rome Statute.

It is worth mentioning that the need to reinforce the
responsibility of host States for the physical security of
United Nations and associated personnel is also addressed
by the Council in its draft presidential statement, which,
inter alia, underlines the importance of including in each
status-of-forces or status-of-mission agreement specific
and practical measures based on the provisions of the
1994 Convention.

Lastly, Ukraine looks forward to the completion by
the Secretary-General of a general and comprehensive
review of security in peacekeeping operations, which
would lead to elaborating and undertaking further specific
and practical measures to increase the safety and security
of United Nations, associated and humanitarian personnel.
We hope that this work will bring tangible results and
constitute serious progress in providing adequate
protection for such personnel.

In conclusion, let me express my delegation's
sincere hope that today's open debate will give fresh
impetus to our common efforts aimed at strengthening the
protection of United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. Ukraine remains
committed to this noble goal.

 

