Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate on the
activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

We are grateful to the Chairman of the
Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for his summary of
the Committee's work and for sharing with us its plans
for future activities, as well as for the excellent manner
in which he and the other members of the Bureau have
been conducting their work. We highly appreciate the
efforts of the Chairman and the Bureau to achieve
maximum efficiency, transparency and cooperation
with all Member States.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my Government's full support for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee's work programme for the next
90 days.
The CTC has entered a new phase. Its workload is
enormous, but this is the work that needs to be done to
achieve the objectives and we place our trust in the
Committee members' competence and wisdom. We
believe that the effective work of the Committee under
the chairmanship of Sir Jeremy Greenstock, in close
cooperation with all Member States, constitutes the
most vivid example of thorough implementation of
Security Council resolutions.

As the United Nations brings together the
political, diplomatic, legal, economic, humanitarian
and security dimensions of the counter-terrorism
agenda, it provides an appropriate framework for
national and international actions. It is the base for our
collective efforts in fighting terrorism and we believe
that, as this crime is a transnational phenomenon, only
multilateral action can counter it successfully. A useful
exchange of opinions and information between
representatives of organizations, States and the CTC
would definitely benefit the work of the Committee.

In this regard, Ukraine welcomes steps taken by
the Committee to facilitate dialogue with States and
relevant international and regional organizations on
matters covered by resolution 1373 (2001). We also
attach great importance to the continuing
communication by the Committee of regular
information on its activities. This, in our view, is one
of the essential prerequisites of its success.

Another direction of the work that is successfully
covered by the Committee is to provide appropriate
assistance to those countries that are willing but unable
to improve their counter-terrorism capabilities. I would
like to express the full support of my country for the
efforts of the Committee to help such countries by
establishing a directory of sources of advice and
expertise in the areas covered by resolution 1373
(2001).

I will not focus on our national report, which was
submitted to the Committee, but let me underline some
recent developments related to Ukraine in connection
with measures against international terrorism that have
been taken since the January meeting of the Council.

This year, Ukraine will become a party to the
European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism
and the International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings. The relevant instruments have
already been deposited by Ukraine. I wish to
emphasize that my country is among the few Member
States that have ratified the European Convention
without any reservations. We also expect that the issue
of the ratification of the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, signed
in June 2000, will be high on the agenda of the new,
recently elected Parliament of Ukraine. With the
ratification of that instrument, Ukraine will become a
party to all universal conventions and protocols on
international terrorism.

The Department of Financial Monitoring was
recently established as a separate governmental agency
within the Ministry of Finance. The main task of the
Department is to collect and analyse information on
financial transactions that are subject to mandatory
supervision, with a view to recommending legal and
executive measures against money-laundering.

Under the auspices of the Council of Europe,
Ukraine also initiated an international meeting of
experts on illegal migration with the purpose of
elaborating proposals for an international strategy to
limit the spread of terrorism by strengthening
migration regimes.

Finally, I would like to wish the Committee and
its Chairman every success in their future work. Let me
reconfirm that Ukraine stands ready to make its worthy
contribution to our common cause.

