Mr. Brown (Liberia): Let me, at the outset, thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate
and for the international attention it affords to ongoing
efforts to resolve the current roadblock to the search
for sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau. On behalf
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), permit me to thank the Secretary-General
and his representative for his report (S/2017/111).

The Authority of Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS remains engaged and seized of finding
a lasting solution to the political impasse in Guinea-
Bissau. The failure to implement the Conakry Agreement
of 14 October 2016, signed by all stakeholders, and
the contentious, non-consensual appointment of the
Prime Minister remain issues of grave concern for the
advancement of peace efforts. The ECOWAS Authority
of Heads of State and Government recognizes that
the current political stalemate undermines Guinea-
Bissau's socioeconomic development and is a threat to
peace and stability in the country and, by extension, the
subregion. We must urgently ensure adherence to the
Conakry Agreement and accelerate its implementation.

Permit me to give a retrospective account of
reconciliatory engagements since the signing of
the Conakry Agreement. In furtherance of the
implementation of the Agreement, the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government tasked
President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Chairperson of
ECOWAS, to follow up with all stakeholders on their
commitments. In light of that mandate, she led a
presidential mission to Guinea-Bissau on 5 November
2016, consisting of the President of the ECOWAS
Commission, Mr. Marcel de Souza; the Minister of State
of Guinea, Mr. Youssouf Kiridi Bangoura, representing
President Alpha Conde; the ECOWAS Mediator, along
with other officials of ECOWAS; the African Union;
the United Nations; and the European Union, among
others. That meeting was to provide the opportunity to
make progress towards resolving the crisis.

The outcome of the mission was the signing of
a final communique focusing on the following six
points in tandem with the Conakry Agreement: first
of all, the stakeholders reaffirmed their commitment
to the Conakry Agreement; secondly, the stakeholders
were encouraged to accelerate the reintegration of the
15 dissident Members of Parliament into the Partido
Africano da Independencia da Guine e Cabo Verde
(PAIGC), in compliance with the Conakry Agreement;
thirdly, the President of the Republic, without further
delay, was to appoint a consensual Prime Minister
who had the confidence of the President; fourthly, an
all-inclusive Government was to be formed, taking
into account the parliamentary representations of the
political parties; fifthly, parliamentary sessions were
to be convened as soon as possible; and sixthly, a
national dialogue round table was to be organized in
order to discuss the stability pact, which was meant to
articulate key constitutional and institutional reforms
before the 2018 legislative elections, as stated in the
Conakry Agreement.

In mid-November 2016, Mr. Umaro Mokhtar
Sissoco Embalo was appointed Prime Minister by
President Jose Mario Vaz. The appointment, however,
was not unanimously accepted because Mr. Embalo
was not a consensus candidate. That has resulted in the
current setback.

In the continuing efforts to find an amicable and
peaceful resolution to the crisis, Guinea-Bissau has
been placed high on the ECOWAS agenda. At a recent
meeting on the margins of the African Union Summit
in Addis Ababa, the Commission discussed ways to
continue the mediation efforts, including through
continued support for the mediator, President Alpha
Conde of Guinea. The President of Sierra Leone,
Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, was designated to assist
President Conde in the mediation, as the latter had
also assumed the Chairmanship of the African Union.
President Conde will schedule a meeting of the PAIGC
in Conakry, to be convened as soon as possible.

The challenge that the Government of Guinea-Bissau
now faces is obtaining the Parliament's endorsement
of its development plan. If that effort fails, the newly
appointed Prime Minister would have to resign. The
situation is a source of growing tension between the
Speaker of the Parliament and the Executive Branch.

Meanwhile, the Authority calls on all parties and
stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to remain engaged, to
support ongoing peace efforts and to collaborate on
promoting the passage of the development agenda,
which will trigger the release of the donor funding
required to meet the needs of the people of Guinea-
Bissau. The ECOWAS Authority also renews calls for
broader international support of its ongoing efforts
to bring lasting peace to the sisterly Republic of
Guinea-Bissau.

