Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this informational meeting and to thank Mr. Filippo
Grandi, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for his timely and comprehensive briefing
as well as for the work that he is doing along with his
selfless staff under very difficult conditions.

Peru has been following with particular concern
the alarming situation that approximately 25 million
refugees are experiencing at the global level, while
expressing its solidarity with them. We realize that
this situation could have an effect on every country,
but especially developing nations. In the face of this
alarming figure, which is growing annually, we
welcomed the adoption in December 2018 of the Global
Compact on Refugees, which constitutes the legal basis
for establishing more just and equitable mechanisms
to fight against xenophobia and discrimination. The
Compact reflects the commitment of the international
community to finding mechanisms for cooperation in
dealing with cross-border problems and supporting
conditions in countries of origin to facilitate the
safe and voluntary return of refugees. Promoting
implementation that includes various sectors, especially
international and regional financial institutions, is
particularly interesting, which is why we would like to
ask Mr. Grandi to further elaborate on his remarks in
that regard.

Addressing this topic is a priority for the Council.
Suffice it to say that 57 per cent of the world's refugees
come from countries that figure on the agenda of the
Council: South Sudan, Afghanistan and Syria, not
to mention the serious situation of the Rohingya in
Bangladesh and the critical state in which the migrants
and refugees from Libya find themselves, as well
as the potential deterioration they face due to recent
clashes. Similarly, we are worried about the ongoing
increase and grave situation of the Venezuelan refugees
and migrants throughout the continent, including my
own country - an issue that will take up at length
tomorrow. We highlight the spirit of solidarity and the
resources that have been deployed by the countries that
are receiving those refugees, despite the difficulties
that such mobilizations may trigger.

Peru believes that it is key to address the root
causes of those international displacements and
respond, in a timely manner, collectively to the various
challenges and vulnerabilities that we share, such as
climate change, desertification, growing inequality,
corruption, an arms build-up and violent extremism,
which leads to terrorism, among other phenomena
of a global reach and transnational dimension. All of
that must be addressed with increased participation by
women and young people, which is the only guarantee
for building a common vision of a peaceful, inclusive
and sustainable future.

In that regard, the Security Council has a role
to play in prioritizing efforts and tools for conflict
prevention and creating sustainable peace. To that end,
a more systemic perspective should be promoted, based
on timely risk analyses and management plans, which
the Secretary-General and the various agencies and
programmes of the United Nations system must provide.

In conclusion, Peru wishes to renew its commitment
to the important work of Mr. Grandi and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refuges.
We hope to have an opportunity to continue our
exchange of Views in future. We are sure that under his
leadership, and beyond the complexity of the current
refugee crises and with the support and political will of
the international community, we will be able to offer a
new opportunity to those millions of people who today
find themselves vulnerable and in a critical situation.

