Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. Minister, my delegation wishes to welcome your
presence among us this morning; it lends a particular
prestige to this Council meeting devoted to the final
conflict ravaging the heart of Europe.

My delegation associates itself with preceding
speakers in expressing its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2005/335). At the
same time, we warmly congratulate Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen on his briefing.

There are two basic elements of the briefing to
which we should like to refer. First is the noteworthy
improvement in the political climate due to the efforts
of all parties fully to implement the eight standards,
although none of the standards has been entirely met;
second is the need for the international community to
focus its efforts on the implementation of those
standards as a prerequisite for determining the future
status of Kosovo.

In that framework, my delegation urges the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
continue to display their will to lead the transition
process to success by giving concrete content to the
standards so as to establish a climate of mutual
confidence, which can reduce tension and violence,
and the conditions for a democratic, multi-ethnic and
economically viable Kosovo.

We welcome the expressed readiness of the Serb
and Kosovar authorities to meet at the highest levels.
Such high-level dialogue, we believe, can help to
achieve progress in the implementation of the
standards. In particular, it will be necessary to continue
to refine the working methods of Parliament, to pursue
decentralization, to take measures to facilitate freedom
of movement and the resettlement of displaced persons,
and to implement the memorandum of understanding
on the reconstruction of destroyed Serbian religious
sites. We also believe that the establishment of a
working framework for the economic development of
Kosovo is a priority that should be pursued.

On the basis of all those considerations, my
delegation wishes to express its support for the
Secretary-General's recommendation that a special
envoy be appointed to conduct a field assessment this
summer of the implementation of the standards and to
shed light on future steps.

The international community must continue to
focus its attention on the situation in Kosovo and, in
particular, to support the people of Kosovo and their
political leaders, who have the primary responsibility
for the future of the province. In that context, all means
must be applied to allow the participation of the
Kosovo Serbs in the process. We also believe that the
press could make a major contribution to the climate
by raising awareness in that respect.

We hope that the final status of the province can
be determined as soon as possible so that the progress
achieved on the long march towards normalization can
be consolidated.

