Mr. Ramos-Horta: I should like to inform the
Security Council about who is in the room here
with me, at a very symbolic moment. To my left is
Mr. Gana Fofang, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Resident Representative, and to
my right is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea-
Bissau. I have also invited representatives of our
international partners, including the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community ofWest African States
(ECOWAS), the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) and the European Union (EU), as
well as Ambassadors resident in Guinea-Bissau and my
colleagues who make up the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office.

It is once again my honour to introduce the
Secretary-General's reports on the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/332)
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
(S/2014/333).

Since the two reports were issued, the political and
security environment in Guinea-Bissau has remained
largely peaceful and calm. Nevertheless, following
the conduct of the first round of the legislative and
presidential elections on 13 April, national and
international partners enhanced their collective
efforts to create an atmosphere free from intimidation,
coercion and fear, so as to contribute to the restoration
of constitutional order. It was in that context that I
held consultations with the Transitional President,
Mr. Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, which resulted in his
hosting of a meeting on 30 April with the candidates
in the run-off election - Mr. Jose Mario Vaz from
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC) and Nuno Gores Nabiam, an
independent. Other senior leaders of the PAIGC and the
Social Renewal Party, which is backing Mr. Nabiam,
as well as all international partners, also attended the
meeting. The aim ofthe meeting was to provide a formal
platform for dialogue. Both presidential candidates and
other leaders pledged to continue to work towards a
peaceful electoral campaign and to accept the outcome
of the election.

The joint command structure trained and established
with the support of UNIOGBIS to help ensure lawful,
coordinated security of the electoral process nationwide
delivered on its tasks as planned, with the national police
assuming the leading role and the military remaining
in reserve. The ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
rendered a most useful service to the activities of the
joint command. I also visited all the regions of Guinea-
Bissau, which are being assisted by the four United
Nations field offices. I went to the most remote areas
and met with local authorities and the population on
matters related to stability, development and the return
to constitutional order through elections. All those
efforts contributed to an environment enabling all steps
of the electoral process, including the recent conduct of
a violence-free campaign by Mr. Nabiam and Mr. Vaz,
supported by their political allies.

Yesterday, Bissau-Guineans went in large numbers
to cast their ballots to elect the President. This morning
I met the heads of all international election observation
missions, who unanimously assessed that the process
took place in an orderly and peaceful manner - hence
providing an opportunity for all Bissau-Guineans to
freely make their choices. They all expressed their hope
and confidence that the results expected soon would be
accepted by all.

In that regard, allow me to congratulate the
transitional authorities, in particular Transitional
President Serifo Nhamadjo and Transitional Prime
Minister Rui Duarte de Barros, as well as the political
parties, candidates, police, military, civil society
organizations and the people of Guinea-Bissau as a
whole, on that remarkable achievement. My sincere
appreciation goes to all international partners,
multilateral and bilateral, that contributed politically,
financially and technically to the holding of the
polls, including the historic success of the electoral
registration. The ECOWAS leaders, in particular,
deserve special gratitude and commendation for their
steady engagement with all parties, including the
military leadership.

The holding of legislative and presidential elections
constituted the most critical step towards the restoration
of constitutional order, as the Council demanded. Within
a few days, the new National People's Assembly should
be inaugurated, followed by the installation of the newly
elected President. The new Government should be fully
sworn in by the middle of June. I have encouraged the
political leadership to ensure that it is inclusive and
based on merit to best deliver on the priorities of the
country. I have impressed upon all to ensure that in
the post-election phase, the winners and losers of the
election contest enter into a new partnership aimed at
rebuilding the State and relaunching the socioeconomic
development of Guinea-Bissau, within an environment
of enduring stability.
Political factionalism, ethnic-based politics,
mutual distrust and the lack of a culture of dialogue
remain major challenges that should be tackled for
the future stability of the country. The acrimonious
civil-military relations, including civilian oversight
issues, are yet to be addressed. Cases of gross human
rights violations and impunity still await redress. The
socioeconomic problems that continue to keep the
country in poverty have been magnified over the past
two years. Deforestation and depletion of the fisheries
resources are endangering the future viability of the
country.

It is clear that the newly elected State institutions
are inheriting a bleak political, social, economic and
security situation. The Government will have to
mobilize all Bissau-Guineans to engage in a serious,
inclusive and constructive dialogue in order to define
a new direction for the country. A consensual national
programme for the country's political stabilization and
economic development will be the first step, alongside
fast-tracking critical security sector reform (SSR), in
line with resolution 2103 (2013). While the current
political discourse of the main leaders reiterating their
commitment to a focus on dialogue and rebuilding
the State provides a reason for guarded optimism, the
challenges are great and the risks are many.

UNIOGBIS has been supporting the National
Commission for Planning and Strategic Coordination,
which has been consulting with and preparing
programme documents to be presented to the incoming
Government. A series of workshops were also held to
identify proposals for updating the national strategy
document on SSR and the rule of law, which awaits
review and approval by the new Government. I have
also been promoting the notion that, in order to improve
transparency and thereby confidence between Guinea-
Bissau and its partners, the resources mobilized for
stabilizing the country should be co-managed through
a programme to improve governance efficacy. At the
core of the idea is the deployment of international
experts to key revenue-generating institutions or
the strategic management of the key Government
institutions with the assistance of international experts,
if requested by the Government. From my consultations
with many international partners, such a programme is
crucial for ensuring the success of the envisaged donor
pledging conference. Bissau-Guinean partners also
seem enthusiastic about the idea.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General for the Council to lend support to the
donor pledging conference, which would contribute to
securing the necessary funds for the implementation of
such an initiative. The new authorities in Guinea-Bissau
need to be urgently assisted so as to move towards a
successful conference. Meanwhile, consideration
may be given to an immediate and specific resource
mobilization effort in support of critical security and
defence reforms, as agreed by national partners.

As for the role of the international community,
the message is clear. The end of the transition is the
beginning ofa new phase that will require our continued
engagement and full commitment to assisting the
people of Guinea-Bissau in addressing the country's
deep-seated political, social and economic problems. In
the immediate post-election period, the newly elected
Government will need emergency budgetary support to
allow it to cover, inter alia, outstanding salaries so that
it can begin the necessary work of rebuilding the State
in an atmosphere of calm and stability. Thereafter, the
international community's long-term commitment to
providing financial and technical support in order to
ensure the rebuilding of the State and the relaunching
of the economy will be critical. In that regard, I appeal
to the Council to use its influence to contribute to
the mobilization of resources for Guinea-Bissau's
comprehensive road map for rebuilding the State, in
line with resolution 2048 (2012).

With regard to the United Nations integrated
presence in Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS should,
through the facilitation of a multilayered and
multisectoral national dialogue, including on defence-
and security-related issues, continue to support national
peacebuilding and State reconstruction efforts, with
a focus on stability and sustainable development in
Guinea-Bissau. While the Mission should also continue
to provide strategic and policy advice and contribute
to human rights monitoring, promotion and protection,
as well as gender-related matters, the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes should be supported
in order to enhance their technical assistance to national
stakeholders on issues relating to public administration
reform, the provision of social services and the
revitalization of the economy. For the latter, I call
upon the international financial institutions to make
every effort to enhance support for the socioeconomic
revitalization of Guinea-Bissau.

I believe that, if we fail to immediately provide the
required support to the new Government, the restored
constitutional order runs the risk of collapsing very
soon. Such a collapse of law and order in Guinea-
Bissau, besides the loss of our efforts and investment
thus far, could bring about more disastrous results than
ever before seen in the country.

Last but not least, I wish to register my sincere
appreciation and commendation for the role played
by the United Nations country team in Guinea-
Bissau, in particular, the United Nations Development
Programme, whose resource mobilization and
coordination role during this critical period, as well as
its professionalism and dedication, contributed to the
holding of the elections.

I have been a privileged witness to the exemplary
performance, selfless professionalism and dedication
of my colleagues within the United Nations country
team and UNIOGBIS, who have been working in an
integrated or coordinated manner. The trust, freedom
and guidance that I and my colleagues have received
from the Secretariat were invaluable. I am deeply
grateful to the Secretary-General and the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

To end my intervention, I would like to reiterate my
deepest appreciation to our partners, notably the African
Union, the CPLP, ECOWAS and the European Union,
for their joint efforts in supporting the implementation
of the critical tasks mandated by the Security Council
and in helping Guinea-Bissau to return to constitutional
order. The continued united effort of the international
community will be essential to ensure the stability and
development of Guinea-Bissau.

