Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation is
grateful to the Secretary-General for his important
statement this morning. We would also like to welcome
his Special Representative, Ambassador Morjane, as he
takes part in this meeting of the Security Council, and
to thank him for the detailed briefing on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

That briefing shows that some positive steps have
been taken recently by the parties to enhance the inter-
Congolese dialogue. However the peace process, in
general, remains fragile. That is why we once again
urge all the parties to the conflict to preserve the
current conditions conducive to the establishment of
peace, which have been created through painstaking
efforts, and to take practical steps to ensure
cooperation with the United Nations presence in the
country.

We maintain that only full implementation of the
parties' commitments would make for dynamic
developments in the peace process, because it rests
with the parties to move the process forward. As for
the Security Council, it stands ready to continue
rendering its full assistance to the parties in their
efforts.

The delays in finalizing the disengagement and
redeployment of forces plans are of great concern for
my delegation. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of all armed groups in the Congo are key
and must be implemented effectively and without
delay. It is urgent to deprive the negative forces of the
support that they still have. We believe that it is
extremely important to boost this process and to make
sure it engages the forces that continue to operate in
the eastern part of the country.

The demilitarization of Kisangani is a key issue,
too. We believe it is absolutely unacceptable that the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD- Goma) forces still remain in this city a year after
resolution 1304 (2000) was adopted.

Now that the inter-Congolese dialogue is about to
start, the Congolese groups must unconditionally
relinquish their military options, join in a political
dialogue and, together with political parties and civil
society, assist in developing constitutional frameworks
for democratic rule in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The efforts by the international community to
promote the economic, social and humanitarian revival
of the country are to become integral elements of the
conflict settlement strategy. We take note with
appreciation of the donor countries' willingness to
support the efforts of the Congolese Government at this
critical juncture.

To conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Morjane for his tremendous efforts in
promoting peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and commend him for his highly skilful
management of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
during the last 20 months, in conditions that have been
difficult in many respects. On behalf of the Ukrainian
delegation, I wish him every success in his new
assignment.

