Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his excellent report (S/2018/1092) and to Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing. We also wish to thank Under-Secretary-
General Fedotov and Ambassador Umarov for their
briefings. Further, we extend a warm welcome to
Ms. Haress. Her vibrant call to preserve the integrity
of the Afghan Constitution is a powerful and
important message.

Those briefings clearly illustrate the complex
juncture at which Afghanistan lies, starting with
persistent security challenges, which continue to exact
a heavy toll in terms of civilian victims and widespread
suffering among the Afghan population. Every day, the
National Unity Government and the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF)courageously
fight terrorist and extremist violence that seeks to
disrupt efforts for peace and stability. Italy remains
committed to strengthening ANDSF capacities in the
framework of the Resolute Support Mission.

We welcome the outcomes of the recent Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, which allowed
us to take stock of the progress made in Afghanistan's
reform process and reaffirm the mutual commitment
between the Afghan authorities and the international
community to fostering a future of peace, prosperity
and sustainable development for the country. An
important outcome of the Geneva meeting was also
the shared awareness that not all of the reform goals
have been fully achieved. We refer here mainly to the
fight against corruption. With a view to the pledging
conference that will take place in 2020, the Geneva
Mutual Accountability Framework clearly outlines the
areas where there is scope for further progress.

With the same objectivity, we recognize the
importance of the first parliamentary elections held in
late October under Afghan leadership. Those elections
attest to the tenacious will of the Afghan people,
especially of the many women who participated despite
an intimidating climate and terrorist threats. At the
same time, taking note of the organizational, procedural
and security-related difficulties that emerged, we
believe that those elections should also function as a
blueprint of lessons learned and help to ensure that the
upcoming presidential elections are held in a credible
and transparent manner.

The only viable solution to the conflict lies in an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process. There is an urgent and unambiguous yearning
for peace among the Afghan people, as well as broad
international consensus on this point. Those factors
have allowed for a window of opportunity, enabled by
the unprecedented offer President Ghani made to the
Taliban last February, to stay open. Although the brief
ceasefire during the Eid Al-Fitr festivities was not a
forerunner of further positive gestures by the Taliban,
prospects for a negotiated peace in Afghanistan have
not been this tangible since 2001, also owing to the
positive impact of international efforts.

Italy expresses its full support for those diplomatic
initiatives, which, in full accordance with the Kabul
process, can lead to concrete progress in opening the
way towards peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
We underline, in that context, the positive contribution
that can be made by the main international stakeholders,
and especially regional partners, in creating the
conditions for peace.

Lastly, it is essential that the negotiations for peace,
which cannot be achieved at any price, involve every
component of Afghan society, especially women,
children and minorities, on the basis ofa fully inclusive
approach. Women, in particular, must be able to play
an active role in negotiations and ensure that their
rights, enshrined in the Constitution, and the civil
and social gains of the past 17 years are protected and
further promoted.

I wish to conclude by expressing Italy's sincere
appreciation for the clear commitment to this issue by
the Afghan Government, as confirmed by President
Ghani in his new road map for peace.

