Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank France for its initiative in convening today's
open debate on an issue as important as the financing
of terrorism. Today's consensus adoption of resolution
2462 (2019), submitted by France, gives the fight against
terrorism renewed political impetus by addressing
its sources of financing, while endorsing the various
elements of the outcome of the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da'esh and
Al-Qaida, held in Paris in April 2018 on the theme
"No money for terror". We also thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Marshall
Billingslea, President ofthe Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), and Ms. Mercy Buku, expert in anti-money
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism,
for their informative briefings.

Peru believes that combating the financing of
terrorism is not only an international obligation but also
a strategic option for States to prevent, limit and impede
the capacity of terrorist groups to plan and carry out
their actions. In that regard, we want to highlight the fact
that today's resolution addresses traditional and new
forms of terrorism financing, particularly its conduct
through financial institutions, the abuse of legitimate
businesses and non-profit organizations, including shell
corporations and organizations, and the use of virtual
payment methods and other financial technologies.
We also want to stress that the resolution is concerned
about terrorists who benefit from organized crime and
that it recognizes that the nature and scope of these
links may vary according to the context, emphasizing
the importance of coordinating efforts to address this
new challenge. But while terrorist groups do link up
with criminal groups to obtain funding, there are also
broader and more complex dynamics of cooperation
between the two. In that regard, we believe it vital to
continue examining the question of the nexus between
those phenomena.

Faced with that constantly evolving scenario, the
resolution's emphasis on strengthening inter-agency
coordination is very relevant, especially with regard
to the need to intensify and accelerate information-
and intelligence-sharing, in line with FATF
recommendations. For that reason, we also believe that
the work conducted by financial intelligence units is
essential, and we want to highlight the resolution's call
for strengthening their capacities, which we have also
proposed within the framework of the Financial Action
Task Force of Latin America, currently chaired by
Peru. In that regard, I would like to highlight the need
for greater support from the international community
so that we can strengthen our national capacities.
Similarly, international cooperation is essential to
effectively combating this scourge. I want to underscore
the significant role played in that regard by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate.
Peru also makes available its experience in the fight
against terrorism.

Our country is committed to the fight against
terrorism financing, and recognizes that States must
consider the potential effects of the actions that they
take in that regard on humanitarian assistance efforts.
I conclude by reiterating our firmest rejection of
terrorism and renewing our solidarity with the victims
of such heinous acts. Bearing in mind the competencies
of each multilateral body, Peru will continue to support
any action that contributes to a comprehensive and
objective response to this scourge that is in accord with
international law.

