Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict. My appreciation goes
also to the valuable presentations made this morning
by Special Representative Coomaraswamy, Executive
Director Veneman, Assistant Secretary-General Mulet
and Ms. Hunt.

Since the Council first took up this issue about
10 years ago, we have been heartened by the progress
made towards protecting children who have the
misfortune to be caught in the midst of armed conflict.
For example, important precedents have been set at the
International Criminal Court and the Special Court for
Sierra Leone to put an end to impunity for crimes
against children, particularly the recruitment and use of
children by armed forces or armed groups. The
monitoring and reporting mechanism established by the
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and the child protection advisers in the peacekeeping
and political missions have all contributed to achieving
concrete results. The dialogue amongst the parties
concerned led to the release of more than 3,000 child
soldiers in Cote d'Ivoire. In Chad and the Central
African Republic, this May an agreement was reached
by the parties to the conflict to release child
combatants.

Despite some of those achievements, we are
deeply concerned about the plight of an estimated
250,000 children who are still forced to serve in armed
forces and armed groups. The recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/757) and the report of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
(A/62/228) highlighted emerging critical issues of

concern, including the lack of security in and around
camps for internally displaced persons and refugees
and the illegal detention of children for alleged
association with armed groups.

Those children affected by armed conflict, who
have been deprived of their families and of appropriate
education, should be given every opportunity to enjoy
normal civilian life. Post-conflict peacebuilding must
address the lives and livelihoods of such children and
ensure their full reintegration into communities. It is
indispensable to provide not only physical protection
but also basic human services. We should pay
particular attention to alleviating the factors at the
community level that are likely to lead to the
recurrence of conflicts, such as discrimination against
former child soldiers and the lack of productive
economic activities for them. Physical and mental
rehabilitation, vocational training and expanded
educational opportunities should be provided to
empower those Victims. In post-conflict situations,
Governments have the primary responsibility to lead
the way by formulating and implementing child rights-
based policies, while communities and civil society
play an important role in building a climate of
reconciliation and forgiveness.

The Peacebuilding Commission can support
national efforts to address the needs of children. For
example, the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in
Burundi has made specific commitments addressing
the needs of child soldiers and to promote their human
rights in the context of transitional justice in response
to Special Representative Coomaraswamy's briefing at
the country-specific meeting. In the case of Sierra
Leone, the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework
recognizes that the education, employment and
empowerment of youth are critical and priority issues.

At the last open debate on children and armed
conflict here in February, the Council issued a
presidential statement in document S/PRST/2008/6,
inviting all parties concerned to enhance their
exchange of information about programmes and best
practices on the reintegration and rehabilitation of
children. The Peacebuilding Commission, with its
diverse stakeholders, is in a position to provide
valuable support to develop a coordinated and
integrated approach to achieve durable peace.
Children are the most vulnerable members of
society when conflict breaks out. The concept of

human security, focusing on the safety and security of
the individual, which Japan promotes wholeheartedly,
provides a vitally important perspective for the
protection and empowerment of children affected by
armed conflict. An integrated approach based on that
concept is highly relevant to the entire process. Japan
believes that those endeavours will, in turn, contribute
to the international efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. For instance, at the recent G8
summit, leaders stressed the importance of the
enhancement of human security and the promotion of
good governance in achieving those goals.

In mainstreaming the human security approach,
Japan has been providing assistance and support to the
programmes aimed at supporting former child soldiers
and Victims of sexual exploitation and Violence in
many countries, such as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Uganda and Liberia. In addition,
through the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security, Japan supports capacity-building in local
communities to build durable child-friendly
environments, for instance, in Kenya and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Fourth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development was
also an occasion to address the importance of ensuring
human security as a top priority.

Political leaders in Africa and in many other parts
of the world agreed the importance of approaching
seamless peacebuilding efforts from a human-centred
perspective, encompassing conflict prevention, early
warning, conflict resolution and the prevention of
relapses into conflict, all of which contribute to durable
peace. Equally crucial are a smooth transition between
one phase and the next and the creation of
interdependence between security, human rights and
development.

