Mr. Onanga Ndiaye (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to begin by conveying its
gratitude to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his very informative briefing.
We also extend our gratitude to the Permanent Observer
of Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their contributions.

Today's debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, takes place at a
critical moment when popular movements shaking the
region are leading to unpredictable results. The stream
of events referred to by some as an Arab spring will
require profound political, social, cultural and economic
change throughout the region. Given these
developments, new approaches must be considered
taking into account this new momentum of
transformation in this important part of the world, which
has been affected for numerous decades by countless
crises and conflicts. The fate of the peace process will
be inextricably linked to the results of the protest
demonstrations taking place throughout the region.

The September 2010 suspension of direct
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians due to a
lack of agreement on stalemated issues has damaged the
peace process. The continued settlement activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, recent escalations of
violence by both sides and the announced launching of
new humanitarian flotillas to Gaza next month are, my
delegation believes, detrimental to the international
community's diplomatic efforts aimed at returning both
parties to the negotiation table. Gabon remains
concerned by the political stalemate. It is important that
negotiations between the parties resume as quickly as
possible under legitimate conditions conducive to
enabling the international community's assistance in
resolving the differences.

With respect to the vital issue of providing
humanitarian assistance to Gaza, my country reiterates
its call for the lifting of the blockade against Gaza in
order to facilitate access for the civilian population to
emergency assistance and economic development,
which are so necessary to their survival and well-being.

My country considers it absolutely necessary that
resolution 1860 (2009) be fully implemented in all its
aspects to guarantee the right to access and freedom of
movement in Gaza. Gabon calls upon all countries
providing humanitarian assistance to Gaza to utilize
existing channels in order to avoid any
misunderstanding and thus to contribute to Israel's
security and that of the population of Gaza.

Direct negotiations must resume based upon clear
parameters that are equally mindful of Israel's security
needs. In that regard, Gabon supports all recent
diplomatic initiatives aimed at relaunching this
process, and renews its call for the creation of a viable
Palestinian State living peacefully side by side with
Israel within secure and internationally recognized
borders.

My delegation also welcomes the conclusions of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and expresses its full
support for the United Nations following actions
undertaken with the Palestinian authorities pursuant to
the positive developments in the six areas necessary for
the creation of a Palestinian State and, of course, for
strengthening its State institutions.

On the political situation in Lebanon, Gabon is
dismayed to note the impasse in negotiations to form a
new Government. We encourage the new Prime
Minister to leave no stone unturned in order to achieve
consensus on this very important issue. Failure could
risk serving as a pretext for the emergence of a new
crisis that will carry the seeds of renewed violence,
source of both instability and conflict. Similarly, my
delegation believes that the effective implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) by both parties continues to
be the sine qua non condition to guarantee a settlement
of all the outstanding issues.

Given the positive progress seen at the diplomatic
and economic levels of the process to build the
Palestinian State, Gabon reiterates its support for the
Quartet's efforts and urges it to convene a meeting as
quickly as possible, during which this progress could
be appropriately considered. Such a meeting would
positively encourage both parties to return to the
negotiation table and achieve a political solution before
September.

In conclusion, my country believes that the
overall situation in the Middle East is a source of
renewed hope in the region. It is the responsibility of
the international community to take into account the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region, who
want to seize this historic opportunity to take control of
their own destinies.

