Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his detailed briefing to the
Council on the report of the Secretary General on
the Mission's activities in Kosovo (S/2019/102). We
also pay tribute to the vital role of the United Nations
during this past period to assist Kosovo in building its
institutions pursuant to relevant Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999). I also welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and the Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, and thank them for their statements.

I would like at the outset to reaffirm that the high-
level European Union-facilitated dialogue in Brussels
between Belgrade and Pristina remains the most
appropriate framework for settling all outstanding
issues between the two parties. It is the right means
for reaching lasting, just and consensual solutions.
We call on both parties to practice self-restraint, take
all measures necessary to diffuse tensions, strive to
overcome obstacles, demonstrate the necessary political
will, commit themselves to reaching a comprehensive
agreement, and create the appropriate conditions for
a return to dialogue and the full normalization of
relations between them.

While we are aware of the sensitivity of the step
approved by the Kosovo Parliament to turn the Kosovo
Security Force into an armed force, given that it is the
sovereign and genuine right of any State to form its
national institutions, we urge both parties to continue to
address the issues of concern through dialogue. In that
regard, we share the concern of the Secretary-General
pertaining to the tension between Belgrade and Pristina
and the resulting danger to stability, particularly in
northern Kosovo. Both parties should therefore refrain
from taking any unilateral measure that would trigger
further tensions.

We welcome the progress made by the Working
Group on Missing Persons following the events in
Kosovo and we call on both parties to take advantage of
that momentum and make further progress on the issue
of disappeared persons in order to establish lasting
reconciliation and create an environment conducive to
good-neighbourliness. We also welcome the ongoing
work of UNMIK, in cooperation with the United
Nations country team in Kosovo and in partnership
with local and international stakeholders, to implement
the recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo
Trust-Building Forum, held in May 2018, in support of
building confidence among the communities.

In conclusion, the international community should
continue to strive to encourage Pristina and Belgrade to
overcome their differences and reach consensual, just
and lasting solutions accepted by both parties, which
will help to establish a basis for peace, security and
stability in the region.

