Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
first of all to thank the Secretary-General for his ninth
report (S/2001/970) on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). I want also to thank Mr. Ngongi
for introducing that report, and again to tell him and his
staff how much we appreciate their great contribution
to the restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; we
appreciate his participation in today's meeting, which
has been further enhanced by the presence of the
Secretary-General.

This meeting takes place at a decisive time in the
peace process, when the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
preparing to begin phase III of its deployment. It is
thus important that the Council has involved troop-
contributing countries and other non-members of the
Council in its discussion of developments in the
situation, in the light of the report of the Secretary-
General.

We are pleased to note that there has been
substantial progress in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The ceasefire has
held along the confrontation line. Disengagement and
redeployment of forces are effectively complete. The
withdrawal of foreign forces has begun. But the
success of phase II does not mean that the peace
process has reached the point of no return. Everything
must therefore be done to consolidate the gains and to
make progress towards peace irreversible. Here, the
parties must continue to implement their commitments
under the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. The Security
Council should accompany them in that process.

The continuing fighting in the East of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a source of
profound concern. We appreciate the special attention
devoted to this question by the Secretariat and by the
Secretary-General, as well as by his Special
Representative and MONUC, and their efforts to help
resolve the many complex problems posed by this
situation. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that MONUC be authorized to enter
phase III of its deployment. The new phase, which we
have awaited with interest, will not be lacking in
challenges. But the report of the Secretary-General is
realistic on that score, and reflects that fact.

As MONUC prepares to enter phase III of its
deployment, we must stress that the parties must
implement the provisions of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and of relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We expect the process of the withdrawal of
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to be complete and to take place
at an accelerated pace, which would make it possible to
restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The process of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement is a key
element in this new phase. It requires the cooperation
of all parties, adequate means and close coordination
among all actors. Here, we encourage continued and
intensified dialogue between the leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and that of Rwanda.
Likewise, we encourage continued and intensified
dialogue between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi, as well as any initiative for
constructive dialogue among regional leaders, which
would be conducive to mutual trust and to commonly
agreed solutions.

In his report, the Secretary-General recommends
the deployment of MONUC to the East of the country.
That would be a major operation. Beyond its role in the
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement, that deployment would
help to maintain the momentum of the peace process
and, as has been demonstrated with earlier MONUC
deployments, to facilitate the resumption of economic
and social activities, which would give the people of
the region hope. Here, it is indispensable for MONUC
to enjoy full cooperation from the parties.

We recall the need to demilitarize Kisangani, as
demanded by the Security Council in its resolution
1304 (2000).

With regard to the public information component
described in the report of the Secretary-General, we
appreciate the interest attached to the role of
information in the activities of MONUC, and we
support the strengthening of such activities. Peace is
served also by a suitable information system.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is another essential
element of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement; here, the
Council has reiterated its full support for the dialogue
and for the efforts made by the facilitator and his team.
We hope that when the meeting is resumed the parties
will truly interact in a spirit of compromise and
tolerance, which will enable them to promote national
reconciliation and to agree, without outside
interference, about the future of their country.

Finally, we should stress the importance of the
economic recovery of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the entire Great Lakes region. This
undertaking will require the continued commitment and
support of the international community as a whole.

