Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. I take this opportunity to thank all of the
Permanent Representatives and their delegations for
the cooperation and support they offered me during
Gabon's presidency of the Council in June.

I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura and
Ambassador Tanin for the briefings they have just
provided on the situation in Afghanistan on the basis of
the report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2011/381).

First and foremost, I would like to express our
strong condemnation of the recent acts of violence,
which undermine the progress and achievements made
since March. In fact, since our most recent debate on
17 March (see S/PV.6497), the situation in Afghanistan
has seen major progress, particularly in the political
transition process.

We are pleased to note the progress achieved in
national reconciliation. In this regard, we welcome the
fact that the Afghan Government has, at the request of
the Security Council, committed itself to facilitating
the reintegration of moderate insurgents, pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). We also welcome the
establishment by the Government of a joint
independent committee to promote transparency and
accountability within the Administration. We believe
that this is an important element in the process of
transferring responsibility, which was referred to by
Ambassador Tanin a moment ago.

Despite these efforts, a number of obstacles
remain, particularly in the areas of security and good
governance. My delegation takes this opportunity to
call once again on the new Afghan Government to do
its utmost to strengthen its capacity to fight terrorism
and corruption, which remain the major obstacles to
peace and stability in the country.

As we stressed at the most recent debate, the
security and protection of civilians must be priorities
of the Government in its efforts to establish a sovereign
State based on solid and stable constitutional
institutions. The Afghan authorities should assume
their full responsibilities in this area.

The withdrawal announced this month of a large
number of troops from some international forces,
particularly those of the United States and NATO,
confirm the major challenge that the Government has
to meet in its attempts to fully assume it sovereign
prerogatives. Here, we reaffirm our full support to the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations for
their assistance to the Afghan Government to that end.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his unceasing efforts to support peace and
stability in that country. With respect to the impending
transition, we share his view that security must remain
a priority, but that improved security must yield
transition dividends based on improved coherence of
international assistance and on inclusive and
participatory dialogue. In closing, we reaffirm our
support to UNAMA and United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan.

