The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members

to document S/2016/1072, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

Following consultations among the members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council takes note of the
report (S/2016/1072) of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Office in West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) and welcomes the briefing
on 13 January 2017 by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the
Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas).

"The Security Council welcomes the letter
of the President of the Security Council dated
29 December 2016 and its annex concerning the
extension of the mandate of the UNOWAS for
a further period of three years, from 1 January
2017 to 31 December 2019.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support to the Special Representative and looks
forward to efforts to enhance ongoing activities
undertaken by UNOWAS in the areas of conflict
prevention, mediation and good offices, subregional
and regional cooperation to address cross-border
and cross-cutting threats to peace and security, the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, as well as the promotion of
good governance, respect for the rule of law and
human rights, and gender mainstreaming.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
positive political developments in several West
African countries, in particular the holding of free
and peaceful elections in Cape Verde and Ghana,

and the outcome ofthe political dialogue in Guinea.
The Security Council welcomes the steps taken to
develop and institute political, institutional and
constitutional reforms in Benin, Burkina Faso,
C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council takes note of the steps
taken by the United Nations system, in partnership
with the authorities of Burkina Faso, to pilot a new
approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
efforts in the country, including the development of
a strategic framework to help consolidate stability
in the post-transition period. The Security Council
encourages UNOWAS to support peacebuilding
and sustain peace efforts in other countries in West
Africa where democratic gains remain fragile,
following the comprehensive United Nations
inter-agency approach in Burkina Faso.

"The Security Council welcomes the ongoing
work of UNOWAS to promote women's participation
in political, peace and security processes and, in
this regard, welcomes positive developments in
Liberia and Nigeria.

"The Security Council recalls press statement
SC/12616, presidential statement S/PRST/20l6/19
and resolution 2337 (2017) and welcomes and is
encouraged by the decision on the political situation
in The Gambia of the fiftieth ordinary session of
the Economic Community of West African States
Authority, held in Abuja on 17 December 2016, and
welcomes the decisions of the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council at its six hundred and
forty-fourth meeting, held on 12 December 2016,
as well as its declaration at its six hundred and
forty-seventh meeting, held on 13 January 2017,
that, as of 19 January 2017, outgoing President
Yahya Jammeh will cease to be recognized by the
AU as the legitimate President of the Republic of
The Gambia. In this regard, the Security Council
requests the Special Representative, through his
good offices, to continue facilitating interactions
and negotiations aimed at ensuring a peaceful
transfer of power from outgoing President Yahya
Jammeh to President Adama Barrow.

"The Security Council expresses its concerns
over the prevalence of violent extremism, which can
be conducive to terrorism, and terrorist threats in the
region and their linkages to transnational organized
crime. In this regard, the Security Council strongly
condemns all terrorist attacks carried out in the
region, in particular in the Lake Chad basin region,
notably by Boko Haram. The Security Council
stresses the need to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, including by addressing
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
The Security Council expresses particular concern
about attacks on civilians, who are the primary
victims of this terrorist violence.

"The Security Council welcomes the
subregional, regional and international efforts to
mitigate the security, humanitarian and development
consequences of Boko Haram's operations. The
Security Council takes note of the progress made
in the operationalization of the Multinational Joint
Task Force (MNJTF). The Security Council urges
the member States participating in the MNJTF
to further enhance regional military cooperation
and coordination, deny haven to Boko Haram
and secure the conditions to enable humanitarian
access and facilitate the restoration of civilian
security and the rule of law in liberated areas. The
Security Council reaffirms that Member States
must ensure that any measures taken to counter
terrorism comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international
human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States and multilateral partners to lend their support
to the MNJTF to ensure its full operationalization,
including the provision of modalities to increase
the timely and effective exchange of intelligence
to further the region's collective efforts to
combat Boko Haram, whenever possible and
appropriate. The Security Council underscores
the importance of a holistic approach to degrade
and defeat Boko Haram that includes coordinated
security operations, conducted in accordance with
applicable international law, as well as enhanced
civilian efforts to improve governance and promote
economic growth in the affected areas. In this
regard, the Security Council deeply regrets the
tragic incident in Rann, north-east Nigeria, on
17 January 2017, which resulted in the deaths of
numerous civilians, including internally displaced
persons and humanitarian workers. The Security
Council urges the Government ofNigeria to swiftly
investigate the incident and recalls the obligation

of all parties to armed conflict to comply strictly
with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian, human right and
refugee law.

"The Security Council reiterates deep concern
over the dire humanitarian situation caused by the
activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin
region. In this regard, the Security Council calls
on the international community to immediately
support the provision of urgent humanitarian
assistance for the people most affected by the
crisis in Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria,
including by fulfilling the United Nations appeal for
the Lake Chad basin region. It also urges national
Governments to facilitate access for humanitarian
organizations and to work with the United Nations
and international partners to develop viable options
for delivering aid.

"The Security Council expresses continued
concern about piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as well
as the trafficking of drugs and other illicit goods,
the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking
and stresses the need to strengthen the fight against
illicit activities in the subregion.

"The Security Council welcomes the leadership
demonstrated by countries in West Africa and the
Sahel in spearheading initiatives to address security
challenges in the region and encourages further
collaboration between Member States, regional and
subregional organizations, relevant United Nations
entities and with other relevant stakeholders to
enhance social cohesion and to address challenges
to good governance.

"The Security Council commends the
engagement of UNOWAS with subregional and
regional organizations, in particular, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), the Lake Chad Basin Commission and
the Mano River Union, in order to promote peace
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel. The
Security Council remains committed to working
closely with these organizations through UNOWAS
to strengthen subregional and regional cooperation
to address cross-border security threats and
prevent the spread of terrorism. In that respect,
they welcome the assistance of UNOWAS to the
efforts of the ECOWAS Commission to implement
its Regional Framework for Security Sector Reform

and Governance and to promote a coordinated
security sector reform approach in the region.

"The Security Council notes the collaboration
undertaken between UNOWAS and the
Peacebuilding Commission and encourages
continued close and effective cooperation in
support of sustainable peace in the region.

"The Security Council commends the efforts
of the African Union and ECOWAS, as well
as of Member States in West Africa and the
Sahel, to strengthen border security and regional
cooperation, including through the G-5 Sahel and
the Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of
security cooperation and the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture in the
Sahelo-Saharan region.

"The Security Council encourages further
progress by the United Nations system and its
partners towards the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
including through support to the Group of 5 for
the Sahel, in order to assist in addressing the
security and political challenges to the stability and
development of the Sahel region, and reaffirms its
continued commitment to address such challenges,
which are interrelated with humanitarian and
development issues, as well as the adverse effects of
climate and ecological changes, and, in this regard,
highlights the need for adequate risk assessments
and risk management strategies relating to climate
change impacts.

"The Security Council welcomes the conclusion
of the independent evaluation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. In that regard, the
Security Council requests UNOWAS to coordinate
with States in the Sahel and all other stakeholders
to provide strategic leadership, guidance and
direction to the United Nations system for the
effective implementation of the Strategy, including
its thematic focus, coordination arrangements,
partnerships and distribution of responsibilities
among United Nations entities in the field and
at Headquarters.

"The Security Council requests UNOWAS
to contribute to efforts aimed at sustaining
international engagement by re-energizing the
commitments and initiatives of all the relevant
stakeholders, including countries of the region, the
various regional mechanisms, the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union, the
World Bank, the African Development Bank, and
emphasizes, in that regard, the importance of the
convening role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in peacebuilding efforts, and thus, in collaboration
with UNOWAS, in mobilizing deeper commitment
and partnership between the United Nations system,
the countries of the Sahel and other international
and regional partners with a view to advancing the
implementation of the Strategy, in collaboration
with UNOWAS, and to adapting the Strategy to the
evolving needs of the region.

"The Security Council further requests
UNOWAS to provide the necessary support to the
Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel and
its Technical Secretariat, as well as to the G-5 Sahel.

"The Security Council expresses its intention
to periodically monitor progress made, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to provide,
in the upcoming regular report due in July 2017,
information on UNOWAS efforts with respect
to the following aspects of its United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel-related mandate:
a) coherence in the political and programmatic
aspects of the Strategy; b) streamlining and
coordination of initiatives by international and
regional actors in the Sahel region, with a view to
ensuring that they meet the emerging challenges in
the region; 0) guidance and leadership of the overall
engagement of the United Nations system and
partners with a View to serving the overall objective
of the Strategy; d) advancing the implementation
of the nine flagship projects of the Strategy and
the assessment of their impact; and e) ensuring
attention to all Strategy pillars, and funding gaps."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/2.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
