Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, it is a pleasure to convey France's
congratulations and best wishes on your presidency of
the Security Council. However, the circumstances that
have led to the holding of this open meeting are very
grave indeed.

France expresses its keenly felt emotions in the
face of the heavy toll that the clashes of the last few
days have taken: some 60 dead, including three
children aged 10 and 12, and a thousand injured. We
wish here to express our profound sympathies and offer
our condolences to the families of the victims.

The President of the French Republic, the Prime
Minister and the Foreign Minister have already clearly
stated our position. The European Union, whose
presidency France holds for the current six-month
period, has also made public statements on this tragedy.
I would like, however, before this Security Council,
before the United Nations, to recall France's reaction.

These events are the result of a deliberate
provocation by Mr. Ariel Sharon on Thursday, 28
September. France unreservedly condemns his
irresponsible visit to the sacred site of the Mosque
Plaza, undertaken for reasons of domestic politics, at
the most sensitive time in the peace negotiations.

France deplores the violence that grew out of that
visit. Above and beyond that provocation, it is the
responsibility of those who are in charge of
maintaining order that is at issue. As President Chirac
put it yesterday morning, "You do not fight against the
emotion of a people with armour". The
disproportionate use of armed force witnessed in the
last several days manifestly violates the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We hope that full light will be shed on this
tragedy, in the framework of international machinery
suited to establishing responsibility.

It is a message of responsibility that the Council
must today address to the parties. We solemnly call on
the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to do all they can,
within their respective spheres, to contribute to easing
tension. The spiral of violence must be halted.
Absolute priority must be given to stopping the
fighting. The ceasefire entered into during the night of
Monday/Tuesday must be strictly observed. The
clashes play into the hands of the provocateurs and the
enemies of the peace process. Calm must return on the
ground. Security must be assured.

These clashes are all the more cause for grave
concern because the two parties had never been closer
to peace. With impetus provided by the United States,
thanks to the efforts led by President Clinton and
Madeleine Albright, efforts which France supports,
each party made courageous gestures towards the other
at the Camp David summit. Those discussions gave
reason to hope for an event awaited for over 50 years:
peaceful coexistence, peace, between Israel and the
State of Palestine. This historic occasion must not be
lost.

We very much hope that the meeting tomorrow in
Paris between President Arafat and Prime Minister
Barak will make it possible to put a definitive end to
the tragedy and to resume the path of dialogue, a
dialogue to which, as the events of the last few days
have reminded us, there is no alternative.

France and the European Union will continue
resolutely to support the peace negotiations and, at the
request of the parties, to make every possible
contribution. There is no other option than peace. The
parties must refrain from any action that might
compromise the success of the negotiations. France
invites the two parties to return to the talks, respecting
the resolutions and conventions that make up
international law. It invites them to adopt a calm
approach to all the outstanding issues, in the spirit of
the decisive strides made at the Camp David summit.

Having made a statement in my national capacity,
I would like, on behalf of the European Union, whose
presidency, I remind the Council, France currently
holds, to read the following statements made public on
1 and 2 October, beginning with the statement of 1
October:

"The European Union is very concerned at
the continued bloody clashes in Jerusalem and in
the territories, and is filled with consternation at
the number of victims. These events show to what
extent an act of provocation in tense
circumstances can have tragic consequences.

"The European Union calls upon the leaders
of both parties to take all necessary steps to halt
the violence and prevent new provocations.

"It warns against the unjustified use of
force.

"The European Union invites the parties to
concentrate again on the quest for a negotiated
peace, which is more necessary than ever."

Yesterday, 2 October, the European Union
declared:

"On the fourth day of bloody clashes
between Israelis and Palestinians, the European
Union once again calls for reason to put an end to
violence. It feels that the disproportionate resort
to force can only aggravate the situation further,
raise an already particularly deadly toll, and
postpone the prospect of peace at a time when it
appeared to be about to become a reality.

"The European Union supports the creation
of an international commission charged with
objectively establishing the facts of the events of
the last several days, and is ready to make its
contribution to the work of such a commission.

"The European Union remains convinced
that only a negotiated solution can meet the
aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples
to peace and security."

