Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like to associate myself with the unanimous tribute that
has been paid to Mrs. Ogata, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, who has devoted herself
profoundly to the cause of refugees, in particular in
Africa, over the past 10 years. I take this opportunity to
reiterate the gratitude of the Government of Mali to her
for efforts to assist and ease the return and
reintegration of refugees in northern Mali.

I should also like to thank Mrs. Ogata for her
important statement containing useful
recommendations, based on her 10 years' experience
and which merit the Council's full attention. The
topicality of her recommendations has given us food
for thought about humanitarian action and related
problems, in particular about the resources available to
us to halt the deterioration of the situation of
populations in crisis.

In this regard, I should like to make a few
comments. First, we feel that Mrs. Ogata was quite
right, in the light of recent conflicts and their tragic
humanitarian consequences - and I do not refer here
solely to conflicts in Africa - to underscore the
relationship between humanitarian assistance and the
maintenance of peace and security. We concur with the
Brahimi report that emergency situations must be dealt
with expeditiously, appropriately and in a coordinated
manner.

Secondly, we agree with Mrs. Ogata that we must
stress the need to ensure coordination and consistency
between humanitarian activities and the more general
activities of the United Nations to ensure peace and
development. Indeed, humanitarian assistance must
always be integrated into broader international efforts
to find political solutions and peaceful resolutions to
conflicts.

Thirdly, as Mrs. Ogata stated, we must, in
accordance with the Secretary-General's
recommendations, consider how to ensure respect for
and strengthen the legal bases and principles of
humanitarian action. In this regard, we believe that we
must address problems that threaten the safety of
humanitarian personnel, in particular by implementing
measures based on international humanitarian law that
could also include education in democracy and human
rights. Vigorous measures must be taken against those
who deliberately attack humanitarian personnel.

It is also important that those who commit acts of
aggression against humanitarian personnel and violate
international humanitarian law be brought to justice.
The International Criminal Court must carry out its
task of ensuring that States, non-state actors and
individuals be made to bear responsibility for their
acts. My country has signed and ratified the Court's
Statute and we urge other States to do likewise.

In conclusion, I should like to convey my best
wishes to Mr. Ruud Lubbers, Mrs. Ogata's successor.
We offer him our congratulations and full support as he
carries out his assigned duties.

