Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Today, after decades
of paralysis in the Council on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the Council has finally exercised its legal,
political and moral responsibility to take effective
action to reverse the negative trends that are
threatening peace and the two-State solution. With the
historic adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), we prove
our sincere commitment to peace and to the two-State
solution. We sincerely thank all Council members
who voted in support of the resolution today. We are
also encouraged by the exemplary restraint shown by
the permanent members of the Council. Malaysia also
appreciates the full support and solidarity shown by
New Zealand, Venezuela and Senegal in carrying the
resolution forward.

We have been persistently warned that the
settlement enterprise constitutes the single biggest
threat to peace and the two-State solution. It is illegal
under international law, as reinforced by the 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and in various Council resolutions. They also lead to
settler violence, home demolitions, land confiscations,
as well as to discriminatory policies and the denial
of development, infrastructure and natural resources.
Decades of great injustice and gross violations of
human rights have perpetuated anger and frustration
for those who have nothing to lose, leading to further
radicalization in the region and beyond.

Recent developments have made it even more
urgent for the Council to act, particularly the brazen
attempt by the Israeli Parliament to legalize outposts on
private Palestinian lands. We need to send a strong and
clear signal that this is simply not acceptable. Today
the Council has redeemed itself to steer the parties in
the right direction, away from violence and unjust and
illegal acts. We are giving hope to both the people of
Israel and the people of Palestine, the majority of whom
still believe in the two-State solution and still want
peace. This is not just a victory for Palestine, it is a
victory for the Security Council, for the United Nations,
for the rule of law, for peace and for humankind as a
whole. It is also a victory for the people of Israel who
still believe in living side by side in peace and security
with the Palestinians and their Arab neighbours. In
the next few months, the Council should continue to
exert pressure on both sides to ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016). We also urge all Member States
to abide by their obligations under the resolution to halt
settlement activities.

As we enter into 50 years of Israeli occupation
in 2017, we need to take a step back to reflect on our
collective failures for the past half-century that have
led to our current predicament on the viability of
the two-State solution. Although our action today is
significant in halting settlement activities, we need to
recognize that we are addressing the symptoms and
not the root causes of the conflict. In the long term,
the Council and the international community must
galvanize their efforts to end the longest occupation in
modern history, which has given rise to sustaining the
settlement enterprise.

We therefore urge all parties to intensify their
efforts to resume the peace process in order to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and various initiatives, including the Arab
Peace Initiative. We also reaffirm our support for all
diplomatic initiatives to that end, including by France
and Russia.

Lastly, although Malaysia's days in the Council are
coming to an end, we will continue to play an active
role in creating the necessary conditions for peace in
the region and defending the two-State solution, in line
with our principled position on the Palestinian question.

