Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your delegation's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2018/140) on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I would further like to
express our thanks and appreciation to his Excellency
Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of UNSMIL,
for his important briefing on the latest developments in
Libya and the extensive efforts being made to resolve
the political crisis in the country. We also thank the
representative of Sweden for his briefing as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, in which
he addressed the latest developments on the sanctions
in Libya.

The international community has stressed its firm
commitment to resolving the crisis in Libya through
an inclusive political settlement embodied in the
United Nations action plan adopted at the high-level
meeting held in New York on 20 September 2017. The
action plan is primarily based on the Libyan Political
Agreement signed on 17 December 2015, which
remains the sole framework for ending the conflict
between Libyan parties, free from menacing rhetoric
and use of force. All Libyan parties engaging in the
political dialogue have committed to the Agreement,
which is aimed at concluding the transitional stage and
all other stages included in the United Nations action
plan, and establish a strong and resilient Government
to lead the country to safety and security. We highly
appreciate the great efforts of Mr. Ghassan Salame' in
reaching out to all parties, and underscore the vital
role of the United Nations in facilitating the Libyan
dialogue. We also appreciate the regional efforts that
have been coordinated with those of the United Nations,
especially those of the League of Arab States and the
African Union towards resolving the Libyan crisis.
We warn against any intervention or unilateral
initiative that could only thwart United Nations
efforts and fail to resolve the Libyan crisis. We note
the statement made by the President of the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord on
17 February 2018, addressed to the Libyan people on
the seventh anniversary of the revolution, with respect
to the negative effect of foreign interventions in the
Libyan crisis.

As for recent positive developments in the political
process in Libya, and thanks to the support of the
Government of National Accord and UNSMIL, the
High Commission for National Elections has started
registering citizens living in the country. The number
of registered people is more than half of those qualified
to participate in the elections. The High Commission
has also started to register citizens residing in foreign
countries. This is a process that remains ongoing. We
hope that the House of Representatives will soon adopt
an electoral law allowing the High Commission to finish
the procedural work and set a date for the elections, in
coordination with the House, the Presidency Council
and the High Council of States. If a date is set, we
hope to see all political parties accepting the results of
the elections, which could lead to the reconstruction
of the State and the unification and reactivation of
its institutions, and to alleviating the suffering of the
Libyan people.

Undoubtedly, insecurity and the proliferation
of weapons are among the main challenges that
the international community must address to help
Libya, especially at this sensitive time. Although the
security situation has improved in the capital Tripoli
and its surrounding areas, thanks to the efforts of the
Government of National Accord, security incidents
involving the terrorizing of civilians continue to
occur from time to time because of some rogue armed
groups. In this regard, we stress the need to unify all
military, security and law enforcement institutions.
These institutions must respect the principle of military
leadership and control, pursuant to the military law,
and must work under civilian leadership and proceed
to the dissolution of armed groups and the collection
of weapons.

It has become urgent to improve the security
situation in Libya and a prerequisite for the success of
any political process and for addressing all challenges,
including the fight against terrorism, illicit migration
and the protection of human rights. If weapons and
tyrannical armed groups continue to proliferate, then
security and stability in the country and the democratic
civil State will not be achieved and no political solution
will succeed. In this regard, there is hope that the
efforts of the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt to unify
the Libyan National Army will succeed. Six rounds of
meetings have been held so far between the military
leadership and high-ranking officers in western,
eastern and southern Libya.

With respect to the economic situation, there has
been a tangible increase in oil exports, which have
almost reached the goal of 1.5 million barrels per day.
If it were not for the security situation, the National Oil
Corporation would have been able to achieve that goal
by now, thereby increasing the revenue of the State,
which would in turn have alleviated the economic
distress and civilian suffering. However, the ongoing
political schism and the presence ofparallel institutions,
in addition to the deterioration of the security situation
as a result of fighting over resources by some greedy
parties with the aim of achieving individual gains at
the expense of citizens' livelihood, have contributed to
the continued deterioration of the economic situation
and the suffering of citizens. We stress again that
all economic problems can be solved only through a
unified Government of National Accord and unified
sovereign institutions.

As members of the Council know, the oil and
financial wealth of Libya is being looted at the national
and foreign levels. Locally, oil continues to be smuggled
by criminal gangs, which established that illicit trade
with the aim of obtaining revenues in the millions of
dollars. That is a waste of the wealth of the country and
the Libyan people. We therefore commend the efforts
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya and its Panel of Experts,
especially in terms of the implementation of relevant
Council resolutions.

Regarding the financial wealth, all Libyans must
first and foremost surmount their differences and work
together to serve the interests of the country. They
must agree to unify their main institutions, such as the
Libyan Central Bank, the National Oil Corporation and
the Libyan Investment Authority, to protect the wealth
of the Libyan people and future generations. Those
institutions must discharge their duties as required,
free of all political polarization. Ongoing disputes over
these institutions could lead to a terrible disaster, the
primary victim of which will be the Libyan people. We
call on all parties to reach an agreement and put the
interest of Libya and the Libyans first.

In conclusion, I would like to express our deep
trust in the work of the Libyan sanctions committee
and its Panel of Experts, in addition to their role in
the protection of the wealth of the Libyan people. We
also place our confidence in the efforts of the United
Nations to achieve security and stability in Libya.

