Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join other
members of the Council in thanking Ambassador
Denisov, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for presenting the thirteenth 90-day
work programme of the CTC and for his briefing on
the work of the Committee during the last quarter. We
greatly appreciate his leadership of the CTC. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Ruperez, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), for his report to the Council
today.

We appreciate the opportunity offered by today's
meeting to reflect on the course of action that we have
taken so far in countering terrorism and to plan for the
future.

Pakistan remains committed to the fight against
terrorism. Terrorism continues to pose serious
challenges to every one of us. The increase in terrorist
incidents in different places in the world in recent
months, including the terrorist attacks in several
Pakistani cities, shows that the terrorist threat is
pervasive and that it is real.

We have noted the work done during the last
three months and the Committee's plans for the next
three months. We share the Chairman's View that the
fight against terrorism needs to be sustained effectively
and with dynamism. We also share his View that it
requires a consolidated and wide-ranging multinational
response.

In the context of our discussions today I would
like to offer a few comments on the work of the CTC.
First, we urge that reports be submitted by all States
whose reports are outstanding. Secondly, we have
noted the CTC's commitment to promote transparency
in its work. We would like to underline that it would
remain important for the CTC to find ways and means
to associate non-members of the Security Council and
of the Committee with the work of the CTC.

Thirdly, we believe that the Committee should
remain committed to enhancing the capacity of States
to counter terrorism. We are encouraged that the
thirteenth work programme says that "facilitation of
the provision of technical assistance would remain one
of the fundamental commitments of the CTC". Such
technical assistance should be relevant to the needs of
each country. We hope that the CTC will play a more
active role in generating support for such technical
assistance, which so far has remained mostly bilateral
in nature.

The proposed visits to States, with their consent,
under resolution 1535 (2004) should focus not only on
promoting cooperation and dialogue but mainly on
facilitating the provision of technical assistance to
States that may require it.

We noted that the CTC is continuing
consultations with the interested regional and
international organizations. Mr. Ruperez has listed
some of those organizations. We would suggest that
close cooperation should also be established with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. We believe
that such cooperation would be mutually beneficial.

Mr. Ruperez has also reported on efforts to ensure
full operational status for the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED). We hope that the
staffing for the Directorate would be on as wide a
geographical basis as possible, as provided for in
operative paragraph 4 of resolution 1535 (2004). In our
view, the Directorate should particularly seek out
experts from the Islamic countries.

I shall make a few comments on resolution
1566 (2004). First, we believe that the consensus
adoption of resolution 1566 (2004), initiated by the
Russian Federation, has sent a clear signal on the unity
of the Council in the fight against terrorism. We need
to maintain and to build on that unity.

Secondly, the counter-terrorism measures to be
considered by the working group under operative
paragraph 9 of resolution 1566 (2004) should be in
conformity with the principles of international law,
human rights and international humanitarian law. In
our view, measures could be considered and imposed
on a case-by-case basis for those involved in terrorism.

We also note that operative paragraph 3 of the
resolution mentions certain acts "which constitute
offences within the scope of and as defined in the
international conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism " A legal and internationally agreed
definition of terrorism still needs to be developed, and
we hope that will be done by the General Assembly.

As the United Nations has decided in the past that
a distinction should be maintained between terrorism
and the right of peoples to self-determination, the
United Nations should not and cannot reverse its
historical support for peoples and nations struggling
for liberation from foreign occupation and alien
domination.

We also welcome the reference in the preamble of
resolution 1566 (2004) to the underlying causes of
terrorism. It provides a good basis for evolving a long-
term strategy to broaden our focus in the fight against
terrorism. Such a strategy should focus on the root
causes of terrorism, such as political injustice, non-
resolution of long-standing disputes, denial or violation
of human rights, including the right of self-
determination, and pervasive poverty and socio-
economic injustice, which provide fertile breeding
ground for terrorism.

We will recommend a United Nations study on
the root causes of terrorism and the development of a
long-term strategy to address that scourge. In that
context, we draw attention to the strategy of
enlightened moderation, which has been outlined by
President Musharraf of Pakistan, to avoid the danger of
a clash of cultures and to promote socio-economic
renaissance and political justice for all peoples,
especially the peoples of the Islamic world.

