The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations with the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
2014 (2011), 2051 (2012), 2140 (2014), 2201 (2015),
2204 (2015), 2216 (2015), 2266 (2016), 2342 (2017),
and presidential statements of 15 February 2013,
29 August 2014, 22 March 2015 and 25 April 2016.

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern about the devastating humanitarian impact
of the conflict on civilians and emphasizes that
the humanitarian situation will deteriorate in the
absence ofa political solution.

"The Security Council expresses deep
concern about the recent outbreak of cholera,
which is the latest indicator of the gravity of the
humanitarian crisis.

"The Security Council recalls that the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue conference, and relevant
Security Council resolutions provide the basis for
inclusive negotiations for a political settlement of
the crisis in Yemen and expresses concern at the
continued non-implementation of these resolutions.

"The Security Council expresses its continued
support for the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, to bring the parties to negotiations
with a view towards swiftly reaching a final and
comprehensive agreement to end the conflict in
Yemen. The Security Council calls on the parties to
immediately agree on the modalities for a durable
cessation of hostilities. Furthermore, the Security
Council reiterates its call to all parties to engage in
peace talks in a flexible and constructive manner
without preconditions, and in good faith.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the attack on the United Nations Special Envoy's
convoy during his recent visit to Sana'a, and
calls upon the Houthis and supporters of former
President Saleh to undertake a full investigation
to identify those responsible and hold them to
account. The Security Council calls upon all
parties to the conflict to engage constructively with
the Special Envoy's proposals for peace and ensure
the unhindered access of the Special Envoy to all
parts of Yemen. The Security Council notes the
statement by the Government of Yemen contained
in document S/20l7/476.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
to comply with international humanitarian law,
including to at all times distinguish between the
civilian population and combatants, and between
civilian objects and military objectives, and by
taking all feasible precautions to avoid and in any
event minimize harm to civilians and civilian
objects, and to end the recruitment and use of
children in violation of applicable international law,
in order to prevent further suffering of civilians.
The Security Council further underlines the need
to ensure the security of humanitarian and United
Nations personnel. The Security Council calls on all
parties to respect and protect medical facilities and
personnel. The Security Council further calls on
the parties to allow the safe, rapid and unhindered
access for humanitarian supplies and personnel to
the populations of all affected governorates, and to
facilitate access for essential imports of food, fuel
and medical supplies into the country and their
distribution throughout. In this regard, the Security
Council stresses the importance of keeping all
Yemen's ports functioning, including Hudaydah
port, as a critical lifeline for humanitarian support
and other essential supplies, in line with the Special
Envoy's latest proposals for Hudaydah port and city.

"The Security Council shares the grave
concern of the Secretary-General about the threat
of famine in Yemen, which he described as the
largest food insecurity emergency in the world,
and notes with deepest concern the additional
humanitarian challenge presented by the alarming
cholera outbreak in the country. The Security
Council emphasizes that the spread of Cholera and
the threat of famine reflect the gravity of Yemen's
humanitarian crisis and the severe strain the
conflict has placed on the country's institutions.

"In light of this worsening crisis, the Security
Council calls on all parties to engage constructively
with the Special Envoy's latest proposals for
increasing commercial and humanitarian shipments
through Red Sea ports including new arrangements
for the management of Hudaydah port and city.
These proposals would act as a confidence-building
mechanism between the parties, with a view to a
durable cessation of hostilities as a step towards
the resumption of peace talks under United Nations
leadership. The Security Council urges the parties
to work with the Special Envoy to conclude an
agreement for the resumption of government
salary payments and the preservation of essential
government services in all areas of the country.

"The Security Council, with a view both to
addressing the humanitarian emergency, and to
building confidence between the sides in a way
which will be conducive to political negotiations,
encourages rapid agreement on (a) deployment
of additional United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism monitors; (b) increasing the
capacity of all of Yemeni ports, including through
the timely installation of cranes at Hudaydah to
increase the port's capacity; (0) increased access to
Sana'a airport for lifesaving humanitarian supplies
and movement of urgent humanitarian cases.

"The Security Council calls for immediate
mobilisation of the funds pledged to Yemen at the
Geneva Pledging Conference of 25 April 2017,
hosted by the United Nations Secretary-General
together with the Governments of Sweden and
Switzerland, and full funding of the United Nations
2017 Humanitarian Response Plan for Yemen as
part of a coordinated international response to the
crisis. The Security Council also expresses support
for the statement made by the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator on 26 May on the
urgent need to provide funding to halt the spread
of cholera.

"The Security Council calls on all Member
States to fully implement the arms embargo
as required by the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Security Council also calls on the
Houthis and forces allied to former President Ali
Abdullah Saleh to cease all attacks at the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia.

"The Security Council takes threats to shipping
around Bab al-Mandeb, a strategically important
shipping passage, extremely seriously and stresses
that the continued exercise of navigational rights
and freedoms in and around Bab al-Mandeb Strait
in accordance with relevant international law must
be upheld.

"The Security Council expresses grave concern
about the presence of Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) in Yemen, and the impact its
violent extremist ideology and actions have upon
civilians and stability in Yemen and the region. The
Security Council further expresses concern at the
presence and future potential growth of affiliates
of the Islamic State in Iraq and Levant (ISIL),
also known as Da'esh, and reaffirms its resolve to
address all aspects of the threat posed by AQAP,
ISIL (Da'esh), and all other associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. In this regard,
the Security Council calls upon all Yemenis to
combine their efforts in countering the threat posed
by terrorism.

"The Security Council emphasises that the
conflict in Yemen will only be resolved through
the resumption of an inclusive political process,
and calls upon all parties to the conflict to engage
constructively and in good faith to overcome
obstacles and find a peaceful solution. The
Security Council calls upon the parties to ensure at
least 30 percent representation of women in peace
negotiations, and calls upon the United Nations
to regularly report on consultations with women
leaders and women's organisations in line with
resolution 2122 (2013).

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/7.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.
