Mr. Bamba (cote d'Ivoire): Let me first
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership of
the Council for this month. On behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and my
own Government, allow me to express our gratitude to
the Security Council for the opportunity given to us
once more to express our concerns and commitment
with regard to the crisis in Mali. I would also like to take
this opportunity to convey the warmest congratulations
of ECOWAS to the European Union for having been
awarded the 2012 Nobel Peace Prize.

Following the overwhelming consensus that
emerged from the High-level Meeting on the Sahel, held
in New York on 26 September, about the serious threat
posed by the crisis in the north of Mali and the need for
urgent and immediate action to deal with the situation,
ECOWAS is pleased that the Council has unanimously
adopted today resolution 2071 (2012), which we strongly
believe is meant to pave the way for the next resolution
by which the Council will be effectively authorizing the
deployment of an international force in Mali under a
Chapter VII mandate.

Before elaborating any further, let me seize this
opportunity to express the satisfaction and gratitude
of ECOWAS towards the international community
for the tremendous political support generated by the
26 September High-level Meeting on the Sahel, and we
would like to underscore in particular the leadership
demonstrated in that regard by the French President,
His Excellency Francois Hollande, and his Government,
whose strong and unequivocal commitment to resolute
action to stop the crisis in Mali is highly commendable.
In the same vein, ECOWAS appreciates the high
priority that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon gives to
the issue of Mali and, in that context, we welcome the
recent appointment by the Secretary-General of Prime
Minister Romano Prodi as the Special Envoy for the
Sahel, who should mobilize international efforts for
the Sahel, coordinate the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy on the Sahel and engage
actively in defining the parameters of a comprehensive
solution to the Malian crisis.

ECOWAS is equally pleased with its close and
constructive cooperation with the African Union on the
issue of Mali, as illustrated by the Community's letter
dated 28 September 2012 addressed to the African
Union, with a view to engaging with the African Union
on fine-tuning the concept, modalities and means of
deployment of the stabilization force in Mali.

Since the adoption of resolution 2056 (2012),
ECOWAS has, indeed, in coordination with the African
Union, fulfilled most of the requirements outlined in
that resolution, as is reflected in the outcome of the
meeting of the Chiefs of Defence Staff, held in Abidjan
from 14 to 15 September, and further validated by
the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council at its
meeting on 17 September in Abidjan.

On 1 September, the Government of Mali
addressed a request to ECOWAS to provide military
assistance to reorganize the Armed Forces of Mali and
restore territorial integrity in Mali, of which the north
is occupied by terrorist groups, and combat terrorism.
On 18 September, the Government of Mali addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General requesting authorization
for the deployment of an international military force to
assist the Armed Forces of Mali, through a resolution
of the Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, to recover the occupied
region in the north of Mali. On 23 September, the
Government of Mali addressed a letter to ECOWAS
on the conditions for the deployment of a stabilization
force in Mali. Lastly, on 28 September, the Government
of Mali addressed a letter to the Secretary-General
requesting a Security Council resolution authorizing
the deployment of a stabilization force in Mali under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

While pressing for the deployment of troops in
Mali, ECOWAS, as well as the African Union, has
consistently believed that priority should be devoted to
negotiations and political solutions, mindful of the fact
that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mali
are non-negotiable. In that regard, the mediation effort
carried out by His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore,
President of Burkina Faso, bears reasonable hopes
and deserves the full support of the international
community. In that context, ECOWAS and the African
Union encourage the core countries, namely, Algeria and
Mauritania, to work towards significant breakthroughs.

ECOWAS and the African Union are equally
convinced that the quest for a negotiated political
solution to the crisis in Mali and preparations for
military action to restore the territorial integrity of
Mali are closely interlinked and that both go together,
indeed, go hand in hand.

As was echoed by all the speakers at the High-level
Meeting on the Sahel, on 26 September, the situation
in Mali is untenable. ECOWAS and the African
Union strongly condemn the abuses of human rights
committed in the north of Mali by armed rebel terrorists
and other extremist groups, including violence against
its civilians, notably women and children, killings,
hostage-taking, pillaging, death, the destruction of
cultural and religious sites and the recruitment of
child soldiers. ECOWAS warns that some of those acts
may amount to crimes under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and that the perpetrators
must be held accountable.

In that regard, ECOWAS is comforted by the fact
that the Government of Mali referred the situation in
the north of Mali since January to the International
Criminal Court on 18 July. ECOWAS is concerned by
the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian situation, as
flows of refugees continue to pour into the neighbouring
countries of Burkina Faso, the Niger and Mauritania, as
well as large numbers of internally displaced persons
to Bamako, leading to serious humanitarian challenges.

The longer the international community allows the
situation to fester and the longer we allow the criminal
and terrorist networks to consolidate their position, the
more the people will suffer and the greater the danger
to regional and international peace and security. Faced
with that situation, we have high expectations for the
upcoming meeting of the support and follow-up group
on Mali, to be convened by the African Union, in
consultation with the United Nations and ECOWAS,
in Bamako on 19 October, which aims to clarify the
modalities of international support to the Malian
transitional authorities in resolving the crisis in the
north of Mali.

In the same vein, we equally expect a strong
commitment from the outcome of the European
Union Defence Ministers' meeting on 15 October in
Luxembourg to discuss options to support international
efforts to assist Mali.

The Council has adopted resolution 2071 (2012)
against that backdrop. In that regard, ECOWAS
strongly supports the request of the Council to the
Secretary-General to immediately provide military
and security planners to assist ECOWAS and the
African Union, in close consultation with Mali, its
neighbouring countries, countries of the region and
all other interested bilateral partners and international
organizations in a joint planning effort to respond to
the requests of the traditional authorities of Mali for
such an international military force.

ECOWAS equally endorses the request of the
Secretary-General, in close consultation with the
aforementioned partners, to submit detailed and
actionable recommendations to respond to the requests
of the transitional authorities of Mali regarding an
international military force, including the means and
modalities of the envisaged deployment, in particular
the concept of operations, force generation, capabilities,
strength, support and financial cost.

In conclusion, the clock is ticking, and every day that
passes brings more suffering to the population trapped
in the areas controlled by the terrorists carrying out all
kinds of criminal activities in the north. ECOWAS is
pleased with the resolution adopted today because it is
timely and opens the door to a further resolution calling
for concrete action. Indeed, in the situation regarding
Mali, inaction is no longer an option.

