Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Allow me at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We
appreciate the approach that you have taken thus far in
conducting the business of the Council, including in
interactions with non-members. I would also like to
thank you, in your capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for your briefings.

I take the floor barely two weeks before the first
anniversary of the horrific terrorist attacks in Mumbai,
in my country. The images of those heinous attacks
remain deeply etched in the minds and hearts of the
Indian people. They demand an early end to the
scourge of terrorism which has plagued us for the past
two decades.

Terrorism poses a grave threat to all States and all
societies. It undermines peace, democracy and
freedom, thus endangering the very foundations of the
continued existence of democratic societies. Terrorism
is a global threat and requires a coordinated and
concerted global response. India is a party to all 13
sectoral conventions on terrorism that have been
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations. India
participated constructively in discussions leading to the
adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy (see General Assembly resolution 60/288) in September 2006.

We at the United Nations have been negotiating a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
for more than a decade. Nearly all the elements of the
proposed convention have met with the agreement of
Member States. It is important that we all put our heads
and minds together with a common resolve to ensure
the early adoption of the convention. Its time has really
arrived, and we all need to act with the necessary
political will to ensure the adoption of the convention.

India supports the anti-terrorism mechanisms
established by the United Nations, including Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999), related to sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban; Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), which led to the establishment
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee; and Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004), which addressed the
issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. India also supports the subsequent
resolutions that renewed, strengthened or amended
those three original resolutions. We are fully
committed to implementing our obligations under those
resolutions.

India has been accorded observer status by the
Financial Action Task Force. We are working towards
full membership. We are reviewing our legislative,
regulatory and institutional framework with a view to
becoming fully compliant with the recommendations of
the Task Force on combating money-laundering and
terrorist financing.

Regarding our participation in the regime created
by resolution 1267 (1999) and subsequent associated
resolutions, it may be recalled that in January 2004, the
Government of India enacted an order entitled
Prevention and Suppres sion of Terrorism

(Implementation of Security Council Resolutions),
revised in March 2006, 2007 and July 2009, which
enables the central and State authorities concerned to
take necessary action as required under resolution 1267
(1999) in respect of the individuals and entities
included in the 1267 list. In December 2008, the
Government of India amended the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967, in order to effectively
implement resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001).
At the same time, however, we are concerned that the
process of listing and delisting on the consolidated list
is subject to political will and pressure - a scenario
that we can ill afford in our united fight against
terrorism.

We received the first visit by the 1267
Committee's Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team from 1 to 3 September 2009. From
our perspective, the visit was very useful, as it gave us
an opportunity to closely interact with the head of the
Monitoring Team. We look forward to cooperating with
the Team and the regime in the future.

Regarding our cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, it is pertinent to note that India
has submitted five national reports to the Committee
on measures taken to implement resolution 1373
(2001). We also hosted a visit by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in
November 2006. We encourage the ongoing
stocktaking exercise with a view to the full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001).

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
India has taken additional steps to further strengthen
the existing legislative and regulatory mechanism for
exercising controls over weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). A major step was the enactment of the WMD
Act in June 2005. The Act provides for integrated and
overarching legislation on prohibiting unlawful
activities in relation to WMDs, their delivery systems
and related materials, equipment and technologies. The
Act criminalizes a range of unlawful activities in
relation to WMDs and their means of delivery.
Separately, industry outreach activities and training
programmes are organized to highlight various aspects
of resolution 1540 (2004).

We support efforts to prepare guidelines for
handling assistance requests by countries and to find
means to address the most commonly found gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It is
important that these activities be performed only at the
request of a country and keeping in mind the varying
national capacities, procedures and systems. Based on
specific requests by countries, India remains ready to
assist them bilaterally in capacity-building and in
fulfilling their obligations under Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). With respect to the
involvement of regional organizations, this may need
to be carefully considered since this subject is rather
specialized in nature and capability and expertise at the
level of regional or subregional organizations may not
often be available.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that we will
continue to work closely with the counter-terrorism
mechanisms established by Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
The scourge of terrorism requires the international
community to act in concert and in a comprehensive
manner, including through termination of sources of its
financing and stamping out its networks. The necessary
political will and resolve needs to be constantly on
demonstration for the international community to give
a truly strong and unambiguous signal in our resolve to
fight terrorism.

