Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): Before addressing the
subject under discussion today, I would like to
congratulate Norway on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. It is a particular
honour to participate in today's deliberations under
your guidance, Your Excellency.

We are grateful for the Secretary-General's very
important statement. I would like to thank
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for his comprehensive report
on the developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for his briefing today, and to avail myself of
this opportunity to convey the appreciation of my
Government for his achievements as High
Representative. Also, I extend our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jacques Klein, for his efforts and accomplishments
in leading the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), as well as for his detailed
analysis today.

We are all aware of the importance of this
meeting. It signifies the announcement of a new and
significant phase of international commitment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which the European Union
will play a pivotal role. We have just heard Mr. Javier
Solana's inspired assessment of this task. Indeed, this
is yet another example of the European Union's
involvement, which is so crucial to the entire region.

On this special occasion, allow me to reiterate
that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a signatory
of the Dayton/Paris Agreement, remains a staunch
supporter of its full implementation. Yugoslavia has
respected, and will continue to respect, the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and has
demonstrated its readiness to develop cooperation with
it. The relations between our countries are
characterized by a dynamic political dialogue,
exemplified by many contacts between the highest
representatives of the two States.

As a follow-up to an earlier decision to establish
an inter-State council, a meeting of the Council was
held on 18 December 2001 to institutionalize all-round
cooperation between the two countries. During the
recent visit of Prime Minister Lagumdzija to Belgrade
on 19 February, the Standing Committee of the Inter-
State Council decided on a joint approach to projects
financed by the international community, particularly
within the framework of regional cooperation and the
Stability Pact. Close contacts between the parliaments
of the two countries have been established as well. In
November 2001, a delegation of the Assembly of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia paid the first visit to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. A return visit followed in
February this year.

In the area of political deliberations, bilateral
relations between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina are gradually being
expanded into the field of economic and other forms of
cooperation of the most immediate practical interest for
the citizens of the two countries. A free trade
agreement was signed in Belgrade on 1 February 2002,
a significant step along the road of regional
cooperation among Balkan States. An agreement on the
encouragement of mutual investments and a customs
cooperation agreement were also signed, as were a
number of other accords that will enhance ties between
the two economies and help secure a free flow of goods
and capital. Dual citizenship issues are in the process
of being regulated, as are the delineation of the
borderline between Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To that effect, an Inter-State Commission
for the State Border has been established, and its work
is progressing well.

Special parallel relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska should
also be understood in the overall context of relations
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are firmly based on the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, their framework was
prepared in cooperation with the High Representative,
and they are fully transparent.

One of the outstanding issues that requires
sustained attention is the return of refugees. In this
connection, I would like to point out that, as a result of
my Government's initiative, the heads of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) missions to Yugoslavia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia have agreed on the principles
for refugee returns. The document they signed in this
connection was confirmed by the OSCE Standing
Committee, as well as by a joint statement by the
delegations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Yugoslavia in Vienna, which was strongly welcomed
by the OSCE. We hope that this important development
will be reflected on the ground.

Yugoslavia has made its relations with
neighbouring countries one of its foreign policy
priorities. Through this lasting, strategic determination,
we are contributing to the strengthening of regional
stability, which is a prerequisite for, and the best means
of, speeding up the process of integration into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures - a goal that
all of us in the region share. The further development
and improvement of our relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina constitutes an extremely important
element of such an approach. My Government also
looks forward to working closely with Lord Ashdown,
the newly designated High Representative, towards the
fulfilment of this aim, and we wish him success in
discharging the important responsibilities that he will
soon assume.

