Mr. Cunningham (United States): I think the
presence of the Secretary-General with us today
signifies the import of the event that we are here
discussing and commemorating. This is truly a rare
example of good news and encouraging news, a cause
for quite a bit of satisfaction. We now have democracy
serving solidly as a base for movement ahead in East
Timor. We have a solid basis via elections for a
Constituent Assembly. Fretilin has a strong but not an
overwhelming majority and will work with others to
determine the future.

I applaud the Fretilin leaders who have asserted
that their approach will be one of inclusion, seeking
consensus on a modern and well-crafted constitution.
This is certainly a wise approach for the long term and
one that we expect will prove out and should be
emulated.

The results of the election and Fretilin's
commitment also honour the commitment of the people
of East Timor to democracy and the elections, as was
evident in Jean-Marie Guehenno's briefing.

It is clear that the approach to and the conduct of
the elections was an example to the world community,
as the Secretary-General said recently, and as was also
observed by a number of members of the international
community, including the United States Assistant
Secretary of State James Kelly, who was there with an
American delegation. I want to join others who have
congratulated the United Nations, the Secretary-
General, Mr. Vieira de Mello and his colleagues at the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), the independent electoral
commission, and certainly the Timorese themselves.

We support Mr. Vieira de Mello's intent, as the
transitional leader, to form a new all-Timorese cabinet
that reflects the spirit and results of the elections. We
also find very welcome the news that Mr. Vieira de
Mello and East Timorese leaders will meet soon with
Indonesian President Megawati. Certainly dialogue is
the way to move forward and the way to resolve the
issues that are still outstanding.

I also want to recall, as Mr. Guehenno did, the
East Timorese refugees that are still in West Timor. We
hope that reports that a large group of refugees may
participate in returns to the East this week are borne
out and that this will be a beginning of movement of all
those who wish to return. We hope that the success of
the elections encourages confidence in that respect.

