Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to express our delegation's
appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his informative briefing and for his and his team's
laudable and tireless efforts in the Middle East. We also
commend the valuable and constructive contributions
of Ms. Tania Hary, Executive Director of Gisha, Legal
Centre for Freedom of Movement.

Today's meeting revisiting the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, is
very timely. In the past week, the Israel Defense Forces
and Palestinian militias in Gaza once again exchanged
intense attacks, resulting in several deaths and injuries
and extensive material damage. These ongoing
clashes are endangering children, whose rights, as the
representative of Belgium noted, are currently being
commemorated in the General Assembly Hall in the
context of the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. And the groups that have
always been the most vulnerable in this conflict,
women and the civilian population of both sides,
are also in danger. We believe that as long as Gaza
remains at the centre of the ongoing tensions between
Israel and Palestine, none of the efforts to improve the
deteriorating economic and social situation of Gaza's
2 million inhabitants will improve their long-standing
terrible standards of living.

We therefore urge all the armed groups in Gaza
to cease their provocations and attacks. Similarly,
Israel should respect international law and measure its
responses in order not to harm the civilian population
generally. Lethal weapons of war should not be directed
at areas inhabited by civilians who are not involved in
the fighting in the conflict. The Israeli forces present in
the occupied Palestinian territories should respect and
ensure the security of citizens of both sides in the event
of protests or demonstrations, keeping in mind that the
right to protest is a historical democratic right as long
as it is the civilian population that is demonstrating, as
is the case in Gaza.

We cannot leave the Israelis and Palestinians to
their fate. That is why our delegation urges the Security
Council and the international community to stay united
and to approach its work with more humanity in order
to achieve a definitive political solution to the conflict
that is in the interests of both the Palestinians and the
Israelis, a solution that all the other peoples of the
Middle East and the world in general so fervently wish
for. We deplore the fact that the historic moments that
gave hope to the whole world on this issue have been
consigned to oblivion. However, we believe that it is
still necessary and urgent to continue to coordinate
efforts aimed at finding a formula for talks that would
encourage the parties to return to the negotiating
table and deal with all outstanding issues. We deem
it urgent and imperative that support continue for the
Egyptian and United Nations mediation efforts aimed
at achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation. It is time
for Palestinian leaders to make concessions and seek to
reach truly definitive agreements that guarantee their
political unity, thereby enabling them to work together
for the well-being of their own citizens. Such an accord
would also involve the return of the Palestinian National
Authority to the Gaza Strip.

Before concluding, I wish to express my
Government's satisfaction with the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and encourage
the international community to continue providing the
funding it needs to maintain and enhance its work. In
accordance with our commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations, Equatorial Guinea wishes to reaffirm
its position that, in recognition of the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 242 (1967), the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Madrid principles, the Middle East Quartet road map
and other instruments, we consider the historic claims
of the Palestinians and the peaceful existence of Israel
to be just. We therefore, reiterate our support for the
two-State solution based on the 1967 borders, with
the capital city of Jerusalem to be negotiated between
the two parties, guaranteeing a safe and peaceful
coexistence for both States and in harmony with the
other countries of the region.

