Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your words of condolence following
the terrorist act that took place in Moscow today, and
which caused human casualties.

We welcome this meeting of the Security Council
at which we hope further measures will be considered
to ensure observance of the norms of international
humanitarian law during armed conflicts and that
appropriate conclusions and proposals will duly be
reflected in the presidential statement and in the
updated aide-memoire. We thank Mr. Egeland for his
interesting and detailed report on the question. We note
with regret that, despite a whole arsenal of
international instruments on human rights and
international humanitarian law intended to protect
civilians caught up in armed conflicts, during
hostilities it is primarily completely innocent children,
women, elderly people and other vulnerable categories
of the population that suffer, as well as the
humanitarian personnel providing assistance to them.

The humanitarian component is now highly
crucial, particularly as an element of a comprehensive
strategy for crisis prevention and during the stage of
post-conflict settlement. However, the efficacy of
humanitarian work depends to a large extent on how it
is incorporated into the efforts of the international
community to find a political settlement to conflicts.
We are pleased at progress made to enhance the
effectiveness of measures in that area in the light of
changing trends and approaches to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The evolution of
international humanitarian law shows that it is
continuing to adapt to contemporary conditions.
Among the latest examples was the creation of the
International Criminal Court, the activities of which
should complement legislative work done at the
national level. The problem of protecting civilians must
be considered within the context of new threats and
challenges, primarily terrorism, such as the terrorist act
that took place, unfortunately, in Moscow today. This
question is under the constant scrutiny of the Security
Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Other bodies of the United Nations are involved
as well. In the Third Committee at the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, the Russian initiative
on the elaboration of a code for protecting human
rights from terrorism was further developed. Virtually
all of the main elements of the code were included in
the resolution entitled "Human rights and terrorism".

An important role in protecting civilians has been
assigned to the mechanisms for early warning and
conflict prevention. States Members of the
Organization should be quicker to inform the Council
about situations that could pose a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including cases of deliberate refusal to grant safe,
unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to
civilians or of blocking humanitarian assistance
intended for civilians, as well as about gross violations
of the rights of civilians, and here the Security Council
should play a lead role.

In order to enhance the effectiveness of work in
this area, the Council should take full account of the
particular nature of specific conflict situations and, on
that basis, take measures to protect civilians. The
United Nations already has some experience in this
area: in Angola, Afghanistan, Indonesia and the
Balkans - and we hope that today's exchange of views
on how to enhance the Council's work and that of other
United Nations bodies in protecting civilians will give
additional impetus to progress in this area.

