Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to express to the
Security Council my delegation's gratitude for the
holding of this meeting devoted to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would also
like to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing to
the Council on the latest developments relating to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict since the
publication of the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2007/643) on the matter, in October 2007.
7

In spite of the legal developments and the
international conventions adopted to address the issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict since the
establishment of the United Nations - from the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War to the many
resolutions of the Security Council - civilians in
armed conflict continue to pay the ultimate price. As
regards the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the gap continues to grow between the letter of the law
and its implementation.

Civilians living in armed conflict and people
living under the yoke of colonialism and foreign
occupation and settlement are still submitted to all
sorts of Violence, forcible displacement, deliberate
denial of humanitarian assistance and the confiscation
of their land. Their only fault is to be living in a region
of armed conflict or to have had their land occupied by
others in their absence and disposed of without their
consent - although most of the time that takes place
while they are on their own land.

In his briefing to the Council last November,
Mr. Holmes referred to the deteriorating situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and especially in
Gaza. He said then that

"the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Gaza, is reaching the
limits of what is bearable for any community"
(S/PV.5781, p. 4).

I believe that the situation to which Mr. Holmes
referred has not improved to date; in fact, it has
worsened. Israel, the occupying Power, has continued
its policies against the Palestinian people. Those
policies have resulted in starvation, injustice, tyranny,
collective punishment, the confiscation of land,
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and forcible displacement. Israel, the
occupying Power, is continuing to intensify its siege
against the Palestinian people, to close crossing points
and to transform the Gaza Strip into the largest prison
in the world. At the same time, it is depriving the
population of life's basic needs by cutting off water,
electricity, fuel, medical and food supplies, as well as
by blocking access to humanitarian assistance and
preventing international humanitarian organizations
from carrying out their work. That includes such
organizations as the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which

has called for emergency relief because Israel has
stopped providing the Gaza Strip with fuel. All of that
means that there is a huge imbalance in the Security
Council's and the international community's response
as regards the prevailing tragic situation in Gaza.

Moreover, it cannot be denied that the occupying
Power is continuing its attacks against civilians in the
occupied Arab territories undeterred. That is due to the
hesitation on the part of the international community to
condemn Israel's siege against the Gaza Strip, as well
as its failure to call for an immediate halt to those
policies and illegal practices. Even worse is the fact
that, despite the statements we have heard in the
Council, some States have attempted to justify such
illegal acts by Israel and have prevented the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, from adopting measures to halt such
violations.

We would like to point out that the Charter of the
United Nations does not grant States the right to violate
the rights of civilians, including those living under the
yoke of occupation, under the pretext of self-defence.
The Charter establishes specific and clear
responsibilities for occupying Powers under both
international and international humanitarian law as
regards humanitarian issues and other issues relating to
peoples under occupation. The international
community, including the Security Council, should
assume its clear obligations in that regard. We must
take immediate tangible steps to implement
international law free from double standards and in a
way that maintains the Council's credibility in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The situation of the Syrian population living in
the occupied Golan is not much different from that of
the Palestinian people. The Israeli occupying Power is
continuing its policy of forced displacement and
expulsion, as well as the seizure of the private property
of Syrian citizens in the Golan. Israel is also
continuing to confiscate land and to expand settlements
in occupied Syrian Golan. Israel's new settlements
council in the Golan won the approval of the
occupying Power to begin to construct a new tourist
resort on 40 dunums of land near the Israeli settlement
of "In Am", which was established in Syria's Wadi
Nakhil Al-Tiba region. The settlements council, in
cooperation with the extremist religious settlement of
Unitan, has devised a plan to attract thousands of
settlers in order to increase their numbers in the Syrian
Golan to over 50,000.

Israel is continuing its policy of suppressing
Syrian civilians in the occupied Syrian Golan, illegally
imprisoning and detaining them in conditions that
threaten their lives. I should like to refer to the cases of
Syrian citizens held as prisoners of war, namely, Bishr
Al-Maqt and Sitan Al-Wali, the latter having had a
nephrectomy, which is a surgical procedure to remove
a kidney that is due to a tumour. My Government has
called upon the Secretary-General, the Red Cross and
other concerned international parties to intervene to
save their lives. I would like to remind the Council, in
this context, that Syrian prisoner of war Hael Abu Zayd
had suffered from similar symptoms, which led to his
death from cancer in 2005.

Therefore, we once again call upon the United
Nations and the Security Council to pressure Israel to
release those prisoners of war without delay, including
Syrian journalist Atta Farhat, who was detained by
Israel because of his nationalist activities as a
journalist.

In the same context, Israel persists in its policies
that aim to cut all forms of contact and
communications between members of Syrian families
separated by the occupation. In addition, on 15 April
2008, Israeli authorities confiscated the Syrian
identification cards that had been given to Damascus
University students from the occupied Syrian Golan
during their trips home to their towns and Villages.
Syria calls upon the Council, with a View to giving
credibility to this discussion, to pressure Israel to
permit the immediate resumption of Visits by Syrian
citizens living in the occupied Syrian Golan to Syria
proper, through the Quneitra crossing point. Since
Israel is an occupying Power and a party to the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, it is incumbent on it
to implement the Convention's articles 25, 26, 30 and
142, as well as article 74 of the first Additional
Protocol to it, in order to allow and facilitate family
visits of persons in the occupied territories.

My country has sent letters in this regard to the
Secretary-General and the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, and to
international governmental and non-governmental
organizations to intervene to help to solve the problem
of permitting Syrian citizens from the occupied Syrian

Golan to visit their families. We are full of hope that
those parties will translate the positions that we have
heard in this discussion into facts on the ground,
particularly the positions with a firm basis in
international law.

Speaking of international law, the Israeli
occupation of the Golan is a two-fold occupation
giving rise to two crimes because Israel not only
occupied the Syrian Golan in 1967, but also issued a
provocative and unjust decision to annex it. That
decision was unanimously rejected by the Security
Council in its resolution 497 (1981), which decided
that Israel's annexation decision was null and void and
that called upon Israel to rescind it forthwith.

Finally, despite the great importance that the
Syrian Arab Republic attaches to the Council's
consideration of the issue of civilians in armed
conflicts, I call on the Council to address the issue of
civilians suffering under the yoke of foreign
occupation in Palestine and the Golan with equal
seriousness and momentum, and in an objective and
impartial manner, free from the use of double
standards. We also call on the Council to undertake an
in-depth study of the reason for the suffering of those
civilians, namely the Israeli occupation.

