Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, Nepal also joins
others to condemn the terrorist attack in Burkina Faso
and offer our deep condolences to the Government, the
people and the families.

I would like to thank the Russian presidency for
convening this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping and for inviting Nepal to participate.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.

United Nations peace operations do not have the
luxury to fail. They must succeed to uphold hopes of
millions of people devastated by conflicts around the
world. They must succeed to maintain international
peace and security. And they must succeed to promote
a peaceful environment in which the Sustainable
Development Goals can be achieved, leaving no one
behind. Current peace operations are facing a raft of
challenges. Late payment and withholding of assessed
contributions have resulted in a lack of corresponding
resources. That has turned into deferred reimbursement
to the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/ PCCs). Consequently, peacekeepers have to compromise
on their performance in the conflict theatre.
Member States and the Secretariat both should
work in tandem for better delivery on the ground. We
appreciate the efforts that the Secretariat has been
making in that direction. Two years ago, the Council
adopted resolution 2378 (2017), a landmark resolution
on peacekeeping. Nepal was one of the co-sponsors.
As one of the major TCCs/PCCs, Nepal attaches great
importance to the issues of United Nations peace
operations. Nepal has always responded positively to
the calls of the United Nations, even at the shortest
notice, without any national caveat. Our peacekeepers
are deployed even in fragile political situations and
environments with an acute security threat. Based
on experience as a major TCC/PCC, let me submit
the following points on effective and efficient United
Nations peace operations.

First, support for an inclusive political process
should be at the forefront of designing peacekeeping
missions. Peace operations should complement and
support the domestic capacity of State institutions of
conflict-affected countries.

Second, thorough and broad analysis of conflicts and
their root causes should guide the mandate formulation
process. Moreover, penholders should consult with
prospective TCCs/PCCs before finalizing mandates.

Third, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
should be integrated into peace operations, with a
sharper focus on poverty alleviation and inclusive
socioeconomic development.

Fourth, the mandates should be supported
by adequate and predictable resources for their
effective implementation.

Fifth, mission leadership should be empowered and
made accountable for whole-of-mission performance.

Sixth, mission-specific performance indicators
should be set based on mandates and reality on the
ground. However, the effectiveness of peace operations
should be assessed according to the political and tactical
situations on the ground.

Seventh, the protection of civilians and zero-
tolerance towards sexual exploitation and abuse must
be ensured. And the participation of women, youth and
community leaders must be promoted in peacebuilding
processes, as it helps in winning the trust and confidence
of the people.

With that, I wish to conclude by expressing
Nepal's full support to reforming United Nations peace
operations with the aim of succeeding of building
sustained peace and rejuvenating the hopes of millions
of people afflicted by conflict around the world.

