Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your friendly country on presiding over the Security
Council. We thank you for convening this meeting
and Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing
this morning.

We also take this opportunity to congratulate the
brotherly and friendly countries that have joined the
Security Council.

The Middle East region is a source of many grave
and complicated threats to international peace and
security that should be considered by the Security
Council, including ongoing decades-long threats and
emerging threats. All those challenges require us
to intensify cooperation among the countries of the
region in particular, and the international community
in general, so as to resolve the crises and its causes, and
address their ramifications in a sustained manner.

The state of Qatar is confident that resolving
the Palestinian question and achieving peace will be
beneficial to the Palestinians and the Israelis alike, and
that the region and even the world will bear its fruits.
The state of Qatar reiterates its support for all efforts
to resume the peace process in order to reach a just,
comprehensive and sustainable solution based on two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace
and security, and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in line with Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Respect for the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
is especially important in the context of the peace
process, in line with Security Council resolutions and
all initiatives to achieve peace in the Middle East. We
stress the importance of achieving peace, and we must
therefore deal with Al-Quds as an integral element of
reaching a comprehensive and final settlement of the
Middle East questions, in accordance with resolutions
of international legitimacy, including resolution 478
(1980) and General Assembly resolution 72/240, on
the status of Al-Quds, which underscored Al-Quds
as a final-status issue that must be resolved through
negotiations among the parties, and non-recognition of
any measure or action aimed at changing the character,
legal status or demographic configuration of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

The State of Qatar stresses yet again that the
ongoing Syrian crisis undermines regional and
international security. Its humanitarian consequences
are unprecedented and require us to step up our efforts
to reach a political solution based on the 2012 Geneva
communique' (S/2012/522, annex) and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. That will meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to security
and stability and maintain Syria's national unity. We
also stress the need to commit to international law,
especially international humanitarian law, and protect
civilians. We support efforts to eradicate terrorism in
Syria, end violence and escalation, and stabilize the
situation in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. We will continue to work
with international partners to provide humanitarian
support to our Syrian brethren.

The continued blockade of and illegal unilateral
measures taken against the State of Qatar have had
grave repercussions on regional and international
peace and security, exacerbate instability in the region,
and reflect negatively on the international campaign
to combat terrorism. Recently, instead of receiving a
response to the efforts of brotherly and friendly nations
to reach a settlement satisfactory to all parties through
dialogue based on the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, we have seen an escalation and
a series of provocations against the State of Qatar,
in violation of the provisions of the Charter and
international law.

Pursuant to the commitments of the State of Qatar
under international law and as a Member of the United
Nations, we have adhered to the procedures set out in
the Charter with respect to this matter and have kept
the United Nations Secretariat and the Security Council
abreast of this issue, in line with Article 35 of the
Charter. While we stress the importance of dialogue
in settling disputes and maintaining good-neighbourly
relations, we categorically reject any violation of our
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and insist on our
legitimate right, under international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, to defend our sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national security. The State of
Qatar renews its commitment to the valued mediation
of His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait,
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and we
appreciate the support of all countries for this initiative
to resolve the crisis.

In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue to
making a positive contribution to efforts to achieve
peace in the Middle East and the objectives of the
Security Council pertaining to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
