The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General very much for her

remarks and for her contribution.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is gravely concerned
at continued attacks against United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel,
which are in violation of international law
including international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999 and reaffirms
the statements of its President of 31 March 1993,
on the safety of United Nations forces and

 

personnel deployed in conditions of strife (S/25493);
of 12 March 1997, on condemnation of attacks on
United Nations personnel (S/PRST/ 1997/ 13); of
19 June 1997, on the use of force against refugees
and other civilians in conflict situations
(S/PRST/1997/34); and of 29 September 1998, on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations (S/PRST/ 1998/30).
The Council also recalls General Assembly
resolution 54/192, on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel.

"The Security Council also recalls the report
of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations, and its addendum on the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel (A/54/154 and Add.l), and looks forward to the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 54/ 192 of
17 December 1999, to be submitted to the General
Assembly in May 2000, which should contain a
detailed analysis and recommendations addressing
the scope of legal protection under the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel of 1994.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
the entry into force of the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
recognizes its importance for addressing the security
of such personnel and recalls the relevant principles
contained therein. The Council encourages all States
to become party to, and respect fully their obligations
under, the relevant instruments, including the 1994
Convention referred to above.

"The Security Council recalls that, on a
number of occasions, it has condemned attacks and
the use of force against United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel. It
strongly deplores the fact that incidents of violence
have continued, leading to a rising toll of casualties
among United Nations, associated and humanitarian
personnel. The Council strongly condemns the acts
of murder and various forms of physical and
psychological violence, including abduction, hostage-
taking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and
detention to which such personnel have been
subjected, as well as acts of destruction and looting
of their property, all of which are unacceptable.
"The Security Council also recalls that the

primary responsibility for the security and
protection of United Nations and associated
personnel, and humanitarian personnel, lies with
the host State. The Council urges States and non-
State parties to respect fully the status of United
Nations and associated personnel, and to take all
appropriate steps, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the rules of international law, to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel,
and underlines the importance of unhindered access
to populations in need.

"The Security Council urges States to fulfil

their responsibility to act promptly and effectively
in their domestic legal systems to bring to justice
all those responsible for attacks and other acts of
violence against such personnel, and to enact
effective national legislation as required for that

purpose.

"The Security Council will continue to stress

in its resolutions the imperative for humanitarian
assistance missions and personnel to have safe and
unimpeded access to civilian populations and, in
this context, is prepared to consider taking all
appropriate measures at its disposal to ensure the
safety and security of such personnel.

"The Security Council welcomes the

inclusion as a war crime in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, of attacks
intentionally directed against personnel involved in
a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission
as long as they are entitled to the protection given
to civilians under the international law of armed
conflict, and notes the role that the Court could
play in bringing to justice those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council expresses the view
that improving the security of United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel,
may require, inter alia, the development and
strengthening of all aspects of the current safety
and security regime in place, as well as the
adoption of effective action to address the impunity
of those who commit crimes against such
personnel.

 

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of issuing clear, appropriate and feasible
mandates for peacekeeping operations, to ensure that
they are applied in a timely, efficient and objective
manner, and of ensuring that all new and ongoing
United Nations field operations include appropriate
modalities for the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel, and humanitarian
personnel. The Council underscores that United
Nations personnel have the right to act in self-
defence.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to complete the process of
conducting a general and comprehensive review of
security in peacekeeping operations, with a view to
elaborating and undertaking further specific and
practical measures to increase the safety and security
of United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel.

"The Security Council considers it important
that a comprehensive security plan be developed for
every peacekeeping and humanitarian operation and
that, during early elaboration and implementation of
that plan, Member States and the Secretariat
cooperate fully in order to ensure, inter alia, an open
and immediate exchange of information on security
issues.

"The Security Council, bearing in mind the
need to reinforce the responsibility of the host State
for the physical security of United Nations and
associated personnel, also underlines the
importance of including in each status-of-forces
agreement and status-of-missions agreement
specific and practical measures based on the
provisions of the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel of 1994.

"The Security Council recalls the obligations
of all United Nations personnel and associated
personnel, and humanitarian personnel, to observe
and respect the national laws of the host State in
accordance with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
"The Security Council believes it is essential
to continue to strengthen security arrangements, to
improve their management, and to allocate
adequate resources to the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/4.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
