Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I am speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. We congratulate the
United Kingdom upon its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month, and we thank Syria for
its work last month.

The Non-Aligned Movement had noted some
encouraging developments in the peace process, with
the beginning of the implementation of the road map.
However, we are now deeply concerned by the recent
turn of events. In the past month we have seen a sharp
increase in violence, with repeated Israeli incursions
into Palestinian cities; the wilful killing of Palestinian
civilians, including extrajudicial executions; excessive
and indiscriminate use of force; and the deadly suicide
bombings against Israelis. We are indeed dismayed that
both innocent Palestinian and Israeli civilians have
been killed. Regrettably, many more will die if the
spiral of violence worsens. The Movement condemns
such acts of violence and deeply regrets the loss of
innocent lives on both sides of the conflict. Peace will
recede further towards the horizon if the current cycle
of violence is allowed to escalate.

The Non-Aligned Movement is committed to a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The Movement firmly supports the two-State solution,
based on the 1967 line. We believe that peace in the
Middle East can be achieved only through the
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination and
national independence and the exercise of sovereignty
in their State, Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

We call on Israel to come to its senses and accept
the two-State solution, as envisaged by Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002) and promoted by the
road map. Israel's acceptance of and commitment to
the State of Palestine is the only way to ensure Israel's
security. Continued Israeli occupation and harsh
military action cannot be a viable solution.

In this regard, we continue to call for the revival
of the road map and further intensive efforts by the
Quartet and the parties concerned. We welcome the
meeting of the Quartet scheduled to take place in New
York next week.
The recent decision of the Israeli Security
Cabinet to expel President Yasser Arafat, a
democratically elected leader of Palestine, is yet again
a prime example of Israel's wilful attempts to
intimidate and dominate the Palestinian people, its
disregard for international opinion and its contempt for
international law. We are shocked at the extent of
Israel's intentions, as clearly reflected by the statement
of the Deputy Prime Minister of Israel that killing
President Arafat was definitely an option. We wish to
remind the Council that such a measure by Israel would
be a clear violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
For Israel to even consider such a measure at this
critical stage in the peace process is more than
irresponsible. This provocative decision will only
worsen the situation and spark a greater cycle of
violence. It will serve only to undermine any progress
in the fragile peace process. The international
community and the Security Council must not be
paralysed in the face of this Israeli decision. The
Council must prevent the execution of the threat
against President Arafat and uphold the rule of law.

The problem of Israel's continued settlement
policies and its construction of the separation wall in
Gaza cannot be ignored either. Israel's settler
colonialism activities and having a grave impact on the
Palestinian people. They remain a major impediment to
progress in the peace process and severely undermine
the creation of a viable contiguous Palestinian State.
We call on the Security Council to act decisively with a
view to the destruction of the wall and to preventing its
completion. Israel must be pressured to cease the
construction of the wall. As envisaged by the road map,
Israel must, indeed, dismantle settlement outposts and
freeze all settlement activity.

The humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
population living under Israeli occupation is cause for
grave concern. The Non-Aligned Movement calls on
Israel to cease this humiliation of the Palestinian
people. If Israel is serious in wanting a just and lasting
solution to the conflict, it must know that the
Palestinian people need to see real and tangible
benefits in their lives for peace to be achieved. The
solution for both sides is to return to the negotiating
table, not increasing violence and oppression.

We urge the Security Council to take a clear and
definite position today by adopting a resolution, which
should send a strong message from the Council against
Israel's decision to remove President Arafat.

