Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her twenty-eighth report and for her briefing, as well as
for the progress made regarding the situation in Darfur.

On behalf of France, I would like to thank the
Prosecutor and her teams for the indispensable work
they are carrying out on behalf of the victims awaiting
recognition and reparations; for the witnesses who truly
believe in international justice; and for the Security
Council, which referred the situation of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court by resolution 1593 (2005)
13 years ago. We are starkly aware of the difficulty of
this task.

The responsibility of the Council is the same as it
was 13 years ago. It must take resolute action to fight
against impunity in the Sudan and to put an end to the
grave crimes committed in Darfur. This is critical to the
achievement of any long-term stabilization in Darfur
and in the Sudan. The International Criminal Court is
essential in that regard.

As others have already said, the overall improvement
in the security situation creates opportunities for
stabilization, which is encouraging. However, there are
still many challenges to address, particularly regarding
the protection of civilians. That is particularly the
case in Jebel Marra, where clashes continue with
consequences in the form of attacks on civilians,
displaced populations and human rights violations. We
are worried about sexual and gender-based violence,
which victimizes women and girls in particular and
does so with complete impunity. We are also concerned
about the plight of the displaced populations. Lasting
solutions must be found for the 2 million displaced
people in Darfur.

It is imperative that the Sudanese authorities and
armed groups make progress in the peace process.
Beyond the cessation of hostilities, it is important to
address the root causes of the conflict, including the
issues of landownership, access to natural resources
and, of course, the restoration of the rule of law. The
ability to effectively combat impunity and strengthen
legal institutions and respect for human rights are
inextricably linked to this.

In all these areas, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) must play its
full role. It is particularly essential to ensure that it has
access to the areas where civilians are most vulnerable.
Humanitarian access, which must be guaranteed, is
essential in Jebel Marra and elsewhere. It will also be
important to strengthen the country team by ensuring
that it is adequately equipped, funded and deployed
with a view to UNAMID's eventual withdrawal. As of
now, both UNAMID and the United Nations country
team must be able to monitor the situation of human
rights, internally displaced persons and sexual Violence
closely, including in remote areas.

France would like to once again remind the Council
of States' obligation to cooperate with the Court,
in accordance with the Council's resolutions. That
obligation is primarily incumbent on the Sudan, which
must cooperate with the Court in executing arrest
warrants against its nationals for acts committed on
its territory, as required by resolution 1593 (2005). We
must respond to the Court's legitimate requests so that it
is able to fully carry out its mandate. France will not let
refusals to cooperate be taken lightly, especially when
they come from States parties to the Rome Statute. In
that respect, we were pleased that in her most recent
report the Prosecutor referred to the discussions in our
Arria Formula meeting of 6 July, as well as to France's
proposal that States that the Court has found to be in
breach of their obligation to cooperate with the Court
be asked to explain themselves to the Council. We
reiterate our proposal.

