Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to acknowledge your country's
initiative in convening this open debate on the topic
"Post-conflict peacebuilding: comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy to prevent the recurrence of
conflict".

I contribute to the discussions as the
representative of a country emerging from conflict and
as a current recipient State under a Pacific
peacebuilding model, led by Australia and strongly
supported by New Zealand, together with the
participation of the 14 other Pacific small island
developing States. My country receives assistance

under the regional arrangement known as the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
The six-year old regional Mission is composed of
military, police and civilian personnel. The relationship
and partnership have generated a tsunami of valuable
lessons that I hope will garner the interest of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and this Council.

The Pacific model is provided for under Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter under the
subheading "Regional arrangements". It is my wish
and hope that we can draw on other peacebuilding
experiences and take a fresh look at other models that
will enrich today's debate.

I am mindful that our United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission has a narrow agenda that
focuses only on four countries. The question remains:
What happens to other countries emerging from
conflict? Who deals with them, if not the PBC?

In sharing my country's experience, let me give
the Council some brief information on my country.
Solomon Islands has a population of more than half a
million people, speaking some 87 different languages.
More than 85 per cent of the population is located in
the rural areas. Back in late 1998, ethnic tension
erupted, leading to a two-year conflict between two
ethnic groups that brought the country to its knees and
saw law and order take an ugly turn. RAMSI entered
the country in 2003 at the invitation of the Government
of Solomon Islands, and today continues to play a
supporting role in rebuilding the country.

For many countries ravaged by wars,
peacebuilding is about security, development and
nation-building. Security is a priority in all early
phases of peacemaking, and remains so within a
changing environment. Sufficient investment must be
made within the development sector if true peace is to
be attained. This means that the PBC must understand
the environment in which it is operating, be flexible in
its approach in order to adapt to the changing
environment and, most important, anticipate change in
any form of crisis, be it climate change, energy, food or
financial. Any of these crises will shock national
systems and exacerbate the problems therein.

Security, human rights and the rule of law
naturally follow the lead of development. The
argument is that we cannot guarantee security or
human rights to populations until they are provided
with economic opportunities and become active
participants in the economy; otherwise, any peace gain
will remain fragile and unpredictable.

On security sector reform, if any peacebuilding
mechanism is to succeed, it is important that
confidence in the State institutions be restored. This
means allowing the State to lead in all initiatives and
providing it with the necessary tools and equipment.
The United Nations can build confidence in State
institutions by providing space for locally trained
police forces to participate in the Organization's
missions. This would be tantamount to a
pronouncement and announcement by the international
community that public trust in new State security
institutions has been restored.

On Governance, more attention also must be paid
to provincial and community governance structures. In
many peacebuilding initiatives, the focus remains on
State institutions within the capital. The paucity of
investment in the other arms of Government outside
capitals have hampered States in their efforts to carry
out their core functions on behalf of their scattered
populations.

Many of the governance systems adopted by
developing countries do not always recognize
traditional and customary laws in a specific way. At
times, modern legislation clashes with traditional
mechanisms. These are issues that should not be
allowed to fester and grow.

One area I wish to bring to the Council's
attention, and that is not covered in the concept paper
before the Council (S/2010/l67), is that of partnership
between the PBC and the receiving State and the
management of that relationship. Solomon Islands
enjoys stability under the RAMSI partnership.
However, sporadic flare-ups on the law and order front
have allowed Solomon Islands and RAMSI to fine-tune
their cooperation in containing emerging national
security problems. The partnership framework,
previously referred to by New Zealand, provides for
dynamic and robust cooperation between the two
parties.

There must be a smart partnership between the
PBC and the receiving State - a partnership that is
about increasing the State's system-wide capacity with
skills and support to improve its delivery of services to
its populations; that addresses the underlying causes of
conflict; and that avoids ad hoc coordination assistance
outside the Government machinery and an unbalanced
assistance that further undermines the State, making
the support unsustainable in the long run and turning
State actors into spectators.

My final point concerns international efforts. Any
country emerging from conflict must be able to create
funds from within the State. In the Solomon Islands,
this can be done with investment in selected areas,
such as energy, which accounts for a third of its
national budget, and agriculture, mainly in rice. This
will free up millions of dollars in allowing the country
to ensure that much of its peacebuilding programme is
sustainable.

Let me close, Sir, by once again thanking you for
this opportunity. I also take this opportunity to thank
my Pacific colleagues - in particular Australia, New
Zealand and my colleagues from the Pacific small
island developing States - for their support to the
Solomon Islands via the Regional Assistance Mission.

