Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan endorses the
statement that will be made later by Malaysia on behalf
of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement.

There is a universal desire to prevent the horrors
that would result from the use of chemical, biological
or nuclear weapons. Historically, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) has occurred
when States have sought to acquire those weapons to
address perceived threats to their national security. But
non-State actors have often, not only in the recent past,
been the instruments of proliferation by States seeking
WMD. Recently, Pakistan detected and dismantled
such a proliferation network involving our nationals
and those of a number of other countries.

The fear that non-State actors themselves may
acquire and use weapons of mass destruction is a recent
phenomenon. That danger is present, but it must be
viewed in perspective. Terrorist organizations and non-
State actors could feasibly acquire chemical and
biological weapon capabilities. The acquisition and use
of nuclear weapons by non-State actors is much more
difficult and much less likely. I think the example of
Osama bin Laden underlines not only that danger but
also the fact that WMD are difficult for terrorist
organizations to acquire. That is especially true with
respect to nuclear weapons. The existing treaty regimes
can address most of the threats that have been raised in
the context of the proliferation of WMD.

Pakistan is a nuclear-weapon State. We have
established effective command and control and
physical security of our nuclear assets, sites and
materials. We are improving our export controls. We
can thus readily fulfil the actions that are desired in
operative paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the draft resolution.

But seen from a historical, legal and political
perspective, the draft resolution initiated by some
permanent members of the Security Council and
negotiated for five months by the five permanent
members, raises a number of doubts, questions and
concerns.
Pakistan believes that the first question is whether
the Security Council has the right to assume the role of
prescribing legislative action by Member States. The
existing treaties, the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT),
already prescribe most of the legislation that would
cover proliferation by both State and non-State actors.
These regimes can be improved, if and where
necessary, through negotiations among sovereign and
equal States. In particular, it is necessary to implement
the obligation imposed by the CWC regarding the
destruction of all chemical weapon stocks, and
biological weapons must be addressed through the
adoption of the verification protocol, which was
negotiated for eight years and summarily rejected.

The Security Council, where five States, which
retain nuclear weapons, also possess the right veto any
action, is not the most appropriate body to be entrusted
with the authority for oversight over non-proliferation
or nuclear disarmament.

Secondly, there is a discrepancy between the
professed objective of the draft resolution and its
provisions. Although the resolution is designed to
address proliferation by non-State actors, it seeks to
impose obligations on States. There are grave
implications to this effort by the Security Council to
impose obligations on States, which their Governments
and sovereign legislatures have not freely accepted,
especially when some of these obligations could
impinge on matters relating to their national security
and to their right of self-defence.

Thirdly, there is no justification for the adoption
of this resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter. The
threat of WMD proliferation by non-State actors may
be real, but it is not imminent. It is not a threat to peace
within the meaning of Article 39 of the United Nations
Charter. A legitimate fear arises that when one sees the
draft resolution under Chapter VII, with language such
as that used - "to combat by all means" - an
authorization is being sought which could justify
coercive actions envisaged in Articles 41 and 42 of the
Charter, including the use of force.

Fourthly, this fear is exacerbated by the open-
ended nature of the draft resolution. It provides for
further decisions, in operative paragraph 10. Thus the
scope of the draft resolution could be enlarged beyond
non-State actors. Such further decisions, if taken under
Chapter VII, could authorize coercive measures against
State and non-State actors, beyond national
jurisdiction.

Fifthly, the creation of a Security Council
committee, in operative paragraph 9, is unnecessary. Its
functions are unclear and unspecified. It could be
utilized in the future to replace the role of existing
treaty regimes. Nor can the "non-papers" informally
circulated by some States be ignored, which imply that
the committee could be used to harass countries, and
even demand explanations regarding "why they are not
parties to the NPT".

Sixthly, the definitions provided in the footnote
of the draft resolution are entirely unclear. Are
missiles, rockets and unmanned aerial vehicles the only
means for the delivery of WMD? Who will judge
whether or not they are designed for this purpose?
What is meant by the term "related materials"? The list
prepared by closed regimes such as the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), the Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG) or the Australia Group cannot
automatically be accepted by or imposed upon States
that are not parties to these regimes.

In the informal consultations held on the draft
resolution, the sponsors had publicly assured that the
scope of the draft resolution is restricted to stopping
proliferation by non-State actors - and that is why is
does not encompass disarmament; that no enforcement
action is envisaged - much less the use of force; that
implementation will be done by States themselves,
through national measures; that the committee will
merely collate and submit the reports from Member
States and is being set up for a temporary period; and
that the draft resolution does not preclude the
negotiation of treaties or agreements to address the
issue of proliferation by non-State actors. However, in
the negotiations that have been held so far, the
sponsors have been reluctant to reflect most of these
assurances in the text of the draft resolution. Recent

remarks appear to have retracted some of these
assurances.

Pakistan hopes that this debate will contribute to
demonstrating the wide spectrum of concerns and
doubts that relate to the draft resolution and that it will
hopefully convince the sponsors to be more responsive
to these concerns. We continue to hope that the Council
will be able, through painstaking consultations and
negotiations, to adopt this draft resolution by
consensus.

