Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to express my delegation's satisfaction at
seeing on the Security Council's agenda the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Allow me to
welcome the presence here today of the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). We
wish to pay tribute to him for the efforts made by his
institution in the protection of civilians.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict remains
a cause of great concern to the international community.
The increasing number of conflicts and the systematic
recourse to violence against the civilian population, in
violation of the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law, attacks against United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
workers are a serious threat to international peace and
security. We must adopt a concerted approach consonant
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

In his report of September 1999, the Secretary-
General made a striking analysis of the situation and
formulated a number of recommendations that we fully
share and support. At this point, my delegation would like
to make just a few concise observations.
First, concerning the protection of civilians,
deliberate acts of violence against civilians in times of
conflict require greater involvement of United Nations
bodies, all Member States, civil society, non-
governmental organizations working in the field and
above all the State on whose territory the conflict is
taking place so that the acknowledged principles of
respect for humanitarian law will produce the necessary
positive results.

In addition to physical protection, civilians require
greater legal protection, and this implies wider accession
to the various instruments relating to international

 

humanitarian law, the incorporation of these instruments
into domestic law and above all their implementation,
which will contribute to the creation of a more solid basis
for the legal protection of civilians. This legal framework
would be relevant to the new guidelines on protecting
vulnerable groups, women and children, refugees, displaced
persons, humanitarian personnel and the staff of
peacekeeping missions.

Secondly, sanctions, as the coercive instrument of the
international community, are also a source of serious
concern because of their humanitarian repercussions. We
believe that the imposition of sanctions must from now on
take into consideration human security, and that is why we
are in favour of targeted sanctions. We must make
sanctions more humane, as it is not our duty to create
conditions of humanitarian catastrophe through excessive
rigidity.

Thirdly, concerning the proliferation of light weapons
and small arms, the massive and uncontrolled use of these
arms remains a serious threat to human security. They are
easy to acquire and use, and they have become a symbol of
the suffering of civilian populations. This is why my
delegation would like to emphasize the importance of
measures to stem the flow of illicit weapons, and
particularly small arms and anti-personnel landmines. The
West African subregion has taken some useful initiatives in
that area, including a resolution on small arms and a
moratorium on the manufacture, import and export of light
weapons.

The international community, hitherto helpless in
terms of ensuring that embargoes are respected and
preventing illegal arms transfers to areas of conflict, must
react with greater cooperation and coordination in the
overall effort to stem the proliferation of light weapons and
attenuate their devastating impact. The United Nations
conference on small arms in 2001 will undoubtedly be the
beginning of a solution in this area.

Fourthly, in connection with peacekeeping, the
multitude and type of conflicts and their disastrous impact
on civilians call for the establishment of multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. This is why we believe that
peacekeeping operations must be endowed with clear
mandates in all areas, including better monitoring of
refugee camps. This is why we are glad to see the
protection of civilians, and particularly children, being
covered in peacekeeping mandates. My delegation would
like to emphasize once again the need for concerted and
coordinated action between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in this field in order to
bring about the desired degree of confidence.

We support the implementation of the Secretary-
General's recommendations he highlighted in his
statement this morning, particularly the creation of a rapid
intervention force and preventive missions.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict must go
beyond the merely physical and legal protection
advocated in the report. It must include the economic,
social and cultural protection of populations, because
there is no longer any doubt about the close linkage
between peace and economic security. Human security
can flourish only in that context.

Finally, we wish to support the important draft
resolution that we are about to adopt and restate my
country's firm commitment to promoting the culture of
peace and opposing the culture of impunity.

