Ihave the honour to deliver this statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is my intention this morning to provide an overview of the work of the Committee since my predecessor, Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of Kuwait, briefed the Council on 24 July 2019 (see S/PV.8584). Since Ambassador Alotaibi's briefing, the Committee has held a total of four meetings, three in 2019 and one in 2020. Due to the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Committee has also met informally via video- teleconference (VTC) on five occasions in 2020. In 2019, during the briefing to regional States held on 9 August, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts provided an overview of the main findings and recommendations of the Group's final report (S/2019/469), following which a number of regional States shared their views in connection with the report. During the informal consultations held on 27 August, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts briefed Committee members on the Group's workplan in pursuance of its new mandate, as set forth in resolution 2478 (2019). During the informal consultations held on 2 December, the Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts regarding the Group's midterm report (S/2019/974), and discussed the findings and recommendations contained therein. In 2019, the Chair of the Committee also hosted an informal informal with the Senior Official of the Follow- on Mechanism for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Robert Petit, who, on 6 October, provided an update to members of the Committee at the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations. On 1 January 2020, I assumed the chairmanship of the Committee. During the briefing to Member States held on 21 February, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts provided an overview of the main findings and recommendations of the Group's midterm report, document S/2019/974, following which a number of regional States shared their views in connection with the report. Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York in March 2020, the Committee had to adjust its working methods, as in-person meetings could not be convened. On 22 May, the Committee held its first informal informal remotely, via VTC, during which the Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts regarding the Group's final report (S/2020/482), and discussed the findings and recommendations contained therein. During the same meeting, the Committee heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, on the situation of children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 12 June, the Committee held, via VTC, a joint informal informal with the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic to hear a briefing by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on the situation in both countries. During the informal informal held with regional States via VTC on 10 July, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts provided an overview of the main findings and recommendations of the Group's final report, following which a number of regional States shared their views in connection with the report. Finally, during the informal informal held via VTC on 4 September, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts briefed Committee members on the Group's workplan in pursuance of its new mandate set forth in resolution 2528 (2020). The Committee also held, via VTC, an informal informal on 27 May with the Senior Official of the Follow-on Mechanism for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Robert Petit. I would like to reiterate that the Committee continues to support Mr. Petit and his team of technical experts as they provide assistance to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its investigations into the March 2017 murders of two former members of the Group of Experts, Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp. As members are aware, in paragraph 7 of its resolution 2478 (2019) the Council requested the Group of Experts "to circulate to the Committee every twelve months proposed updates to the existing information on the DRC Sanctions List" On 10 August 2020, a number of proposed updates to the sanctions list submitted by the Group of Experts were circulated in the Committee. On 19 August, the Committee agreed to updates regarding two individuals and three entities, and is awaiting further responses from Member States in connection with requests sent by the Group of Experts regarding the status of certain listed individuals, prior to updating the list entries of these individuals. On 6 February 2020, the Committee added Seka Baluku to the list of individuals and entities subject to measures reaffirmed by paragraph 2 of resolution 2360 (2017).
