Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Argentina welcomes the fact that the
situation in Tajikistan is being addressed in the form of a
briefing open to interested delegations. We should also
like to express our gratitude for the update provided by
the Secretariat, in the person of Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi, and for the interim report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2000/214.

We should like to express particular appreciation for
the important work carried out by the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) since its
creation in 1994. It is worth noting that, after years of

 

fighting, the transition period provided for in the General
Agreement has been completed, and that the United
Nations, in the form of UNMOT, has played an essential
role in this process.

The international community has just witnessed the
holding of the first multi-party elections in the history of
Tajikistan. It is true that those elections were far from
exemplary in terms of transparency and legitimacy.
However, if this electoral event is viewed in the context of
the history of Tajikistan, which has been marked by
struggle, grave crises, bans on opposition parties and the
absence of minimal political guarantees, the recent
parliamentary elections can be interpreted only as an
encouraging milestone in that country's path towards
democracy.

Argentina believes that the fundamental objective of
turning Tajikistan towards national reconciliation and
democratization has been achieved, although it also agrees
with the Secretary-General's assessment, expressed in
paragraph 17 of his interim report, that much remains to be
done. For this reason, we share his concern that there are
still too many men under arms, and we also hope that the
job creation projects for former combatants will receive the
requisite international financing.

We endorse the Secretary-General's proposal that, at
the end of its mandate on 15 May, UNMOT be replaced by
a small office for post-conflict peace-building purposes. We
believe that in that way the United Nations presence in
Tajikistan will be assured during this new stage of
democracy-building.

In conclusion, I should like to say that we, too,
support the draft presidential statement proposed by Russia,
which has been circulated to the members of the Council.

