Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): 1 would like to
commend the Peruvian presidency for convening today's
open debate on youth, peace and security. Young people
currently represent a majority of the populations in
countries affected by conflict. As the largest generation
ever, one-fourth of the world's population, the efforts
of young people will be essential if we are to ensure
effective responses to today's complex crises, prevent
conflicts and sustainably prepare their countries for

the future. Resolution 2250 (2015), which the Security
Council adopted unanimously in December 2015,
marked the beginning of a process that will secure a
more relevant role for young people in the maintenance
and promotion of international peace and security. We
have translated it into Portuguese to ensure that the text
is more widely known to relevant stakeholders and the
general public.

As the progress study on youth, peace and security
(see S/2018/86) clearly states, young people are already
seeking ways to prevent violence and consolidate peace
around the world. It is our responsibility to ensure
that they are heard and recognized as true partners for
peace. The study also indicates that for young women
and men, peace and security depend on human rights-
based protections and redress. Portugal fully agrees
with that. Young people can be partners for peace only
if their rights are fully respected, whether political,
civil, social, economic or cultural.

Young people are often more vulnerable to violent
extremism. They are also more prone to being recruited
into extremist groups, partly owing to a sense of
marginalization and social and economic exclusion.
Ultimately, a lack of kinship and belonging leads
to young people's alienation and disfranchisement,
which in turn aggravates their vulnerability. That is
exacerbated in our globalized societies by extremists
and terrorists' growing use of information and
communication technologies to incite, recruit, fund
and plan terrorist acts, disseminating a false narrative
of glory and a sense of empowerment, all of it just a
computer click away.

We must therefore work to ensure that young
people's human rights are fully respected and that
they can be meaningful members of society. It is
also important to ensure that they can participate
meaningfully and inclusively in political life. In that
regard, Portugal fully agrees with the progress study's
recommendations on enhancing the capacity of youth
organizations and recognizing youth leadership. For
those purposes, we believe there is no greater tool
than education. The full realization of the right to an
education, including higher education, is crucial to
achieving those goals and ensuring that young men and
women are part of the solution rather than part of the
problem. That is especially important in crisis situations.
Portugal has been supporting the Global Platform for
Syrian Students, which is an excellent example of
how the international community can work together
to create opportunities for those affected by crisis and
emergencies and ensure a future for their country and
region. I would like to take this opportunity to call on
all partners to support the Global Platform, as well as
the recently launched Rapid Response Mechanism for
Higher Education in Emergencies.

In conclusion, Portugal has always been a staunch
supporter of the youth agenda at the United Nations and
firmly believes that the World Programme of Action
for Youth, established with the adoption by consensus
of General Assembly resolution 50/81, 20 years ago,
continues to offer an adequate response to the serious
challenges faced by young populations, since it
provides Member States with a blueprint for practical
guidelines for national action and international
support. Furthermore, Portugal has continuously and
consistently encouraged the participation of young
delegates in international events related to youth. In our
View, investing in policies and programmes to create
an enabling environment for young people to prosper,
fulfil their potential, enjoy their human rights and
engage as responsible social actors is a prerequisite for a
successful collective strategy against the dissemination
of violent extremism and for the maintenance of peace
and security.

