Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Undoubtedly the Security Council's continued
consideration of the issue of providing protection to
civilians in armed conflict is a reflection of the
recognition by the United Nations that the performance
of the international community in that regard still
needs further commitment, will and diligent collective
work.

The Egyptian delegation would like to single out
certain elements that we believe are important aspects
ofthe issue under consideration today.
First, in the past few years and in a number of
resolutions and presidential statements, the Security
Council has been able to determine the elements and
requirements for dealing with this issue in light of the
provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. However, we find hotbeds of armed
conflict in the world today that give rise to alarming
reports of an increase in violations and crimes against
unarmed civilians, increasing numbers of victims and
displaced persons, acts of destruction and the
plundering of natural resources and cultural artifacts
and heritage. All that reflects the continued inability of
the international community to firmly and effectively
stand against such violations, which are prohibited by
international humanitarian law.

Indications and statistics of civilian victims on
both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides, the number of
houses that have been demolished, the lands that have
been bulldozed in the occupied Palestinian territories
and in many parts of Africa comprise irrefutable proof
of that inability on the part of the international
community.

We therefore believe that the most serious lack
facing the world today is the lack of the collective
international will that is supposed to be demonstrated
by the United Nations in dealing with areas where there
is the most suffering due to armed conflicts and their
consequences for the lives and futures of all types of
civilians.

Secondly, in spite of the importance of
recognizing that there have been important
developments in expanding the mandate of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to cover broader
issues, including protecting civilians in armed conflicts
and securing unhindered access by humanitarian
assistance to them, we must also recognize that the
training and deploying of the personnel in those
operations are always done in accordance with the
rhythm and commitment of each individual situation
and in accordance with a very complex equation based
on elements that can be attributed to intertwined
political, security and economic interests.

In most cases, Security Council intervention to
protect civilians in remote areas or to assist them in
overcoming their particular dilemmas or crises comes
too late or else is not commensurate with the security
and emergency humanitarian assistance needs of the
civilians in those areas. Perhaps the serious
humanitarian situations that we witness daily in the
international media and that are reflected in the reports
of United Nations agencies and bodies - in the
occupied Palestinian territories, Somalia, Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau and other countries - are all examples
of the imbalance in the international community's
Vision of dealing with threats to international peace and
security, on the one hand, and the concept of providing
protection to civilians living under foreign occupation
or in armed conflicts, on the other.

Thirdly, it is necessary to understand that the
concept of providing protection to civilians in armed
conflict should not stop with the end of military
operations. The comprehensive concept of such
protection should extend into post-conflict peace-
building, which should include the humanitarian, social
and development dimensions that are linked to
rehabilitation and reconstruction. The legacy of armed
conflicts in terms of their destruction of the social and
economic infrastructure of their societies represents the
most serious threat to the lives and future of civilians.
Peace, in its security and political dimensions, will
remain fragile and vulnerable if not complemented by
focused and comprehensive development programmes
and plans.

Fourthly, and finally, focusing on providing
protection to civilians in armed conflict should not
compromise the cornerstones of the Charter of the
United Nations, represented by the principles of
political independence and sovereignty of regional
States and their responsibility for their citizens and
their jurisdiction over their own territories. It is
absolutely necessary to balance the right of civilians to
protection with the right of each State to sovereignty.
The international community's treatment of and respect
for one of those rights should not be at the expense of
the other. In that regard, in dealing with the issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, the international
community should be committed to and guided by the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
those of international law.

