The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and Yemen in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
24 August 2007 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2007/514, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Wednesday, 29 August 2007, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Michael
Williams, Special Coordinator for the Peace Process in
the Middle East and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Williams to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Michael Williams. As this is the last
appearance of Mr. Williams in his capacity as Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, I
wish, on behalf of the members, to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Williams for his contributions
to the work of the Council at this time of change on the
ground and important developments in the Middle East
peace process. The knowledge and insight shared by
Mr. Williams have been much appreciated by the
Council members, who wish him well in his new
assignment. I now give the floor to Mr. Williams.


