Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express my sincere thanks to
you, Sir, Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permant
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations,
for your leadership of the Security Council for the
month of August and for this opportunity to address
the Council. I would also like to express my gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for the efforts
that continue to be made since the end the of the latest
round of talks in Kuwait in the ongoing efforts to reach
a definitive peace and end the tragic war launched by
the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias against our people in
September 2014.

We had great hopes that today's briefing would be
held against the backdrop of progress along the path to
peace. We had hoped that the putchists would be aware
of the tragedy of the situation in Yemen and that they
would have agreed to the paper presented by the Special
Envoy as the successful result of ongoing negotiations
of over 100 days between the Government delegation
and the putchists in neighbouring country of Kuwait.
However, the pernicious Houthi and pro-Saleh militias
have continued to wage war, kill innocent victims, expel
civilians and blow up homes and houses of worship.
They have continued to attack areas bordering Saudi
Arabia, unleashing death and fuelling the terrorist
gangs in Iraq through the regional proxy, Hizbullah.
Those gangs took the State hostage back in September
2014. Without any form of legitimacy or legal basis, they
have continued to destroy the homeland through their
sectarian endeavour to gain legitimacy in promoting
pro-Saleh factions and Houthis as representatives of the
Yemeni people - a people who has fully rejected them
and the family fiefdom of Saleh.

The Yemeni Government has unconditionally
renewed its firm commitment to choose the path
of peace in order to end the suffering of the valiant
Yemeni people, who continue to face the consequences
of the unjust war launched by the Houthi and pro-Saleh
militias in all areas of Yemen. The Government believes
that peace is the only way to rid the country of those
criminal gangs and warlords. Since the very beginning,
the Yemeni Government has responded positively
to the efforts made by the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy for Yemen. The Government of Yemen
continues to make the painful and difficult concessions
for peace in the country, whereas the putchists have
remained staunchly opposed to any peaceful solution.
With regard to the people of Yemen's present and future
fate, they have insisted on the status quo and the rule of
gangs and militias.

While we stress the importance of the terms
of reference in resolving the crisis in Yemen, the
initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),
the results of National Dialogue Consultations and
the relevant Security Council resolutions on Yemen,
namely resolution 2216 (2015), the putchists have
insisted on circumventing them -particularly in their
latest unilateral statement, which buries those terms
of reference because they do not serve their plans to
lay hand on the State. The regional community as well
as the international community have stressed that the
solution to the Yemeni crisis cannot be a repetition of
the Hizbullah model in Yemen and that the presence of
statelets cannot be accepted within Yemen.

When the Kuwait talks collapsed following
the rejection of the putchists to deal in a positive
manner with the efforts of the Special Envoy and
States encouraging the political process in Yemen,
international efforts continued and resulted in ideas
that emerged from the ministerial meetings of the
Quartet in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia as well as other efforts
on the part of the GCC, the United States and the
United Kingdom, in cooperation and coordination with
Russia and the participation of the Special Envoy. The
Yemeni Government was among the first to embrace
those ideas, whereas the putchists rejected them.

Those who are working towards peace have taken
different stances with regard to dealing with militias
whose slogan promotes death and who trade in death
and destruction, introduce children to the theatre of
war, are driven by sectarian expansionist ideas and call
for increased international terrorism. The war could
be ended today if the Yemeni people were allowed to
overcome those criminal gangs, which have transformed
their daily lives into a nightmare, and if Yemeni
political forces were able to implement the results of the
National Dialogue to rejoin humankind and implement
the Sustainable Development Goals. Meanwhile, the
Houthi and pro-Saleh gangs are destroying the little
that we were able to build in Yemen with the assistance
of Powers in the region and the world. At a time when
the putchists continue raise the flags of death, we in the
Yemeni Government continue our efforts to renew the
hope of returning to a normal life in the areas in which
the Government is present and of a democratic and
federal State of Yemen in which everyone is a winner,
living in peace and security with all our neighbours in
the Gulf and the Arabian peninsula.

The people of Yemen are suffering because of the
war launched by the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias
on the Yemeni provinces. That suffering has reached
inconceivable levels in connection with public
health, education and various services. On a daily
basis, violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are being committed. In response,
the Government of Yemen is working around the clock
to lessen the destructive consequences of the chaos
created by the war launched by the militias against our
people. Yemen's National Independent Commission has
taken up the grave violations of human rights committed
against our nation and people. We in the Government of
Yemen call upon the international community and the
friends of Yemen to stand with our people to confront
this intransigeance and rejection on the part of the
putchists, thereby enabling the Government to assume
its responsibilities for rebuilding Yemen.

In conclusion, the Government of Yemen
sincerely appreciates the tireless efforts made by the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen.
We also appreciate the efforts of the Council and the
Ambassadors of the group of 18, which are aimed at
achieving peace and stability in Yemen. We renew our
deep appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and all other members of the Arab
coalition in contributing to regain legitimacy in Yemen.
The Government of Yemen appeals to all members of
the Security Council to continue their unified efforts,
which have accompanied the crisis in Yemen since
its onset in 2011. Because of the unified stand of the
Security Council, much has been achieved in Yemen,
which can be added to the outstanding record of the
United Nations in the settlement of disputes throughout
the world.

We call on the Security Council to take a firm stand
vis-a-vis the putchists, who have shown their rejection
of all the commitments required to achieve peace and
continue daily to obstruct the resumption of the peace
process led by the United Nations.

