Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation is very
grateful that the Danish delegation has taken the
initiative to organize this open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. We appreciate its participation in the
debate and its guidance on this important issue.

One of the priority issues in my country's
international assistance policy is its support for the
consolidation of peace and for nation-building in
countries emerging from conflict. Japan has long
stressed the need for seamless assistance in the
comprehensive settlement of conflicts. In particular,
my Government believes in the importance of
peacebuilding right from the earliest stages of conflict
settlement. As a result, Japan has supported
peacebuilding activities in Timor-Leste, Afghanistan,
Iraq and various conflict areas in Africa.

Speaking from Japan's experience, one challenge
we face in conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts is that there is no general
template for handling all conflict situations. The same
is true regarding the role of the United Nations in that
area. For example, the United Nations had
administrative control of Timor-Leste during a brief
transitional period before independence. During that
period, the United Nations was directly in charge of all
peacekeeping activities on the island.

The United Nations policy in Afghanistan is
called the light footprint approach. There, the United
Nations has encouraged local leaders to take charge,
while respecting the initiatives of other international
participants. In Africa, the United Nations approach to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration issues
has differed considerably from one conflict to another,
taking into account the nature of each particular
conflict as well as the local situation. The role of the
United Nations in peacebuilding should be flexibly
defined by the specific conflict situation and the roles
played by other peacebuilding participants.

Among a number of important issues contained in
the discussion paper for this open debate, my
delegation would like to address three, namely, local
ownership, a comprehensive strategy and integrated
approach and, finally, financing.

Ownership by local actors must be encouraged
and strengthened as much as possible. Japan fully
agrees that self-help efforts by the local population are
essential for the success of any peace agreement and
should be respected.

In a similar vein, the success of post-conflict
peacebuilding depends on having the locals in the
driver's seat. The role of international assistance
should be to provide support as necessary. There often
arise situations, however, where the national
Government is either in a state of collapse or not
functioning at all. In such a case, it is imperative for
the international community to take the lead in
peacebuilding until a new Government starts to
perform its role effectively.

However, we need to be aware of the risk of
making the local aid recipients overdependent on
international assistance. Projects aimed at local
empowerment and capacity-building would help to
prevent that from happening. In addition,
peacebuilding projects should make the best possible
use of local human resources and local ownership.

National Governments are not the only local
partners for us. Even in conflict situations, traditional
entities, communities and civil groups can sometimes
play critical roles. I would like to recall the debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding
that was held last June in this Chamber, when the
Security Council praised the important role played by
civil society. We should acknowledge the contribution
that such groups can make and look for ways to
cooperate with them. They are important partners in
our peacebuilding activities. That is all the more true
when a national Government is not functioning.

You, Mr. President, also raised the need to
develop a comprehensive strategy and to integrate the
activities of all the relevant actors. Cooperation and
coordination among international participants in the
peacebuilding process is indispensable to achieving
those objectives. We should note that there are
different levels of cooperation, depending on who the
actors in question are, especially as the concept of
integrated missions has been discussed actively at the
United Nations of late.

First, within complex peacekeeping operations
and peacebuilding missions, the activities of their
different components must be adequately integrated,
under the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for the fulfilment of the
mission's mandate.

Secondly, cooperation with United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies is also critically
important. The Special Representative should be given
authority to ensure effective coordination with these
United Nations bodies. In undertaking such
coordination, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should seek to ensure the best
possible division of labour, taking into account the
areas of responsibility, advantages and degree of
achievement on the ground of each of the United
Nations bodies concerned.

Thirdly, outside the United Nations and its related
organizations, the World Bank and other international
financial institutions play an indispensable role in
peacebuilding, and I thank the President of the World
Bank, Mr. Wolfensohn, for his elucidating observations
delivered via videolink.

We must also acknowledge that international non-
governmental organizations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross system also play very
important roles in peacebuilding. These organizations
often begin activities when a conflict is in its early
stages. Therefore, they gain deep knowledge and broad
experience in dealing with the conflict.

We agree that stable funding is important for
peacebuilding. The comprehensive settlement of a
conflict is bound to depend on peacebuilding activities
continuing for a certain period of time and also
requires financial resources. Peacekeeping is financed
through assessed contributions and enjoys funding
stability. By contrast, peacebuilding is mostly financed
through voluntary contributions, which depend on the
goodwill of donors. Simply turning to assessed
contributions, however, is not a solution. If we
financed all peacebuilding activities through assessed
contributions, it would hinder not only the optimum
allocation of financial resources but also local
ownership in peacebuilding. It could also risk
expanding and prolonging United Nations engagement
beyond what is actually necessary. Therefore, we
should discuss which types of peacebuilding activities
should be financed through assessed contributions and
which should be financed through voluntary
contributions. This needs to be done on a case-by-case
basis, based on existing divisions between the two in
terms of scope, while taking into account the nature of
individual conflicts and the situation on the ground. We
should also consider mobilizing the private sector in
the financing of peacebuilding efforts.

Before closing, let me raise the issue of the
relationship between peacebuilding and human
security. Japan has advocated consistently the idea of
human security, which deals with threats from not only
the point of view of State security but also from the
human perspective. Its objective is to protect people
from critical and pervasive threats to human life and to
their livelihood and dignity and thus to enhance human
fulfilment. Human security thus understood provides
an important perspective for peacebuilding.

As stated in the report of the Commission on
Human Security, which takes up the transition from
conflict to peace as a priority issue, the response from
the international community should take into full
account the needs of people on the ground and of the
local community. The success of peacebuilding and the
transition from conflict to peace and development
hinges on whether the idea of human security can be
translated into reality, so that people are protected and
empowered to stand on their own two feet.

In conclusion, the idea of a Peacebuilding
Commission, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
has Japan's strong support. My Government has made
proposals in General Assembly discussions on how
such a body might be set up and what its functions
should be to ensure its effectiveness. We will spare no
effort in working with other interested countries to
ensure that a Peacebuilding Commission is established
and can begin its work soon. That is the best way to
address the important issue we are discussing today in
concrete terms.

