Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fisher
for his briefing.

At our last Security Council discussion of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in October 2012 (see S/PV.6842), I
was cautiously optimistic about progress in Haiti and
noted the important contribution that MINUSTAH had
made to that progress. I tempered that with concern
about politicial inertia blighting the decision-making
necessary to the country's development.

Since then, we note that some important steps have
been taken. In particular, the uniformed component of
MINUSTAH has been reduced without any negative
impact on the overall security and stability of the
country, and MINUSTAH's consolidation plan has
focused the Mission's activities on a number of core
objectives. The final aim of the consolidation plan is for
Haiti to have sufficient capacity to tackle its challenges
itself. If the Government of Haiti takes the necessary
concrete steps, we believe that that goal is attainable.

Notwithstanding this progress, there are two
important areas of concern where we do need to see
urgent progress. The first is the political situation.
Political fragility is the most likely source of instability
for Haiti. Efforts to support the political process must
continue to be a priority. The appointment of a permanent
electoral council will be a crucial step towards securing
future stability. This needs to be completed quickly
so that the long-overdue Senate and local elections
can take place. It is vital that the permanent electoral
council be able to act independently and that it be given
the funding to do so.

The second area of concern is security, and
specifically the capacity and capability of the Police.
We continue to believe that building the capacity
of the Haitian National Police, both operational and
institutional, should be MINUSTAH's highest priority.
Therefore, we are concerned to see that recruitment to
the Haitian National Police is below the levels required
to meet the target of 15,000 police officers by 2016.
We would be interested in understanding why this is
the case. Is there a lack of volunteers? Is it because the
training infrastructure needs to be improved, or is it
that MINUSTAH is not giving sufficient priority to
the task? If recruitment and training continue at the
current rate, how far below the target would we be in
2016? What annual recruitment rate is now going to
be required to hit the target, and is that realistic and
achievable?

We urge MINUSTAH to focus its resources on
this effort in order to support the recently adopted
Haitian National Police development plan. The Haitian
National Police must also meet appropriate human
rights standards if it is to win the confidence of the
Haitian people. Effective oversight, transparency and
zero tolerance for corruption will all be essential. The
National Police should be able to rely on the support of
all political parties.

Capacity-building in the justice sector, regionally
and at the institutional level, is also necessary to
complement the development of the police. We call
on the public authorities to fulfil their constitutional
obligations and duties, including the efficient and
transparent operation of the judicial process, with no
impunity, and an improvement in the management of
the prison service.

In conclusion, MINUSTAH continues to achieve
some encouraging results, but we have outlined two areas
of concern - politics and police recruitment - that
must be addressed. I would welcome the views of the
Acting Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
on those points.

