Ms. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
The States members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) are convinced of the exceptional
importance of the issue of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), their means of
delivery and related technologies and materials. Today,
as the issue grows in relevance it is becoming a priority
goal of the world community in general and regional
organizations in particular.

We are convinced that it will be possible to
effectively countering the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction only through the joint efforts of the
international community as a whole and coordinated
actions and measures undertaken by States and
international and regional organizations. In that regard,
we underscore the importance of a comprehensive
approach to preventing the proliferation of WMD,
which in our view must be based on strengthening all
non-proliferation regimes, including the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the Chemical
Weapons Convention; the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
their Destruction; resolution 1540 (2004), and effective
national export control systems.

We note the timely and relevant nature of resolution
1540 (2004), which is a unique instrument providing
a comprehensive approach to the non-proliferation of
WMD in the context of non-proliferation to non-State
actors, including terrorists. We support the outcome
of the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which is aimed at increasing
the effectiveness of national efforts in that area and
optimizing the interaction of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) with participants in
the process, first and foremost States and international
and regional organizations.

The States members of CIS believe it important
to fully and effectively implement all provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) through voluntary plans of
action on the implementation of the resolution. States
members of CIS cooperate in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and are open to further
cooperation with the 1540 Committee and the relevant
specialized international and regional organizations,
as needed.

We are convinced that through thejoint efforts ofCIS
and international organizations, under the coordinating
role of the 1540 Committee, we will be able to increase
the efficiency of our implementation of the resolution.
CIS member States welcome innovative approaches,
in particular conducting regional training courses for
national contact points and peer reviews of resolution
implementation with the aim of exchanging experiences
and national practices. CIS member States, noting the
generally positive trend with respect to implementation
of provisions, underscore the importance of remaining
up to date as we take into account the specific features
and real expert and financial capacities of each country.

We stand ready to cooperate with all interested
parties in strengthening the international weapons of
mass destruction non-proliferation regime.

