Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Huang Xia for
his briefing.

The Dominican Republic commends the progress
that has been made in the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo and the Region, and we also very
much welcome the positive progress that we are seeing
in the region, particularly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo following the peaceful transition of power
and the formation of the new Government.

We have seen progress in terms ofthe representation
of women and the forging of new commitments to
regional cooperation and integration. We also very
much welcome the fact that in the Sudan an agreement
was reached between the Transitional Military Council
and the opposition coalition, Forces for Freedom
and Change, to establish a civilian-led transitional
Government with African Union mediation.

We are concerned about the fragile security
situation, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where armed groups continue to intensify
their attacks against the civilian population, the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
resulting in the death of hundreds of civilians, including
women and children.

Such activities have a negative impact on peace
and stability across borders and throughout the region.
We therefore urge the affected countries to combine
their efforts to dismantle armed groups, control the
illegal trafficking in natural resources and eradicate
the illegal trade in arms and ammunition. Development
plans that include young people affected by armed
conflict are needed in order to develop their skills
and meet labour demands by providing relevant
educational opportunities.

The climate of insecurity adds to the worrying
humanitarian situation. We note with great dismay the
increasing number of refugees, asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons. The millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees in South Sudan
and other countries of the region registered during
the reporting period highlight the need to continue
encouraging positive developments in the political
situation in the region. In the case of Burundi, while
some 75,000 refugees have returned to their homes, the
400,000 Burundian refugees dispersed in the region are
of great concern.

We believe in the importance of convening
the upcoming Great Lakes Investment and Trade
Conference, with a focus on cross-border investment
as a critical enabler for economic integration and
sustainable development, as well as the steps taken
towards economic development.

A joint review of problems and opportunities is
needed to address the existing challenges. It should
focus on achieving regional solutions through dialogue
and cooperation by fulfilling the commitments made
in support of peace, security and socioeconomic
development in the Great Lakes region.

In conclusion, we highlight the role played by the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and MONUSCO, among others,
through their efforts and cooperation in pursuit of
peaceful and stable coexistence in the region.

