Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the United States presidency for organizing today's
meeting on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing.

Regrettably, in 2015 we had yet again a year
marked by an upsurge in extreme violence on the part
of terrorists around the world. Reports that non-State
actors used chemical weapons against people in the
Middle East are more than worrying. They prove that
the international community must do more to prevent
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of
delivery from getting into terrorists' hands. Last year's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7) reaffirmed the
importance of resolution 1540 (2004) and laid down
clear guidelines relating to the future work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

Lithuania believes that, during the 2016
comprehensive review, due attention must be paid to
developing a specific strategy aimed at achieving the
full and universal implementation of the resolution.
Greater synergies among the relevant subsidiary bodies
of the Council and improved assistance to Member
States should also be explored. Lithuania is also of
the view that the Committee should enhance the
coordination of its non-proliferation work with other
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The Committee should also engage more actively with
civil society, industry and the private sector, and take
their relevant expertise into consideration.

The 2014 Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague
once again reaffirmed its main objective, which is to
strengthen nuclear security and prevent non-State actors
from acquiring nuclear material. Lithuania continues
to implement its commitments relating to nuclear
terrorism under the Nuclear Security Summits of Seoul
and The Hague by building its national capacities
and strengthening cooperation with other States and
international organizations in order to counter illicit
trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive materials. In
preparation for the Nuclear Security Summit to be held
in Washington, DC, in 2016, Lithuania held a four-day
Sherpa meeting in Vilnius this summer. Our nuclear
security centre of excellence, established as a national
capacity-building and training venue, continues to
expand its regional and international outreach, hosting
national, regional and international thematic seminars
and study visits.

Lithuania would like to emphasize the need for
universal and comprehensive reporting under the
resolution, with the aim of identifying challenges that
States may face during its implementation. We applaud
Spain's tireless efforts to help non-reporting States
submit their initial reports to the Committee. Some
progress has been made in that regard in 2015, although
17 States have yet to submit their initial reports. In order
to effectively implement the goals of resolution 1540
(2004), the Committee and its Group of Experts should
continue their practice of visiting Member States,
particularly non-reporting ones, as well as their active
participation in events related to non-proliferation at the
regional and subregional levels. That direct interaction
has proved very useful in assisting States that lack the
capacity to implement the resolution.

During the 2016 comprehensive review, the
Committee should investigate future options for
further strengthening its clearing-house role in
facilitating matchmaking between assistance requests
and assistance availability. It should also work to
expand its base of assistance providers, which should
be open to all who express the desire to contribute to
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). This
is particularly relevant in the area of expert controls,
where many gaps persist. Lithuania also encourages
the 1540 Committee to interact more closely with the
relevant Committees of the Council and their groups
of experts, such as the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Daesh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, in order to reap the benefit ofpossible synergies
while dealing with issues of non-proliferation of WMD
and their means of delivery.

Last but not least, I would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts of Ambassador Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi as Chair of the 1540 Committee, as
well as his team for their tireless work and commitment
to achieving the universal and full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Since this is the last scheduled meeting at which my
delegation is delivering a statement as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, on behalf ofRaimonda
Murmokaite, Permanent Representative of Lithuania,
and our whole team, I would like to convey our
appreciation for the fruitful cooperation we have had
with all the members of the Council and its secretariat,
and to thank everyone for the support we have received
during our tenure.

