Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank the delegation of Argentina for organizing this
public debate on Haiti, and we thank you, Honourable
Minister, for presiding over this session. My delegation
joins in welcoming the President-elect of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Rene Preval, to the Security Council.
We thank him for his profound address.

We congratulate Mr. Preval on his electoral
victory and commend the people of Haiti for
expressing their democratic vote of confidence in him
during the presidential and parliamentary elections of
7 February 2006. We urge the people of Haiti to
maintain similar calm as they wait to complete the
second round of legislative elections and subsequent
local elections to complete successfully the political
transition and usher in a democratic dispensation. In
the intervening period, it is necessary to maintain the
momentum in the electoral process in terms of voters'
interest, hopes and aspirations.
We commend the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and its Head, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes. We also commend
the Haitian electoral board, the troop-contributing
countries, Haiti's neighbours and all of its friends for
their collective efforts to organize and supervise what
turned out to be free, fair and credible elections. The
successful experience of last month should augur well
for the second round of elections next month.

The cyclical political instability and natural
calamities that have ravaged Haiti in the past few
decades are inseparable from the poverty that is
entrenched in that country. This latest international
effort to give Haiti yet another fresh start must be a
lessons-learned undertaking of past pitfalls and their
underlying causes. The democratic elections should be
the entry and starting point for comprehensive and
irreversible change. The political, judicial and
governance institutions must be revamped, while
simultaneously addressing the chronic social and
economic poverty of the Haitian people.

The international community, including the
United Nations, must have a long-term, coordinated
commitment to Haiti. There must be a conscious effort
to invest in the political stability, governance structures
and social and economic infrastructure before we can
expect private enterprise to be attracted to invest in
Haiti. We must avoid the mistakes of the past, when
international involvement was selective, ad hoc and
short term. It is imperative, therefore, that the post-
electoral mandate of MINUSTAH is re-defined to set
the stage for coordinated peacebuilding in all the vital
sectors.

We look forward to the formation of a responsive
Parliament, a committed Cabinet and a dedicated Prime
Minister, a team that will put service to the people and
their needs at the top of the list of priorities. They
should start working immediately on national
reconciliation, respect for human rights, enforcement
of the rule of law, social and economic regeneration
and constructive engagement with international
partners.

We are pleased to note that the security situation
in Haiti is already showing signs of improvement.
Instances of kidnapping have gone down tremendously
since the election of Mr. Preval as President of Haiti.
The integration of former soldiers should continue to
receive due attention to address misguided discontent,
which can again become a destabilizing factor.
Finally, we thank the delegation of Argentina for
the draft presidential statement, which we support.

