Mr. Hunter (United States of America): Let me
begin by joining my colleagues in congratulating
Kuwait as it assumes its presidency of the Council. I
thank Special Representative Fall for his briefing today
and for the efforts he undertakes, which continue to
play a central role towards strengthening the political,
security and economic conditions of the countries of
Central Africa. In Cameroon in particular, his work to
promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis in the North-
West and South-West regions is of singular importance.

The United States remains gravely concerned
by the deteriorating humanitarian and human rights
situation in Cameroon. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs estimated in April that
4.3 million people in Cameroon - roughly 17 per cent
of the population - need humanitarian assistance. We
have heard disturbing reports of armed groups and
Cameroonian authorities obstructing humanitarian
aid delivery by establishing road checkpoints, ceasing
supplies, demanding bribes and detaining personnel.
Bureaucratic impediments and movement restrictions
further exacerbate the situation. That must stop now. We
call on all parties to enable unhindered humanitarian
access to deliver life-saving assistance to all those in
need and to respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

We welcome the Cameroonian Government's
development of an emergency humanitarian assistance
plan and coordination centre for the ongoing crisis in the
North-West and South-West regions. However, we must
underscore that for those efforts to be successful they
must adhere to the humanitarian assistance principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.

The international community, with the support
of the Cameroonian Government, should continue
implementing a coordinated and robust humanitarian
response. Since the beginning of fiscal year 2018,
the United States Government has contributed over
$87 million to provide humanitarian assistance to host
communities, internally displaced persons and refugees
in Cameroon. That aid is critical, but it is effective only
when we have access to the vulnerable populations.

The human rights abuses and violations in the
affected regions are also worrying. The continued
reports of attacks on civilians, including extrajudicial
killings, are extremely troubling. We urge all the parties
to refrain from such abuses, and the Government of
Cameroon to hold all responsible accountable through
transparent and fair trials. We thank the United Nations
and representatives of civil society for their brave
reporting on the status of human rights, and call for
all the parties to cease actions that could hinder human
rights reporting in the two regions. The Government of
Cameroon's recent decision to deny entry to a researcher
from an international non-governmental organization
is regrettable.

We are similarly concerned about the increasing
restrictions on political pluralism. In late January, the
Government arrested Maurice Kamto, the leader of
the Cameroon Renaissance Movement, and hundreds
of his followers, following peaceful demonstrations,
and on 1 June arrested more than 100 party members
as they attempted to hold a peaceful march. Many of
them remain in pretrial detention on dubious charges.
We call on the Government to move trial proceedings
for political detainees to civilian courts and to respect
fair trial guarantees, in accordance with Cameroon's
obligations under international law.

We welcome the Prime Minister's visit to the
North-West and South-West regions to talk about the
ongoing crisis with the parties affected, which we view
as a very positive step. We welcome President Biya's
instruction to speed up the decentralization mandated
by the 1996 Constitution. The international community
will support the Government of Cameroon in its efforts
to open an inclusive dialogue with the separatists,
and we encourage the Government to consider those
options. Likewise, we strongly urge those supporting
the separatist cause, particularly those living in the
diaspora, to join talks without preconditions. We urge
the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to play an even
stronger role in promoting peace and security in
Cameroon through dialogue. Our colleagues frequently
remind us of the AU's leadership role in conflict
prevention on the African continent, and we urge AU
leaders to play a constructive role in trying to find a
solution to the current political impasse that is causing
this humanitarian crisis. One way to do that is by
joining ECCAS and the United Nations injoint visits to
engage all Cameroonian actors in supporting dialogue.

Finally, we look forward to the strategic review of
the mandate of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) later this year. We anticipate
further discussions with Special Representative Fall
and his staff in order to ensure that UNOCA's mandate
is focused on the most pressing challenges in the Central
African region, while coordinating strategically with
other United Nations offices operating there as well.

