Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to echo previous speakers by
expressing my sincere condolences to the people and
the Government of Haiti following Hurricane Matthew.
I can assure Haiti of Egypt's support. I would like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honore' for her comprehensive
briefing and express our support for the efforts that she
and her team are making in Haiti.

Haiti is at a turning point in its history. It is
encountering enormous challenges in different areas,
including the disastrous humanitarian situation and
ongoing political, security and economic challenges.
The joint support of the international community
to Haiti is therefore absolutely vital now. Hurricane
Matthew has provoked a dire humanitarian situation,
as Ms. Honore said a moment ago. Basic infrastructure
has been destroyed, in particular infrastructure that
the Haitian authorities were going to use as ballot
stations. There is also a cholera epidemic and an acute
food crisis. For that reason, I urge the international
community to step up its efforts in supporting Haiti
during this humanitarian crisis.

In the face of these challenges, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) - to
which Egypt has contributed a police contingent - has
played an important role in ensuring that humanitarian
aid has reached the Haitian people. The Mission took
part in the relief and rescue operations following the
hurricane. Those efforts must continue so that Haiti
does not again face a humanitarian crisis similar to that
which followed the 2010 earthquake.

Before the MINUSTAH mandate is renewed, Egypt
calls for the issue to be reviewed in an open-minded
manner, given the current suffering of the Haitian
people and the number of challenges that the country is
facing. It is therefore necessary to undertake a strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Haiti,
while taking into account all current challenges and
the way in which MINUSTAH is addressing them. It
is vital that such an assessment include real solutions
to address the underlying causes of the country's
instability.

The country's political process, which should have
led to presidential elections on 9 October, has been
impacted by the hurricane. The Haitian authorities have
found themselves obliged to postpone the elections,
without fixing a new date for them, in the light of the
fact that the hurricane destroyed numerous polling
stations. The national authorities were counting on their
own resources to conduct the elections, which clearly
demonstrates their determination to establish political
stability in the country. We are firmly convinced that
the Haitian authorities understand the importance of the
election taking place on the date set in order to avoid
another political crisis that would impact the country's
security, economy and society as a whole.

When the Council begins its consideration of
extending the mandate of MINUSTAH, it should take
account of the fact that, despite a relative drop in crime
over recent months, the number of demonstrations and
protests has been increasing since April, exposing
the fragility of the security situation, particularly
in the current humanitarian crisis. I must therefore
congratulate MINUSTAH on its efforts. The Mission
has indeed played a lead role in bolstering national
institutions and in institutional capacity-building,
particularly of the country's security and judicial
institutions.

I appeal to Member States and all troop-contributing
countries to continue to support the country's national
authorities and to step up efforts to finish building
national security institutions. In that regard, we call for
a genuine partnership with the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
deliver comprehensive international aid to Haiti during
the current transition phase, in which the country is
seeking to move beyond its decades-long instability.

In conclusion, I would like to express our full
support for the people and the Government of Haiti. We
are convinced that they will succeed in overcoming this
very delicate and complex period.

