Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, I would
like to thank the Special Envoy for his very clear and
comprehensive briefing. I also wish to convey our deep
appreciation for his persistence and resilience and for
his continuous efforts in the last years to bring us closer
to a political solution. We welcome his commitment to
going the extra mile in the remainder of his term in
office. We will miss him.

I would like to focus on three points today - first,
the need to swiftly convene the constitutional committee;
secondly, the need for sustained de-escalation in
Idlib; and thirdly, the need to address issues related to
reconstruction aid and the return of refugees.

On my first point, the convening of the
constitutional committee is long overdue. There have
been too many delays. The committee should convene
as soon as possible and move ahead with the creation
of a new Constitution. The constitutional committee is
not a goal in itself: as others have said, it is part of the
broader United Nations-led political process based on
resolution 2254 (2015). Only when the constitutional
committee itselfis credible can one speak of a credible
political process. Inclusiveness and representation of
all Syrians is key. We repeat our strong support for the
Special Envoy in this regard.

We are concerned about the Syrian regime's
actions, which have led to the delay in the establishment
of the constitutional committee. We support Mr. De
Mistura's commitment to having women constitute
30 per cent of the committee's members. In our View,
any future drafting subcommittee should also include
having a floor of women's representation set at 30 per
cent. We feel very strongly that the Security Council
should unite behind the Envoy's ambition to convene
the committee soon.

That brings me to my second point, the need for
sustained de-escalation in Idlib. We welcome that the
memorandum agreed between the Russian Federation
and Turkey has largely been respected. It has led
to de-escalation in the area. It is now important that
the agreement be sustained. We are concerned about
signals from Damascus that the current situation is only
temporary. We must do all we can to prevent an all-out
offensive, as that could only lead to an international
confrontation and a humanitarian catastrophe.

Unimpeded and unconditional access for principled
humanitarian assistance is absolutely necessary. This
applies both to cross-border and cross-line assistance,
and it should be based on independently assessed needs.
We are concerned that the Organization's humanitarian
access continues to be constrained in areas where
the regime has reasserted control, such as in eastern
Ghouta and Quneitra. We feel that it is important that
the Russian Federation use its influence to ensure that
the Syrian Government facilitates the Organization's
sustained and unfettered humanitarian access.

That brings me to my third point - issues related
to reconstruction aid and the return of refugees.
We strongly disagree with premature calls for
reconstruction aid and the return of refugees. There
will be no reconstruction aid from the European Union
for Syria until there is a lasting political transition in
Syria. It is inconceivable to start rebuilding when the
possibility ofa massive attack still looms over Idlib. We
acknowledge the positive developments for the civilians
of Idlib from the Russian-Turkish agreement, but we
have to be realistic - the situation can change rapidly.
It is inconceivable that the international community
will rebuild a country in the absence of a negotiated
political solution.

The international community should not normalize
relations with a regime that is credibly suspected of
perpetrating crimes against humanity and ofwar crimes.
We need accountability for those crimes. Let me stress
again our support to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, a French
initiative on fighting impunity. We see the referral of
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court as the best path forward to fighting impunity.

Let me also refer to the statement made by eminent
jurists on 24 September that sets out clear standards
for reconstruction in Syria. These jurists' legal opinion
is that "without adherence to these standards, the
provision of reconstruction assistance can facilitate
past, continuous or new violations of international law,
which would in turn give rise to complicity or shared
international responsibility."

With regard to premature calls for the return of
refugees, Syria is simply not ready for the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees. Voluntary return can
only be facilitated when the internationally agreed
protection thresholds are in place. The involvement of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is crucial for monitoring the protection of
Syrian civilians. Many Syrians cannot go back. They
fear the lack of security. They fear retributive violence,
persecution and imprisonment. They fear security
screenings and forced conscription. They often have no
homes to return to due to the consequences of housing,
land and property laws, such as Law Number 10, which
is currently being implemented, despite earlier reports
that its implementation had been suspended. Arbitrary
arrests that contradict reconciliation agreements are
another reason that Syrian refugees fear going back.

Furthermore, we are concerned about the recent
amnesty law, as it does not differ from previous amnesty
laws. The biggest flaws remain the same - the law is
not applicable to opposition fighters nor does it provide
for exemption from military service. It seems the
Al-Assad regime adopted this amnesty law to extend
its ability to recruit new troops.

Our focus needs to be on real
confidence-building measures. The regime should
release those unlawfully held in detention, reveal
the fate of the missing and prevent further forced
disappearances and detentions. So far, it has not done
any of these things.

The approach to detainees must be part of a
comprehensive political solution - not an afterthought.
Securing the release of detainees is critical to Syria's
future. Release can build confidence and can provide
hope for reconciliation. The issue needs to be properly
addressed with genuine progress under the auspices
of the United Nations, as part of the official United
Nations-led process in Geneva. The United Nations,
and in particular the UNHCR, needs access to those
currently detained in detention facilities. That could be
a start.

In conclusion, it is clear that fundamental structural
changes are needed in the administration of Syria. An
inclusive political transition must be the starting point,
and the convening of the constitutional committee is an
important first step. There should be no reconstruction
aid before a lasting political transition takes place. Last
but not least, there is no peace without justice.

