Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, for his very comprehensive briefing,
and to express Poland's gratitude for his efforts to find
a political solution to the Syrian crisis. I would like to
reiterate Poland's support, especially at this crucial time
in his consultations with the various parties. I would
also like to share some reflections with the Council.

The conflict in Syria has caused suffering to
millions ofpeople who are forced to find refuge in other
countries and who face starvation and armed offensives
inside Syria, along with constant violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. In a broader
political perspective, we welcome the agreement on

Idlib between Russia and Turkey. At the same time,
Poland wants to point out that it is the duty of the Astana
guarantors to protect the most recent de-escalation zone
in Syria, which they made a commitment to safeguard.
The measures necessary to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure must be ensured.

We strongly believe that the Idlib ceasefire
agreement is an opportunity for the resumption without
delay of the political process under United Nations
auspices in Geneva. In that regard, we express our full
support for the Special Envoy's efforts to establish a
constitutional committee as soon as possible. As has
been repeatedly said in this Chamber, it should be
implemented right now as a priority, and further steps
should swiftly follow in order to enable a negotiated
political transition process. It requires the full and
constructive engagement ofall the parties to the conflict,
especially the Syrian authorities, in participating in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.

Let me conclude by underlining that a political
solution must be brokered in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). There is no military solution to the conflict
that can bring sustainable peace to the Syrians, and we
should focus on achieving an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement. It is for the Syrians themselves to
negotiate, and that is why we desperately need to revive
the United Nations political process in Geneva. Only
a real, tangible political process that ensures the true
representation of the Syrian people can set a timetable
and provide procedures for drafting a constitution and
conducting free and fair elections supervised by the
United Nations.

