Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of members of the Group of Friends
on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict:
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. The Group of Friends thanks Uruguay
for organizing today's open debate and the briefers for
their statements.

Deliberate and indiscriminate attacks on civilians
are widespread in many armed conflicts. A growing
number of parties to armed conflicts openly disregard
long-established rules of international humanitarian
law, especially with regard to the conduct of hostilities
and the protection of civilians. The despicable trend
whereby medical facilities, personnel and their means
of transport and the wounded and sick are deliberately
targeted, so as to violently deprive civilian populations
of vital services, has to be reversed. Access restrictions
and assaults on humanitarian and medical workers
impede the delivery of urgently needed assistance. The
number of deaths of humanitarian and medical workers
to date this year, one of the deadliest on record, should
horrify us all. Therefore, it is with a sense ofurgency that
we must promote respect for international humanitarian
law. As highlighted in the Secretary General's report
(S/2017/414), all States have an obligation to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law in all
circumstances.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2286 (2016),
condemning attacks against medical units and personnel
in armed conflict by the Council in May 2016, with a
large number of sponsors, was an important signal that,
despite the numerous violations observed in recent
years, international law is clear. The wounded and
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, must be respected and protected.
This is an issue of great concern to the international
community.

The Group of Friends acknowledges the Secretary
General's recommendations on implementing resolution
2286 (2016) and urges States to implement them, in
accordance with their national legal framework. Member
States have the primary responsibility to ensure that
proper legal, policy and operational frameworks are
in place to ensure full implementation of international
law. We call on all Member States to take action on
the Secretary-General's recommendations which will
allow for the full implementation of resolution 2286
(2016).

The Group of Friends condemns attacks against
schools, which, as civilian objects, enjoy protection
against direct attacks and the effects of such attacks
under the Geneva Conventions and international
humanitarian law. When schools and children are
targeted, the future is attacked. In this regard, the Group
of Friends takes note of the Safe Schools Declaration,
currently endorsed by 64 countries, aiming at the
protection and continuation of education in armed
conflict.

The Group of Friends underlines the importance
of deterring violations of international humanitarian
law and promoting accountability. States must make
greater efforts for systematic data collection, analysis
and reporting on incidents, including on civilian
casualties; for full, prompt, impartial, independent and
effective investigations into alleged serious violations
under international law; for the prosecution of alleged
serious violations; and for the provision of assistance
to victims.

In this sense, we welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly ofresolution 71/248, establishing the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011. The Mechanism is
mandated to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse
evidence of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses and to
prepare files in order to facilitate and expedite fair and
independent criminal proceedings in national, regional
or international courts or tribunals. It is anticipated
that the Mechanism will not share information in
circumstances in which a trial may be held in absentia
on the basis of universal jurisdiction.

In line with the principle of complementarity,
we call on all States to ratify the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), to penalize the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole and to enable the ICC to
investigate such crimes should national justice systems
not be able or willing genuinely to do so. Through such
measures, we can deter future crimes by closing the
impunity gap.

The report ofthe Secretary-General in the protection
of civilians (S/2017/414) rightly puts an emphasis on
prevention. Preventing armed conflict in the first place
is the best way to protect civilians. However, prevention
also applies within the context of armed conflict. Good
practice that spares civilians from harm should be
developed, implemented and shared, as identified in
the Secretary-General's report. The report underlines
the importance of finding comprehensive strategies to
address forced displacement. We recall that two thirds
of forcibly displaced persons are displaced within their
own countries. Ensuring assistance and protection but
also the development of opportunities for displaced
persons is crucial, especially when looking at the many
protracted situations.

A gender perspective is also a key component of
effective protection. At the same time, preventing
forced displacement in the first place becomes even
more important, including by addressing the need
to avoid civilian harm during hostilities in an urban
environment and to prevent the indiscriminate use of
weapons, in particular in areas with concentrations
of civilians.

Access remains a central challenge in conflicts
around the world. For example, millions of civilians
are on the brink of famine in Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan and Yemen, and humanitarian access restrictions
imposed by parties to conflict played a key role in
this crisis.

Greater respect for international humanitarian
law and negotiations for the purposes of gaining
humanitarian access may imply contacts with all
parties to armed conflicts, including armed groups.
The Group of Friends takes note of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians currently
endorsed by 40 countries, aimed at reinforcing the
protection of civilians by troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries in the framework of
peacekeeping operations. The Group ofFriends calls on
all current and future Security Council members to take
timely and decisive action to prevent or end genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

The Group of Friends would like to encourage
States having not yet done so to consider acceding to
the Additional Protocols to the Geneva conventions
of 1949, in particular this year, the year of the fortieth
anniversary of Additional Protocols I and II, and to
engage constructively in the ongoing discussions in
Geneva about ways and means to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law.

