Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by expressing my heartfelt condolences to the families
of the victims of the devastating flood and landslide
in Mocoa, which left hundreds of people dead, injured
or missing.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his update.

Ukraine reiterates its support for Colombia's
efforts in implementing the Final Peace Agreement
in accordance with resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307
(2016). We recognize the challenges the country faces
in making the transition from a conflict to a post-
conflict environment. It is now essential that the open
dialogue that led to the Agreement continue.

In February, we observed historic images as
thousands of members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias the Colombia moved into transition
zones where they are starting their reintegration into
new lives. Moving nearly 7,000 fighters to such zones
was not an easy task; indeed, it constitutes an example
of the real commitment of the parties to tackling
outstanding difficulties head-on.

In the light of that, we encourage the parties to
maintain their positive cooperation and momentum
for the benefit of all Colombians. All political forces
and all sectors of Colombian society should be actively
engaged in this crucial endeavour. Broader unity around
the Peace Agreement is indispensable to achieving the
Agreement's goals with regard to ceasefire and the
laying down of arms, as well as rural reform, combating
illicit drugs and expanding political participation.
While moving ahead with the peace process in all its
complexity, it is also important to keep in focus the
needs and best interests of children affected by conflict,
as well as a gender perspective.

The cases of violence against human rights
defenders mentioned in the Secretary-General's recent
report (S/2017/252) are of concern. We believe that the
end of impunity is crucial to ensuring comprehensive
peace in the country. In that regard, we take positive
note of the recent legislation, including the amnesty
law passed last December and the law establishing the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations
and Non-repetition, approved by Congress on 13 March.

We commend international efforts in support of
implementation of the Peace Agreement, in particular
those States Members of the United Nations that have
provided observers for the United Nations Mission, as
well as the role played by the guarantors and supporting
countries during the peace process. The Security
Council should continue to back parties as they
advance in implementing the provisions of the Final
Peace Agreement.

We look forward to the Security Council's visit
to Colombia next month so as to better appreciate the
aspirations and concerns of the parties. On the other
hand, such a visit will demonstrate the Council's full
commitment to long-lasting peace in Colombia. We
hope that the Colombian experience of engaging the
United Nations as the international component of
the tripartite mechanism will become an illustrative
success story for the region and beyond.

