Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to align the
United Kingdom with the statement to be delivered
later by Greece, which holds the Presidency of the
European Union.

I am very grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2002/ 1299) and for his presentation this
morning. I am grateful too for the briefings we have
heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Olara Otunnu, and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Carol
Bellamy. Both their organizations are doing crucial
work which the United Kingdom commends and
continues to support in practice.

It is good to note that since the last open debate
in the Security Council and the adoption of resolution
1379 (2001), the normative framework for child
protection has continued to strengthen. The Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
are real steps forward in terms of protecting human
rights.

The United Kingdom agrees fully with the
report's call for effective implementation to
complement the normative framework. The two
reinforce each other. We should regularly review
resolution 1379 (2001) in conjunction with the
Secretary-General's reports and see what the Council
can do to strengthen this agenda in practical terms.
Mr. Otunnu's proposals in his description this morning
of the era of application are very relevant in this
respect. With practical steps in mind, let me focus on
three aspects raised in the Secretary-General's report.

First, with respect to mainstreaming, we are glad
to note that an inter-agency working group, involving
UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), the Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and
the Office of the Special Representative, will do further
work on developing guidelines on the integration of
child protection issues into United Nations peace
efforts and that this work will make constructive use of
the Executive Committee on Peace and Security
discussions. We firmly believe that protection and
assistance measures must go together. It follows, then,
that there is no alternative to mainstreaming protection
concerns into the body of our peace and security
objectives.

The United Kingdom has consistently called for
this type of cross-cutting, integrated approach to take
root across the range of United Nations protection
work. We did so on women, peace and security in
October last year and again in December on protection
of civilians. Paragraph 6 of resolution 1379 (2001) is
very closely linked, for example, with many of the 13
elements contained in the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians (S/PRST/2002/6, annex). We
look forward in future reports to hearing how this
integrated approach is developing and how it is being
taken forward consistently across the system. We
would like to have early feedback on how the
Executive Committee is using these guidelines, as well
as on how United Nations peace missions have
benefited from child protection components and what
lessons follow for other United Nations missions.
Improving resources is part of this, certainly, but so is
better planning. We still need more information on
where the constraints to better implementation lie so
that we can move beyond advocacy to sustained action.

The second element is small arms and light
weapons. The literature on this subject is littered with
examples of the devastating effects of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in fuelling conflicts and
prolonging suffering. Graca Machel tells us in her
recent book that in a number of African countries, $5
can buy a bag of maize or a well-worn but serviceable
weapon. The Secretary-General asks the international
community to do more to sever the link between the
proliferation and widespread use of small arms and
light weapons and the horrendous numbers of civilian
casualties, including among children, that results from
their use, especially in Africa. The United Kingdom
agrees wholeheartedly with his call.

We are organizing a meeting in London starting
today to discuss with Group of Eight (G-8) partners
how we can improve common controls on small arms
and light weapons transfers. As part of the G-8 Africa
Action Plan on the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, we will be exploring how we can
provide assistance to African countries to promote
regional trans-border cooperation and enforcement
regimes to combat the proliferation of small arms. We
look forward to briefing the Secretariat on the outcome
of that conference. We also encourage Japan to build
on this work when it chairs this year's follow-up
conference on the Programme of Action which Member
States agreed to in July 2001 at the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

The third element is the impact of illicit
commercial exploitation of natural resources in conflict
zones. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, report
of the Panel of Experts with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2002/1146) noted that
children are being conscripted and used as forced
labour in natural resource extraction by a number of
armed groups. We commend the Panel for its attention
to this issue and would like to be fully informed of
these activities in the context of our future discussions
on the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and on the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Council colleagues might like to be aware that the
United Kingdom is hosting an international workshop
in London next month which will take forward an
initiative launched by the Prime Minister at the World
Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg
last year. The objective is to promote greater
transparency of payments and revenues in extractive
sectors.

In too many countries, the abuse of these
resources and the opacity of wealth distribution arising
from their exploitation constitute a massive blow to
prospects for peaceful development and growth. Again,
we will be pleased to pass on the conclusions of the
conference to United Nations partners.

Our attention is drawn to the list presented in the
Secretary-General's report of violators in five specific
countries. Of the five countries on this list -
Afghanistan, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Liberia and Somalia - three - Afghanistan,
Burundi and Liberia - appear in the forward
programme of work for the Security Council this
month. Referring back to our calls for sustained
mainstreaming of child protection and protection of
civilians, we call for future consultations to provide a
higher profile to protection concerns within those
countries, where violations of protection constitute a
clear threat to already fragile peace and security
environments.

We expect the work of the inter-agency working
group referred to in the report to play an active part in
the regular briefings provided to the Council and in the
Council's subsequent discussions of these countries.
The Council will in this way become better briefed on
the kind of measures which we can take to deal with
protection violations in those countries. The report
points out that we have already begun to do this as we
move to give life to the provisions of resolution 1379
(2001). But operative paragraph 9 (b) of that resolution
is particularly relevant. Material measures may need
further discussion in the Council, not least in respect of
the violating parties in the five countries mentioned in
the Secretary-General's list.

I am glad to acknowledge the efforts of countries
on the Security Council's agenda where conflicts have
recently ended and where there is no evidence of child
recruitment. We encourage the continued engagement
of the Economic and Social Council in developing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes that take into account the specific needs of
children and of other vulnerable groups in building the
conditions for post-conflict recovery.

We also note several countries that are not
included on the list but where the problem of child
soldiers is persistent. We are especially concerned
about Burma, where consistent reports indicate wide,
systematic and forced recruitment and training of
children for use in combat. Combined with access
restrictions to vulnerable communities in the country,
this provides a serious impediment to the most basic of
human rights.

The Secretary-General's report points out the
continued need for strengthened monitoring and
reporting mechanisms. We agree. But I also underline
the need for us to work to the fullest extent possible
with existing system architecture. We do not have to
invent new structures or mechanisms. We just need to
insist on efficient and coherent management of the
system in place and on results that make a difference
on the ground.

As Carol Bellamy has reminded us, we have
made promises that we have to keep.

