The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack in Iraq that
targeted the democratically elected Council of
Representatives. The Security Council expresses
its deep sympathy and condolences to the victims
of this heinous act of terrorism and their families,
and to the people and the Government of Iraq.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism
to justice, and urges all States, in accordance with
their obligations under international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions, to
cooperate actively with the Iraqi authorities in
this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.
the

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council strongly supports
efforts to promote national dialogue,
reconciliation and broad political participation in
ensuring unity, peace, security and stability in
Iraq. Furthermore, the Security Council demands
that those who use violence in an attempt to
subvert the political process must cease
hostilities, lay down their arms and participate in
that process.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
continued support for the Iraqi people and
Government as they rebuild their country and
strengthen the foundations of sustainable peace,
constitutional democracy, and social and
economic progress."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/l l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
07-30543
