Mr. Abe (spoke in French): I am honoured today
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms, contained in document S/2005/69.

Pursuant to the request made by the President of
the Security Council in his statement of 19 January
2004, this report provides an overview of the initiatives
undertaken to further implement the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms of 20 September 2002 on ways and means
by which the Security Council could contribute to
dealing with the question of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration. Those recommendations covered four
main topics: first, the implementation of the
Programme of Action on small arms and light
weapons; secondly, Security Council-mandated
sanctions and arms embargoes; thirdly, conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of former combatants;
and fourthly, confidence-building measures.

The present report was prepared by the
Department for Disarmament Affairs in close
consultation with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Children's Fund and the International Criminal Police
Organization.

(spoke in English)

Much progress has been achieved in some key
areas, such as the efforts to enhance cooperation to
enable States to trace illicit small arms and light
weapons; measures to increase the effectiveness of
sanctions; the adoption of more rigorous measures
against violations of arms embargoes; control over the
export and transit of small arms and light weapons,
including international efforts to address the problem
of illicit brokering in such weapons; and transparency
in armaments.

The increasingly vigorous actions recently taken
by the Security Council with respect to the
implementation of sanctions and arms embargoes are
particularly encouraging. The systematic establishment
of monitoring mechanisms to support, monitor and
assess the implementation of sanctions and to provide
technical advice to the sanctions committees is an
important development. Equally noteworthy is the
adoption by the Council of measures to identify and
punish violators of arms embargoes as well as those
who support such violations.

The greater attention being given by the Security
Council to the specific needs of women and children
and the receiving communities in the context of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants in post-conflict situations is also
commendable. In that connection, also noteworthy is
the demobilization of thousands of child soldiers in
Afghanistan, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

The report also underscores that more needs to he
done in a number of areas, namely the links between
illicit small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources; greater
support for the reintegration of former combatants into
their communities; greater interaction between the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the
issue of small arms and light weapons; and support for
the establishment of the Small Arms Advisory Service.

Today's open debate on small arms takes place in
the wake of the second substantive session of the
Open-ended Working Group to negotiate an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons, which was held recently at
Headquarters in New York. That session considered a
draft international instrument prepared on the basis of
discussions held at the Working Group's first
substantive session. Although the Open-ended Working
Group seems to be moving closer to an agreement on a
number of technical issues, it is still far from reaching
a consensus on some important issues, particularly the
nature of the international instrument. The challenge
facing the Open-ended Working Group is to build a
consensus on the various substantive issues by the end
of its third session in June 2005. I trust that Member
States will muster the political will necessary to bridge
the differences and to bring that process to a positive
outcome.

The Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council to address the
challenge posed by illicit small arms and light weapons
in the context of matters under the Council's
consideration. I am confident that this meeting will
contribute to strengthening the achievements obtained
thus far, as well as to identifying the best approaches to
addressing the areas of continued concern.

