Dato Lim Jock Hoi: At the outset, allow me to express my appreciation for this opportunity to brief the Security Council upon the invitation of Viet Nam, which holds the Council presidency this month and is Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) for 2020. ASEAN is also fortunate that Indonesia, another ASEAN member State, has been a Council member since last year, thereby marking a rare opportunity for ASEAN, with two of its members sitting in the Chamber. But beyond our appreciation for the chance to speak at the Council is our acknowledgement of the recognition accorded to the important role that regional organizations, including ASEAN, play in promoting regional peace, stability and prosperity. Indeed, it is often said that, because of their knowledge and familiarity of their respective region's nuances, regional organizations are in a good position to complement the work of the United Nations. It is my honour to brief the Council today on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining peace and security and the role of ASEAN, which is based on the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations. In that connection, I am pleased to touch upon two matters - first, ASEAN's contributions to peace, security and prosperity, and, two, the importance of ASEAN's relations with its external partners, including the United Nations. As is widely recognized, the global community today is fraught with many issues and challenges, from the strategic level to that of our individual peoples, and from the physical to the digital domain. The bottom line, however, is how to maintain peace and stability - because it is peace and stability that underpin economic prosperity. In other words, without peace and stability, there can be no economic prosperity; and without economic prosperity, peace and stability would be difficult to achieve, much less to maintain. It is based on that premise that ASEAN, since it was founded in 1967, has worked diligently for peace and stability in our part of the world amid diverse political, economic and social systems. By promoting economic cooperation and serving as a confidence-building platform, ASEAN has successfully enabled the South- East Asian region to evolve - having been previously described as the Balkans of the region - into a Community that provides opportunities to all. Indeed, the ASEAN Charter underscores the importance of the principle of comprehensive security to responding effectively to all forms of threats, transnational crimes and transboundary challenges.Having gone through difficult times in history when South-East Asia was deeply affected by wars and conflicts, the member States of ASEAN hold high the value of peace, which is clearly specified in the ASEAN Charter as the very first purpose of ASEAN, "(tlo maintain and enhance peace, security and stability and further strengthen peace-oriented values in the region". By signing on to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, ASEAN member States committed to maintaining peaceful relationships with one another, guided by the principles of mutual respect, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes, among others. To date, many of ASEAN's external partners have likewise acceded to the Treaty, including several members of the Security Council, and other States have also manifested their interest in doing so. But beyond the political commitment to pursue and promote a cooperative relationship is the evolution of ASEAN regionalism anchored in dialogue and consultation in order to build consensus. The primacy of that approach has enabled ASEAN member States to address issues confronting the region, to arrive at approaches acceptable to all and to manage differences, thereby enabling them to move forward, notwithstanding the diversity in their political, economic and social systems. In our part of the world, we call it the ASEAN Way - a unique manner of dealing with issues that is difficult to comprehend for some outside observers, but is fully understood by ASEAN members. In other words, the ASEAN Way has become a way of life in ASEAN. Another unique contribution of ASEAN to nurturing a conducive environment for peace and stability is the ability to initiate and be the driving force on regional mechanisms and frameworks for promoting dialogue, cooperation and confidence-building, bringing together not only its member States but also external partners, including key players in the region and major global Powers. The forums with ASEAN at the core - such as ASEAN+3, the ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) and the East Asia Summit, long became important frameworks where the culture of peace and the habit of dialogue and cooperation are nurtured by ASEAN, thereby helping prevent disputes and conflicts from arising. ASEAN's achievements in shaping and promoting norms that govern inter-State relations and behaviour in the region have also been duly recognized. ASEAN has been able to incorporate external Powers into its established rules and norms, including through their accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, respect for the ASEAN Way and ASEAN centrality and abiding by ASEAN's rules in participation at ASEAN-led mechanisms. ASEAN has also actively engaged in efforts to formulate norms and codes of conduct that complement international law by ensuring that States behave in amicable ways by upholding the rule of law when managing differences and maintaining peace, security and stability. Maintaining peace and stability in the region has enabled ASEAN to reap the peace dividend, so to speak. With a combined gross domestic product (GDP) of $3 trillion - according to latest available figures, from 2018 - ASEAN is the fifth-largest economy in the world, accounting for 3.5 per cent of the global economy in nominal terms, and as high as 6.5 per cent in terms of purchasing power parity. For almost two decades, ASEAN has been growing at an average annual rate of 5.3 per cent - consistently above the global average. ASEAN is now a global trade powerhouse as the fourth-largest trader in the world, accounting for more than 7 per cent of global trade. ASEAN's total trade reached $2.8 trillion in 2018 - more than 90 per cent of its GDP. ASEAN's economic growth has directly translated into lifting people from poverty. Measured in terms of purchasing power parity, statistics show that the ASEAN population living below the $1.25 purchasing power parity per day declined from 47 per cent in 1990 to 14 per cent in 2015. That trend is expected to continue. With a population of almost 650 million people, a rapidly growing middle class and more than half of its population under the age of 30, ASEAN is a very attractive market. With such dynamism and immense potential, ASEAN has become the world's top investment destination. In 2018, ASEAN received $154.7 billion in foreign direct investment flows - the highest in its history, accounting for almost 12 per cent of global flows. ASEAN's efforts in economic integration have also paid off, with intra-ASEAN trade accounting for the highest shares in trade and investment, at 23 per cent and 15.9 per cent, respectively. A major part of ASEAN integration is skilled labour mobility, which is being facilitated through various mutualrecognition arrangements among skilled professionals within ASEAN. It could therefore be rightfully claimed that the vision of the founding fathers of ASEAN to promote economic prosperity has today become a reality, but its positive performance thus far should not be taken for granted. It is important for ASEAN to keep its market open and forge ahead with its reform and economic integration agenda. It is likewise essential to narrow or close the development gap, as that would contribute to ensuring the sustainability of the peace dividend that ASEAN currently enjoys. It is for that reason that ASEAN puts a premium on sustainable and equitable development to make sure every part of the Community, including the Mekong and the East ASEAN areas, are on track with ASEAN's common development path. That is also why that subregional initiatives such as the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area, among others, serve as building blocks for ASEAN-wide integration and development. It is also in that sense that developing our human capital, including women, children and youth, has been high on ASEAN's agenda. At their most recent summit last year, ASEAN leaders noted the completion of the review regarding the implementation of the Initiative for ASEAN Integration Work Plan III. They tasked the Initiative's task force with following up on the review's recommendations to improve the effectiveness of the Work Plan and sustain work on narrowing any development divide that might exist. Complementing that initiative are the poverty alleviation programmes being undertaken across ASEAN. The ASEAN Ministers Meeting on Rural Development and Poverty Eradication continues to work to address challenges brought about by poverty and strengthen resilience at the community level. Last year, they issued an ASEAN ministerial statement on adopting a community- driven development. Indeed, development mustbe sustainable- something that has been enshrined in ASEAN's agenda. The ASEAN Community Vision 2025, adopted in 2015, underlines the complementarity of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with ASEAN community-building efforts to raise living standards for our peoples. It is also worth noting that the sense among ASEAN peoples of belonging to ASEAN as a regional Community has deepened. To demonstrate ASEAN's efforts as a people-oriented, people-centred Community and enhance ASEAN's abilities to provide assistance to our nationals, ASEAN has operationalized its guidelines on consular assistance by ASEAN member States' missions in third countries to nationals of other ASEAN member States. As ASEAN moves forward towards its goal of building an ASEAN Community, challenges abound. Like other regions in the world, we have a number of issues that could potentially make the South-East Asian region unstable. ASEAN has taken pragmatic steps to deal with those issues and prevent them from making our region volatile, in full cognizance of their complexities. While external observers oftentimes view ASEAN as not doing enough, ASEAN's success or failure in dealing with those issues should be judged by whether or not ASEAN has prevented conflict from arising or spreading further. ASEAN'scommunity-building efforts are complemented and supported by its robust external partnerships, including with the United Nations. Beyond being granted observer status by the General Assembly, there are established modalities for ASEAN-United Nations relations at various levels based on mutual benefit, from Secretariat-to- secretariat interaction between our organizations and the ASEAN-United Nations ministerial meeting to the ASEAN-United Nations summit, where ASEAN leaders and the Secretary-General of the United Nations engage in strategic dialogue. That is aimed at strengthening ASEAN-United Nations cooperation in line with the joint declaration on cooperation in the spheres of political-security, economic and socio- cultural cooperation. We adopted the Complementarities Roadmap 2020-2025 to promote synergy between the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the most recent ASEAN- United Nations summit, held in Bangkok in November 2019. Through the Roadmap, ASEAN hopes to ensure that its Vision 2025 supports and contributes to the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals. Likewise, it is meant to ensure that the goals set forth in the Sustainable Development Agenda are taken into account as ASEAN pursues its community-building vision. The complementarities vision is highlighted in a series of symposiums on the Sustainable Development Goals that ASEAN has undertaken in its partnershipwith the United Nations Development Programme since 2016, as well as the annual High-Level Brainstorming Dialogue on Enhancing Complementarities between the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which ASEAN has co-organized with the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific since 2017. Meanwhile, ever since the five-year Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations was put in place, in 2016, tangible results have been achieved, with 93 per cent of action lines - or 96 out of 103 - contained in the Plan having been implemented thus far. That is a testament to the commitment of our organizations in sustaining our comprehensive partnership. Among the areas where ASEAN and the United Nations have pursued cooperation are, to name but a few, transnational issues; humanitarian assistance and disaster response; the prevention and control of infectious diseases; counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism; preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution; peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding; nuclear disarmament; capacity-building, such as on the role of women in promoting peace and security; and addressing the global existential threat of climate change, including natural hazards, haze pollution and changes in global weather patterns, which have created disturbances previously unseen in terms of scale and magnitude. As we witness fluctuating temperatures and weather disturbances afflicting places previously unaffected by such calamities, disaster risk reduction and management as well as resilience must remain priorities for ASEAN-United Nations cooperation. We therefore appreciate the continuing role of the United Nations in enhancing the capacity of the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management through its capacity-building programmes. ASEAN is also making efforts to better prepare the ASEAN Community to address existing and forthcoming challenges, such as natural disasters, by diversifying its sources of funding. Terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization are among the major security challenges that the global community continues to face. ASEAN itselfhas not been spared the terror attacks perpetuated by extremists and radical groups and individuals and is therefore taking pragmatic steps to address this issue. We have adopted the ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalization and Violent Extremism (2018- 2025) and its work plan, the Bali Work Plan. ASEAN sees the importance of comprehensive approaches to counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism, which dovetails with the Secretary- General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. By adopting the ASEAN Declaration on Culture of Prevention for a Peaceful, Inclusive, Resilient, Healthy and Harmonious Society in 2017, ASEAN has taken steps to promote a culture of prevention by focusing on understanding the root cause and consequences of violent extremism, with an emphasis on the importance of moderation to counter violent extremism, including radicalization. Such initiatives are complemented by additional ASEAN and United Nations efforts, including a range of capacity-building activities to address the phenomena of foreign terrorist fighters and terrorism financing. Given the possibility of extremists and radicalized individuals developing improvised explosive devices, it is equally important that ASEAN develop its capacity to ensure that the various chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear elements, which are primarily lodged under the medical and science sectors of the individual ASEAN member States, are protected and secured, thereby preventing individuals and groups from using such elements and materials for illicit and criminal activities. As ASEAN deepens its community-building process and our borders become more seamless, we expect to see an increasing flow of people, whether for tourism or job opportunities, across ASEAN member States. Increased flows of people are accompanied by the attendant social, political, economic and even security risks, which need to be mitigated. ASEAN is therefore working on effective border management, which will contribute to ensuring the security of ASEAN peoples against transnational crimes and other cross-border challenges. Preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention are a shared area of interest between the United Nations and ASEAN. As we have stressed, ASEAN itself is a living testament to the importance of preventive diplomacy, with conflict prevention being one of the reasons for its existence. Throughout ASEAN's evolution as a regional organization, preventingdisputes from arising, preventing them from becoming conflicts and preventing the spread of conflict - the three elements of preventive diplomacy - have been ASEAN's key objectives. Cooperation with the United Nations in further enhancing our capacity to undertake preventive diplomacy measures, such as, for example, through workshops organized by the United Nations in conjunction with the ASEAN Regional Forum, one of whose key milestones is preventive diplomacy, is beneficial. Capacity-building activities such as the ASEAN- United Nations workshops and regional dialogues on political-security cooperation, a flagship programme under the ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership since 2012, has been useful for ASEAN. The workshops have focused on a range of issues important to ASEAN: preventive diplomacy, in 2014, conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and the prevention of violent extremism, in 2016, the role of women in the prevention of violent extremism, in 2018, and more recently, in December last year, enhancing the capacity of the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation. In 2020, ASEAN plans to co-organize with the United Nations the second ASEAN-United Nations Electoral Observation Workshop to promote good governance, human rights and democracy in the region through training and sharing of best practices. Apart from solving its own issues, through its members States ASEAN also makes a tangible contribution to the work of the United Nations by participating and contributing to United Nations peacekeeping missions. We note that to date, ASEAN member States have contributed around 5,000 peacekeepers to various United Nations missions, including the peacekeeping missions in Lebanon and South Sudan. All 10 ASEAN member States have endorsed the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, renewing our collective engagement with United Nations peacekeeping. Within ASEAN, we are taking steps to further develop our peacekeeping-operation-related competencies and capacities through our ASEAN Peacekeeping Centres Network and through the Experts' Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations under the ADMM-Plus. On that note, I would like to convey our appreciation to our ADMM.-Plus partners for their continued participation and support to the said Experts' Working Group and its practical activities. In addition to maintaining peace through peacekeeping operations and enforcing it through peace-enforcement mechanisms, building peace is equally, if not more, important. Peacebuilding has always been a priority of ASEAN's agenda, where the participation of all sectors, including women, plays a key role. ASEAN leaders themselves affirmed that in 2017, when they adopted the Joint Statement on Promoting Women, Peace and Security in ASEAN. The establishment of the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry is a step towards the goal of women playing a greater role in building peace. That is an area where ASEAN and the United Nations could further enhance collaboration. It is also encouraging that there is now momentum for strengthening cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations in support of the enhanced role of women within ASEAN in areas such as peacekeeping operations, mediation and reconciliation. ASEAN shares similar goals and a like-minded vision with the United Nations in its efforts to pursue the elimination of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction by signing the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWEZ) in 1995. While the Treaty and its plan of action are already being implemented, the signing of the Treaty's Protocol by the Permanent Five remains inconclusive. In the light of that, we are hopeful that the United Nations can support the ongoing efforts of the States parties to the Treaty and nuclear-weapon States to resolve all outstanding issues, in accordance with the objectives and principles of the SEANWFZ Treaty. We would also like to highlight that ASEAN and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) signed the ASEAN-IAEA Practical Arrangements, which set out a framework of cooperation in the areas of nuclear science, technology and applications and nuclear safety, security and safeguards for a period of five years. Meanwhile, dealing with the so-called remnants of war, particularly unexploded ordnance, given the security risk that they pose to our people, remains one of ASEAN's priorities, including the establishment of the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Center. Likewise, the Expert Working Group on Humanitarian Mine Action has been established under the ADMM-Plus. That is therefore one area on which the United Nations and ASEAN could work further. The advent of the digital age and the fourth industrial revolution present many opportunities. As early as 2017, the digital economy already accountedfor 7 per cent of ASEAN's GDP. The potential is massive. If fully utilized, digital integration could uplift the region's GDP by $1 trillion by 2025, which equaled one-third of the region's GDP in 2019. In that context, last year ASEAN leaders issued the ASEAN Declaration on the Industrial Transformation to Industry 4.0 and reaffirmed ASEAN's commitment to develop a consolidated strategy for the fourth industrial revolution. ASEAN's digital penetration is high, with cellular/mobile phone density now pegged at 128 per cent, indicating that each person within the ASEAN region actually owns more than one mobile phone. Internet subscription is at 50 per cent. In that context, the ASEAN Smart Cities Network is a promising initiative that promotes interoperability, enables cities to share best practices on addressing urbanization and deepens ASEAN's integration as a single digital market. As such, we welcome the partnerships that various United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, have developed to support the implementation of smart cities in the region. But the fourth industrial revolution also poses challenges for ASEAN, particularly amid the ongoing rapid urbanization in our region. ASEAN therefore needs to enhance its capacity to deal with the attendant risks of technological and scientific development, particularly in view of the growing sophistication and transboundary nature of cyberthreats. At the thirty- fifth ASEAN Summit in November last year, ASEAN leaders emphasized the need to enhance regional cybersecurity cooperation througha feasible cross-pillar cybersecurity cooperation mechanism, strengthening a rules-based cyberspace, as well as supporting the cybersecurity activities and training programmes of the ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of Excellence in Singapore and the ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Capacity Building Centre in Bangkok. We welcome the United Nations support in those efforts. We also look forward to collaborating with the United Nations Group of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended Working Group on the issue of security in the use of information and communications technology. The engagement with those United Nations bodies would be useful for ASEAN. The areas that I sketched out are just few of the those on which ASEAN and the United Nations collaborate. ASEAN and the United Nations are collaborating in many other areas. We look forward to commencing work on crafting the next plan of action of the ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership for the period 2021-2025 to sustain the momentum of our cooperation. As the year 2020 marks theseventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, those present can count on ASEAN's efforts and commitment to uphold the Charter. We in ASEAN are committed to multilateralism and its processes, of which the United Nations remains at the very centre. The United Nations continues to be the most important platform for pursuing international cooperation and dialogue, as well as resolving many of the world's most pressing problems. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations provides an opportune time for the States Members of the United Nations, including ASEAN countries, to work closely together towards the strengthening of the United Nations for the better, and in the interest of international peace, security and prosperity. We therefore look forward to participating and contributing to the United Nations seventy-fifth anniversary's global conversation towards shaping the future we want and the United Nations we need. In conclusion, the Council plays a critical role in keeping and maintaining global peace and stability. Worth commending are the efforts being undertaken within the Council to ensure that it remains responsive to the increasing demands of keeping the peace and maintaining a secure and stable world for all. We hope to learn more through exchanges about best practices and capacity-building initiatives, as we in ASEAN also continue to evolve our organization so that it remains cohesive and responsive to the increasing demands and needs of our region and beyond. A strong, united and cohesive ASEAN is in the interest of the international community. We look forward to the continued support of all our partners so that we will continue to maintain peace and stability in the region, while we work to bring greater prosperity and development to the peoples of ASEAN. Again, allow me to reiterate our appreciation for this opportunity to speak at the Council today.
