Mr. Christian (Ghana): I would like to join
preceding speakers in commending the Indonesian
delegation for organizing this debate. I would also like
to thank you, Sir, for your kind words at the beginning
of the meeting regarding the Ghana delegation and me,
in reference to the Ghanaian presidency of this
Council.

The recurrence of today's theme in the Council's
open debates is an acknowledgement of the increasing
relevance of regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation is optimistic that at the end of our
deliberations, we will resolve to strengthen the
cooperation between the various regional organizations
and the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council.

The growing importance of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention and
resolution is not merely the result of the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is also the natural
consequence of the failure sometimes of the
international community to respond promptly and
effectively to some conflict situations.

The relevance of regional or subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security cannot be overemphasized. Regional
organizations often have in-depth knowledge about the
root causes of conflicts in their respective regions.
Those organizations may have better knowledge and
understanding of the dynamics, as well as of the parties
and personalities involved in a given conflict, and can
therefore be indispensable sources of useful
information, which will enhance the effectiveness of
the United Nations in the management of those
conflicts.

Some regional bodies are more flexible in the
allocation of resources, including troops, and are
therefore able to deploy them, faster than the United
Nations can. Furthermore, regional and subregional
organizations can be very useful in launching
peacebuilding activities in support of the United
Nations and can facilitate post-conflict reconstruction.
In addition, as the world continues to be confronted
with both new and old threats to international peace
and security, the demand for peacekeeping will
continue to increase. With the United Nations having
no standing army of its own, the regional and
subregional organizations can be indispensable
resource pools for tapping troops for peacekeeping
operations.

Moreover, as the concept of international security
has itself been broadened with the declaration of a
global war against terrorism, local knowledge and
expertise will be crucial in any antiterrorism
operations. Addressing these and other emerging issues
requires effective cooperation with the relevant
regional or subregional bodies.

The broad strength of regional organizations
vis-a-vis the United Nations has generally centred on
the motivations of local actors to become involved in
addressing conflicts and to maintain involvement even
in the face of casualties. Some members of the Security
Council are sometimes more inclined to seek regional
solutions for operations where a conflict falls within a
traditional sphere of influence or where major powers
are reluctant to deploy their own forces. This may also
be driven by concerns about the perceived difficulty
and cost of mustering support within the wider
international community and the legislative processes
of the United Nations.

Reflecting these tendencies, regional
peacekeeping capacity is undergoing considerable
development, propelled by the interest of countries
within and outside those regions. However, these
developments should not be regarded as favouring the
arguments for multilateral or regional peacekeeping
operations as substitutes for or replacements of United
Nations operations. They must be construed in the
broader sense as part of the overall efforts to enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and the
regional and subregional organizations in order to
share responsibilities, based on the comparative
advantage of each, leading to complementarity and the
avoidance of competition.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and it is in this context that
effective cooperation must take place. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional and
subregional organizations is a shared responsibility.
Members of the regional and subregional organizations
should ensure respect for the fundamental principles
enshrined in the Charter or instruments establishing
these organizations, especially in the areas of peace
and security. In the case of Africa, for instance, the
Constitutive Act of the African Union frowns upon the
unconstitutional overthrow of Governments and
enjoins its member States to ensure respect for rule of
law and the democratic principles of governance.

While the regional and subregional organizations
endeavour to address their peace and security
challenges, the United Nations and the international
community must support their efforts, keeping in mind
that the Security Council still bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of the international
peace and security. Indeed, more action is needed from
the international community to tackle the wider global
sources of armed conflict. The United Nations should
support capacity-building and the training of personnel
and should maintain a sustained engagement with these
organizations.

To ensure the success and effectiveness of
regional organizations, co-deployment sanctioned by
the United Nations in an operation carried out by
regional or subregional organizations should establish
a clear framework that will include specifying
objectives, careful delineation of the respective roles
and responsibilities of the United Nations and those
organizations. In the end, however, the involvement of
regional organizations must not be seen as diluting the
primary responsibility of the Security Council.

Finally, Ghana supports the adoption of the
presidential statement prepared by the Indonesian
delegation.

