I thank you, Mr. President, and the German presidency for organizing this virtual high-level open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs for sharing their valuable insights. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has upended the entire world. The lack of an adequate and sustained response has taken the crisis beyond the health and socioeconomic sectors. It is affecting the political domain. The pandemic has also constrained the United Nations ongoing peace mediation and the work of the special political missions. Casualties among front-line responders, particularly law enforcement officials and other security sector personnel, and troop illness are also having an impact. All these factors are causing disruption in peace and security at the national and global levels. Some of the secondary security implications of the pandemic are already visible. Violence against women and children is increasing; cybercrime and Internet-based criminal activities are growing; and massive joblessness and other economic shocks are already hitting hard. The loss of jobs or income, without hope of reinstatement, could result in increased criminal and anti-social activities, as well as other security threats. The work of civil society organizations providing support to women and other vulnerable communities has been disrupted. The pandemic is also causing additional vulnerability for returnee migrant workers. Economic uncertainties are increasing the vulnerabilities of certain sectors of the population, leading to their exploitation in the hands of organized criminal networks. Since such organized crime is mostly transnational and cross-border in nature, the impacts will not be confined within the borders of any particular country or region. There are some context-specific security implications of the COVID-19 pandemic at which the Council needs to have a closer look. First, in humanitarian settings, COVID-19 is exacerbating the despair and hopelessness of people living in refugee camps or other settlements. The lack, or limited supply, of humanitarian assistance due to the pandemic-enforced travel restrictions is posing greater challenges. However, even bigger challenges could be caused by the slowing down of political processes aimed at durable solutions. For instance, both the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Organization for Migration have put a halt to their resettlement programmes in most situations globally. Last month, referring to the Rohingya crisis, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in his briefing to the Council said: "What worries me is that, among the refugees, there is a growing sense that solutions are not coming - that solutions, especially in terms of returning to Myanmar, continue to be elusive. We see this despair, and are multiplying our mental health programmes, because people are really very desperate." (S/2020/560, annex I, p. 7) Indeed, the Rohingyas, especially young people, are gradually yielding to frustration and desperation, and we all can easily imagine what this desperation could lead to. Secondly, with regard to conflict settings, due to COVID-19 civilians trapped in conflict situations are doubly victimized. While health infrastructure are already affected by conflicts, civilians continue to suffer from continuous threats of hate speech, xenophobia and confinements, as well as potential displacements. Despite the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, deadly conflicts continue to cause devastation in some parts of the world. In our neighbourhood, the clearance operations in Rakhine state have the potential to cause the suffering of civilians and perhaps a repeat of their exodus. The Council may like to take due cognizance of this important issue to pre-empt yet another possible crisis in Rakhine state. Thirdly, in peacekeeping settings, even during the pandemic, our peacekeepers are responding to the call of duty and carrying out their mandated peace operations. Besides, they are taking up additional responsibilities to support national efforts to contain the spread of the pandemic. In the process, they themselves are becoming exposed, which is putting them at a higher risk than ever before. Embedding pandemic preparedness in the future planning and setting of mandates for peacekeeping missions may go a long way towards ensuring the safety of peacekeepers. This pandemic, its security implications and, more so, the limited use of military solutions to such security challenges have perhaps brought to the fore the need to rethink the entire notion of security. Security has to be truly overarching. To address the security implications of the pandemic, what we need the most is global solidarity and cooperation, as well as the convergence of political will. Member States should be able to resolve the underlying causes of insecurity. There may be a need for the repurposing of resources. The participation of all stakeholders is imperative. With its resolution 2532 (2020) now adopted, the Security Council should be better placed to rally support around the Secretary-General's global ceasefire appeal. It can ask all parties to a conflict to respect the cessation of violence and hostilities. Above all, the Council needs to step up fulfilling its responsibility by addressing the existing and traditional security challenges before they are exacerbated by COVID-19 and translated into new security challenges.
