Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate the Niger on its successful presidency of the Security Council in September. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important Security Council summit and for your pertinent choice of theme, namely, global governance after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This theme reflects the shared conviction that the Security Council has a central role to play in addressing the implications of this epidemic for international peace and security. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing and to reaffirm the unwavering support of Tunisia for his constructive initiatives to escalate the Organization's involvement and mobilize international efforts to help States and peoples cope with the COVID-19 pandemic and contain and mitigate its effects. I also wish to extend my thanks to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for his remarks, and to express my appreciation for the continued efforts of the Commission and the African Peace and Security Council to silence the guns across our continent and strengthen the capacity of African countries to respond to this pandemic. In the nine or so months since the epidemic began, it has spread to all corners of the globe, and its repercussions for every country and people, without exception, have become more dire. The international community has gradually come to accept that the pandemic has grave repercussions for international peace and security not only in conflict zones, where the pandemic has compounded many existing crises, humanitarian disasters and other volatile situations, but also in every corner of the globe. This pandemic has overshadowed economic, political and social issues, as well international relations. The repercussions of this pandemic may persist for generations and will not disappear when the virus does. They also threaten to exacerbate tensions between international Powers, destabilize regional equilibrium and weaken the multilateral system. In that regard, we completely agree with the Secretary-General's characterization of the current crisis as "the gravest test the international community has faced since the founding of the United Nations". Tunisia was one of the few countries that strove to draw international attention to the danger that the pandemic posed to humankind, and to its destructive impact on peace and security and, indeed, on all aspects of life. Let us therefore adopt a new approach to international security, one that is based on strengthening cooperation among States and peoples, because we believe that no nation, however powerful, can confront this invisible enemy that knows no borders, that we have a shared destiny and that the security and safety of all are linked to the security and safety of each individual without exception. In keeping with that belief, Tunisia, in coordination with France, proposed a draft resolution to the Security Council. In the adopted resolution 2532 (2020), the Council underscores that combating the pandemic requires greater international solidarity and a joint, coordinated and comprehensive response under United Nations auspices, and calls for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and a humanitarian truce in various conflict zones in order to enable the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of assistance, and for special measures to be taken to protect vulnerable groups. I once again express my gratitude and appreciation to all members of the Security Council for unanimously adopting resolution 2532 (2020), in July 2020. I would now like to stress how important it is to comply with that resolution and follow up its implementation by the various stakeholders, especially as the humanitarian repercussions of the pandemic in many conflict areas grow more dire. The immediate, direct repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global health situation should not obscure its negative economic and social ramifications, as all available data indicate that the world economy will experience a sharp contraction of 5.2 per cent, which will inevitably weaken national economies and drive millions more people towards poverty and unemployment. These repercussions will undoubtedly be felt more acutely in developing countries, particularly among vulnerable groups, whose poverty and suffering will deepen. According to the most recent estimates from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the economic recession will force at least 132 million more people into the ranks of the hungry, who currently number 690 million people worldwide. It is no secret that these and other repercussions will further fuel tensions and conflict in the world and trigger a series of mutually reinforcing crises, presenting the Security Council and international actors responsible for maintaining peace with additional challenges. The gravity and complexity of these shared challenges compel us to think about driving the Organization to go beyond the traditional concept of security, which does not encompass all threats to humankind, and address the non-traditional security threats that the world is experiencing today, such as epidemics, environmental disasters, climate change and cybercrime. The urgent need to push for greater solidarity and strengthen international cooperation becomes all the more evident. Tunisia once again calls on the international community to continue to provide the necessary support to the African continent and to help it to assess its promising potential and enhance its development prospects, thereby contributing to realizing the greater security and stability and sustainable development to which its peoples aspire. The changes in international relations wrought, and yet to be wrought, by the COVID-19 pandemic, and which some believe may establish a new global order with different concepts and innovative mechanisms for action, invite us to reflect on the future of global governance, which will be different from what it was before the pandemic. We therefore call for action in order to deepen a shared awareness among the members of the international community that is based on humanitarian concerns, and in order to build a more just global order. We must make a collective effort to use this crisis as the impetus for a new beginning and the creation of different systems of governance that are capable of dealing with contemporary challenges. This can be achieved only by drawing upon lessons learned, rethinking the priorities of our societies and clinging to the values of solidarity to confront crises and rise to challenges. To conclude, I wish to reiterate the conviction of Tunisia that joint action is vital. Tunisia is determined to contribute to developing a renewed vision of cooperation that all parties can agree on, in order to address the pandemic's immediate effects and contain its spread, as well as to achieve the goals set forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It will thus be possible to preserve human dignity and enable the world's peoples to harness their efforts and energies to achieve comprehensive development, communication and solidarity.
