Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the
determination, skill and mastery with which you have
guided the work of the Security Council during the
month of May. I would also like to thank you for
having organized this wrap-up meeting on the theme
"Conflicts in Africa: Security Council missions and
United Nations mechanisms to promote peace and
security". This very timely meeting it taking place as
this body is preparing to send two missions to Africa
next month - to Central Africa and to Western Africa,
two subregions shaken by ongoing conflicts that are
seriously threatening the peace and stability of the
countries in those regions.

In his opening statement this morning,
Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari, the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General on Africa, provided a clear
indication of the stakes involved in the task ahead, as
well as of its scope. He also made some suggestions as
to how to improve upon our approach, for which my
delegation is grateful to him.

Our decision to send missions to Central and
Western Africa leaves no room for doubt about our
desire to contribute to the establishment of peace and
development in these sensitive areas of the continent. It
is up to us to benefit from those missions by making
the necessary contacts at the governmental level and
with political leaders and the civilian populations, so
that we may have an objective view of the situations
and their consequences and be able to refine our
methods of work to find appropriate solutions to the
various situations involved. The victims of conflict
desperately need this. They aspire only to calm and
security in order to focus their energies on improving
their welfare.

However, the Council cannot fully shoulder its
responsibilities unless it acts with the utmost
intelligence with regional and subregional actors,
whose importance and usefulness in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts no longer
needs to be demonstrated. That is why during our visits
we must take due note of the regional dimension, listen
closely to the points of view expressed by the various
actors and take a comprehensive approach in order to
contribute to a just and lasting settlement of the
conflicts.

In addition, my delegation would like to point out
that supporting the peace process necessarily requires
strengthening peacekeeping missions. In that regard,
we area pleased with the decisions taken by the
Council to establish a United Nations mission in Cote
d'Ivoire and to authorize the deployment of an Interim
Emergency Multinational Force in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Furthermore, as a number of speakers have
pointed out, the Council must not lose sight of the
thorny issue of the proliferation and illegal circulation
of light weapons, which further fuels such hotbeds of
tension. A clear message must be sent by the two
Council missions to all who are involved in that
scourge, which is detrimental to the return to peace.
Combating mercenary activities, which are developing
at an alarming rate in West Africa, must not be
overlooked, either.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm its profound conviction that the Council
missions remain useful and very important exercises. It
is our duty to ensure that they are further invigorated
so that they can be more effective instruments in the
service of international peace and security.

