Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to thank the Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/746).

Uruguay underlines the report's indication that,
despite the decrease in armed clashes between the
Government of the Sudan and rebel forces, the security
and human rights situation in Darfur remains unstable.
It should also be noted that one ofthe main flash points of
violence in Darfur continues to involve intercommunal
conflicts, which are closely related to the root causes of
the conflict and are exacerbated by armed militias, as
well as by the fact that weapons are proliferating among
the civilian population and that rule-of-law institutions

continue to lack the capacity and effective means to
meet those challenges.

My delegation considers it vital that the Government
of the Sudan and the armed movements comply with
their unilateral declarations concerning the cessation of
hostilities and move on to the next stages of the peace
process, facilitated by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, with the support of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and
the Sudan and the Joint Special Representative for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Progress in those areas would allow for the
establishment of the necessary conditions for effectively
addressing the root causes of the conflict, such as
intercommunal conflicts, and, moreover, contribute to
the safe return to their homes of the more than 2 million
internally displaced persons in Darfur.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
UNAMID is moving forward in its reconfiguration
in accordance with the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 2363 (2017). As we have repeatedly
said, the Government of the Sudan's cooperation
with the Council and UNAMID is indispensable for
successfully achieving that transition. We note that the
general environment in which UNAMID is operating
has shown signs of improvement, while, at the same
time, a decrease in the number of criminal incidents
and traffic restrictions have also been noted.

Nevertheless, the Mission continues to face several
logistical difficulties that continue to hamper its work,
including delays in issuing visas, especially for human
rights workers in the Area. In that regard, we urge the
Government of the Sudan to expedite the process of
resolving outstanding operational restrictions, while
living up to all its obligations in that respect and
sustaining the positive spirit that characterized the
review process of UNAMID. Furthermore, although
the Mission is drawing down, we are aware of the
important and continuing necessary role that it plays
in the area of the protection of civilians, including, for
example, monitoring human rights violations, carrying
out daily patrols and supporting intercommunal
conflict mediation.

To conclude, allow me to express Uruguay's
gratitude to all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations
country team and humanitarian workers, who continue

to work tirelessly and often in difficult conditions so as
to achieve sustainable peace in Darfur.

