Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's debate on Afghanistan and for
choosing the subject "Building regional partnership in
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link security
and development". We also thank the Secretary-General
for sharing his views on a subject that is so closely
linked to the stability of our region.

Afghanistan is the true heart of Asia and a linchpin
to the economy of the region. As pointed out by several
other speakers, security and development are closely
linked, and that link must drive the policies and actions
of all stakeholders at the conceptual and operational
levels. However, in the case of Afghanistan, that link
is skewed in one direction only - the impact of the
deteriorating security environment on development.

That the security situation weighs adversely on
Afghanistan is reflected in the latest World Bank
Development Update. From 2003 to 2012, Afghanistan
recorded a 9.6 per cent annual economic growth rate.
Last year, the rate was 2.6 per cent, which is better than
the 2.2 per cent recorded in 2016, which in turn was
better than the lower growth rate in 2014-2015. Next
year, the projections are for growth to edge up to 3.2 per
cent, assuming the security situation holds.

Many of us who are engaged in development and
infrastructure projects in Afghanistan are acutely aware
of the disproportionate amount of resources that are
diverted to protecting the projects and infrastructure
that is created, rather than implementing more projects
in the country. While we commonly see attacks on
dams, schools, parliament buildings and electric-power
centres, what is most debilitating for the development
of the country are the attacks on its people. The attacks
on the young in Afghan schools, women in Afghan
hospitals and the hopeful in Afghan mosques all are a
stark reminder of how the very spirit of Afghanistan's
future is being systematically threatened and scarred
by those who believe that violence is the only way to
achieve their goals.

The people of Central and South Asia have
been connected through centuries. We have shared
commonalities of art and culture, ideas and knowledge,
as well as language and traditions. These connections,
while now tarnished by decades of war and instability
in the region, remain resilient even in the face of the
forces of decay and division. Today, they are in need of
rejuvenation and reconnection. To reconnect and revive
the commonalities of the region, we need to confront
these forces of decay and destruction.

It is our belief that the starting point of our
journey to realize the full spectrum of connectivity
between Central and South Asia, as articulated by our
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi - from culture
to commerce; from traditions to technology; from
investments to information technology; from services
to strategy; and from people to politics - begins
in Afghanistan.

In line with our vision of a connected region,
we established in 2017 air corridors between India
and Afghanistan to overfly the obstacles imposed by
geography and mindsets that hurt the welfare of the
Afghan people. We have also cooperated with Iran and
Afghanistan to facilitate the flow of goods between our
countries through the Chabahar port. This also opens
opportunities for surface connectivity between India
and the Central Asian region.

Recent visits to India by President Ashraf Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah in the past
three months have provided impetus to the wide-ranging
new development partnership that both our countries
launched in September 2017. This covers diverse areas,
including education, health, agriculture, infrastructure,
renewable energy, drinking-water supply and human-
resource development. Our people-to-people contacts
extend from colleges and cricket fields to trade
and investment.

For thousands of years, Afghanistan was situated
at the heart of Asia. The cities of Kabul, Balkh, Herat,
Kandahar and Bamiyan constituted some of the key
way stations on the crossroads of history through which
trade, culture, religions, syncretic philosophies and
technologies freely flowed, to reach every corner of
Eurasia. We therefore support the desire of the Afghan
Government and people, as expressed by President
Ghani, to regain their country's former status as the
centre of the Asian crossroads. Afghanistan has always
been at the heart of networks: a roundabout, a place
of meetings, civilizations, religions, cultures and, of
course, armies and traders as well as pilgrims, and,
hopefully, will once again become the true heart of our
region's prosperity.

It is our vision that Afghanistan will regain its
place, and we remain committed to working closely
with our regional and international partners to bring
peace, security, stability and prosperity to Afghanistan.
It is with this in mind that our Prime Minister, during
his visit to Afghanistan on 24 December 2015, to
inaugurate the Parliament building, stopped over
in Lahore, Pakistan. Unfortunately, the visit was
followed by a heinous and barbaric terrorist attack on
the Pathankot airbase on 1 January 2016, perpetrated
and planned by the very same mindsets that attack
the spirit of Afghanistan every day. These mindsets
differentiate between good and bad terrorists and refuse
to see reason in peace. People with these mindsets are
reluctant to join hands in moving the region forward
to build a shared future for our people and our youth.
These mindsets need to change.

We honour the supreme sacrifices made by the
Afghan Defence and Security Forces for the cause
of humanity and in their efforts at fighting terrorism
emanating from beyond Afghanistan's borders.
Terrorism and externally induced instability pose the
gravest threat to Afghanistan's peace, stability and
prosperity, and the growing arc of terrorist violence
endangers our entire region.

There is a common Afghan saying that roughly
translates as, "If water is muddied downstream, do not
waste your time filtering it; better to go upstream and
clean it".

As such, support for voices ofpeace in Afghanistan
alone is not enough. We must focus on addressing the
challenges posed by cross-border terrorism emanating
from safe havens and sanctuaries to our region,
especially to Afghanistan. Ifwe do so, the decay that has
been inflicted on Afghanistan can be made reversible.

The Council has returned after a successful visit to
Afghanistan. It was a visit during which, in the many
interactions they had with a cross-section of Afghan
interlocutors, Council members must certainly have
come across the common Afghan saying, "A sign is
enough for the wise to understand".

We hope that the Council will act with wisdom to
promote the vision of a shared and connected future
for the people of the region by addressing the security
conundrum that Afghanistan faces.

