Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): The
mobilization and the deployment of civilian expertise
in post-conflict situations is one of the priorities of
United Nations peacebuilding activity. In May 2008,
under the United Kingdom presidency, the Council
addressed this issue for the first time (see S/PV.5895).
The Council emphasized the need to swiftly deploy
civilian expertise in the two years following the end of
a conflict.

Allow me, too, to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno and Under-Secretary-General Ms. Susana
Malcorra for their presentation of the report of the
Senior Advisory Group tasked with considering this
issue (see S/2011/85). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Gasana for his intervention, providing the
point of view of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
which we give our full support.

On the one hand, the report enables us to
highlight the shortfalls in the transition between
peacekeeping activities and the restoration of peace. It
also enables us to assess peacebuilding experiences in
recent years in Afghanistan, Somalia, Burundi, Guinea-
Bissau and the Central African Republic in order to
draw relevant lessons. Countries emerging from
conflict often lack the means needed to establish
lasting peace, in particular in areas such as the
restoration of a judicial system and administration,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and the re-establishment of
economic activity and social services, such as
education, health care and so on.

My delegation supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General seeking to establish a reliable
and credible partnership between countries in crisis and
the international community that takes account of the
country's potential, the aspirations and real needs of its
people and the leadership of local authorities in order
to better direct the aid and the many kinds of support
of the international community.

It is vital that such a partnership is ultimately
based on strong national ownership, in particular in the
areas of justice, basic services and the critical functions
of the Administration. By receiving international
assistance, the State emerging from conflict must
regain the exercise of its sovereign prerogatives in
those areas. The partnership between the State
receiving assistance and the international community
should be carried out under the leadership and
governance of the relevant State, even in the absence of
national human resources.

We welcome what the United Nations has already
undertaken in recent years with training programmes
for the civilian and military personnel of States in
transition, or already in a post-conflict situation, so that
such personnel can take on the tasks transferred to
them and replace the external staff deployed in the
context of such missions. The situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Timor-Leste and
Afghanistan are instructive in that regard. Such
capacity-building is crucial to better consolidate the
gains of peace and post-conflict stabilization.

For its part, the Council has a central role to play
given that the mandates of peacekeeping operations
increasingly entail consolidation and reconstruction
tasks. It is therefore our duty to focus on the structure
and new mandates of operations, to ensure that the
resources allocated are sufficient for the assigned tasks
and to have a bearing on effective implementation in
order to fully realize the potential for consolidation and
reconstruction in countries emerging from conflict.

My delegation would like to underscore the view
of the Advisory Group that assistance to a country in
the post-conflict period must respect the country's
priorities and real needs. That is the basis of ownership
and the guarantee of better results on the ground.

In conclusion, we welcome the establishment of
the team that Ms. Malcorra will lead to examine the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Group. We are convinced that their
conclusions will make it possible to increase the
effectiveness of missions on the ground and the
possibilities for lasting stability of countries emerging
from conflict.

