I thank the German presidency of the Security Council for convening today's important debate. I am also grateful to High Commissioner Bachelet, Special Representative Shearer, and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga for their insightful briefings. Their insights from the ground remind us that there can be no lasting peace or any sustainable development without respect for human rights and the rule of law. This oft-repeated refrain in the Security Council is a concept each of us endorsed in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, but it is a vision that we all too often fail to realize. I would like to turn to the situation in Mali as an example. Through the Security Council, we have mandated the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to complete three vital human rights functions: first, to act to prevent serious human rights violations and attacks on civilians, in line with the United Nations protection-of-civilians policy; secondly, to monitor, investigate and report abuses or violations; and thirdly - and importantly - to support Malian efforts aimed at, on the one hand, protecting and promoting human rights, and, on the other hand, also importantly, fighting impunity. This multipronged role is fundamental to preventing a further erosion of trust between States and their peoples and thereby to ultimately helping to stabilize the country. The integrated response at the heart of the Mission's adaptation plan, with better coordination between military, police and civilian components, should enable MINUSMA to respond more effectively to reported abuses. It is needed. Despite our best efforts, reports from High Commissioner Bachelet's Office and the Mission continue to highlight persistent human rights abuses and violations in Mali and indeed across the Sahel. MINUSMA, like any peace operation around the world, can only ever be a part of the solution. It is incumbent on all national Governments to protect and promote human rights, investigate allegations of violations and abuses openly and transparently, and hold those responsible to account. When national Governments are unwilling to act, and where the international community is able, we should always be prepared to deploy the full range of tools at our disposal and hold perpetrators to account, including through the use of sanctions. Strong coordination and collaboration among all relevant parts of the United Nations machinery and the Malian Government should enable the Malians to strengthen their capacity both to protect and to promote human rights, as well, importantly, as the rule of law. United Nations peace operations have an obligation not only to monitor human rights violations and abuses, but also to ensure that their support for other security forces is human rights compliant. The Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces sets this out very clearly. The Policy also gives an incentive to those security forces to deploy and strengthen their own safeguards. I encourage our missions to show more clearly how they are applying it. Every member of a mission's personnel, from the special representatives and force commanders to contingent troops, should understand their role and responsibilities both to protect and to promote human rights. We must ensure that missions have the specialist capabilities they need to respond effectively to specific human rights challenges in the field. The devastating impact of conflict-related sexual violence in South Sudan, where nearly a quarter of the reported cases involve children, is an unwelcome reminder of the abuses that take place and why we must do better and do more. Reports from the field tells us that survivors continue to struggle, particularly in terms of access to medical and mental-health care. That having been said, I am encouraged that the Government of South Sudan has acknowledged these concerns and expressed a willingness to work together with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to combat sexual and gender-based violence. Let me assure everyone that the United Kingdom is absolutely committed to supporting survivors, including children born of conflict-related sexual violence, and to holding all perpetrators to account. We call upon all Council members to support the inclusion of vital human rights experts in our missions, including more gender and child protection experts, and, importantly, more women's protection advisers. To conclude, human rights are all about safeguarding the dignity of each and every person around the globe and unleashing their true potential. That is why States that fail to protect and promote human rights are less prosperous, less stable and less able to meet the demands of their people, and more likely to remain on the agenda of the Security Council. Human rights are intertwined with all aspects of United Nations peace operations. The Council's focus must therefore be unflinching. We must promote, protect, strengthen and realize human rights wherever we work. It is in our interests. Indeed, it is in all our interests and in the interests of all people across the globe.
