Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): The resolution which is before us,
co-sponsored by the United Kingdom and eight other
members of this Council, is in direct response to continued
Iraqi obstruction of the Special Commission (UNSCOM) in
the execution of the mandate given to it by this Council, in
contravention of the demands of Security Council resolution
1115 (1997), adopted unanimously by the Council on 21
June 1997.

In that resolution, the Council stated its firm intention
to impose additional measures on those Iraqi officials
responsible for instances of non-cooperation with the
Special Commission and those which had not allowed the
Special Commission's inspection teams immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to Iraqi facilities
and personnel. The incidents described by the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission in his report of 6
October 1997 show that the Iraqi regime chose to ignore
that warning.

We, together with our fellow co-sponsors, believe,
therefore, that the Council should react robustly to
continued Iraqi flouting of Security Council resolutions.
We further believe that the resolution on which we are
about to vote is a reasonable, proportionate and focused
response to repeated Iraqi failures.

It contains a firm and consistent decision which
builds on and develops the firmly stated intention in
resolution 1115 (1997) "to impose additional measures".
It spells out those measures - what they are and to
whom they will apply - while generously providing a
further opportunity over the next six months for Iraq to
demonstrate by its good faith that they are unnecessary.
It begins straight away the process of designating, on the
basis of incidents recorded since the adoption of
resolution 1115 (1997), who some of the targeted
individuals would be, so that action on paragraph 6 of the
resolution could begin at once, if needed. It also
postpones any further sanctions reviews until next April,
because Iraq's obstruction has made it impossible for the
Special Commission to complete its work.

The basis for these decisions is clearly set out in the
resolution. It expresses grave concern at the additional
incidents of Iraqi refusal to allow UNSCOM. access to
sites in Iraq since the passage of resolution 1115 (1997).
It condemns these incidents, as well as the endangering of
the safety of UNSCOM. staff, the destruction of
documents of interest to the Special Commission and the
interference with the freedom of movement of UNSCOM
personnel. It decides that these incidents of Iraqi non-
compliance are a flagrant violation of Security Council
resolutions. It notes that, in his report, the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission was unable to
advise this Council that Iraq was in substantial
compliance with the demands of resolution 1115 (1997).

To us and our fellow co-sponsors this provides
adequate justification to move forward from the decision
we took in June. We shall regret it if a few Council
members, for whatever reasons of their own, are unable
to subscribe to this View. We have worked hard and in
good faith to accommodate all members' preoccupations
on the text. But we were not willing to compromise the

 

underlying purpose of the resolution or the responsibilities
of the United Nations Security Council in order to appease
Iraq - an Iraq, by the way, whose spokesmen have
unwisely tried to threaten and intimidate the United Nations
in recent days.

This Council will not be deflected from its course by
unacceptable Iraqi attempts at blackmail. The message
which needs to be sent clearly is that if the Government of
Iraq chooses to challenge the will and authority of the
United Nations Security Council, it can be sure of a firm
and principled response. If Iraq has not yet understood this,
it has understood nothing.

The United Kingdom, for its part, remains determined
to ensure that Iraq complies fully with the decision of the
international community that it should give up its weapons
of mass destruction and any ambitions it may have to retain
or acquire them. This can only be achieved if Saddam
Hussain takes the political decision to cooperate fully with
the Special Commission. The regularity with which this
Council has had to address this issue confirms that this
decision has still not been taken. All we have heard from
the Iraqi regime for the past six and half years are lies and
empty promises, while on the ground they have actively
obstructed the Special Commission and concealed from it
details of its illegal weapons programmes. These facts are
borne out in the latest report of the Special Commission,
which clearly states that, while progress has been made,
serious deficiencies remain in all three weapons areas, in
particular on chemical and biological warfare agents.

The United Kingdom congratulates the Executive
Chairman and his staff for the progress which has been
made. In the light of Iraqi behaviour, it is nonsense to
suggest that Iraq deserves to share the credit. The progress
which has been achieved is due solely to the dedication of
numerous international experts drawn from many Member
States, for whom Iraqi harassment, obstruction, lies and
half-truths have been and continue to be a daily fare. The
Special Commission and its staff will continue to have our
full support.

Let us be clear that until and unless Iraq cooperates
with the Special Commission and tells the whole truth
about its programmes of illegal weapons of mass
destruction, there can be no prospect of the Council
considering whether the demands of Section C of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) have been met. The reviews
for that purpose remain in suspension.

Finally, this is not a sanctions review. But on this
occasion it is worth reminding ourselves that Iraq has still
failed to meet its obligations on missing Kuwaiti prisoners
of war, property and the national archives of Kuwait. For
the United Kingdom, the successful resolution of these
issues is no less important than that of the destruction of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. It is high time for Iraq
to commit itself to addressing seriously these matters as
well.

