Mr. Antonio: I would first like to thank the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Said Djinnit and
Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their briefings, and to welcome
the presence here today of Ambassador Bamba,
representing the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).

The African Union (AU) fully shares the concerns
raised by most of the speakers today about the challenges
facing West Africa and the Sahel region, especially
taking into account the fact that those challenges
have been shown to have much bearing on the issues
of terrorism, human trafficking, mercenarism, armed
rebellion and unconstitutional changes of Government.
The problem of the scourge of drug trafficking
and drug use in West Africa and the Sahel, as well as
the attempts to find adequate solutions to it, should be
viewed against the background of the current general
economic, political and social context of the region.
As is well known, many of the States in the region
are dealing with factors such as poverty, political
instability, unconstitutional changes of Government,
sporadic or frequent acts of extremist violence and,
in a number of countries, drug trafficking, as well as
an increasing threat of spreading terrorist activities,
especially in the vast Sahel and Sahara desert.

Such threats to regional peace and security are partly
born of and sustained by conditions that, as credible
sources have noted, produce an average life expectancy
for the region of 48 and an adult literacy rate of 25 per
cent, with 40 per cent, or 65 million, of its young and
adult population unable to read or write. Again, West
Africa has a scholarization deficit, with 14 million
children between the ages of seven and 12 currently
not in school. These groups represent uninformed
and generally unskilled populations vulnerable to the
schemes of peddlers of terrorism, drug traffickers and
political, social and religious agitators.

It is, however, important to underline that those
conditions are partly caused by external factors as
well as internal ones, including unjust international
trade practices and structures that help to stifle
African economic profitability through the dumping
of subsidized foreign products and the imposition
on Africa of high export taxes and forced economic
liberalization. Their effects have been to institutionalize
disguised unemployment, provoke reckless attempts to
travel to Europe for greener pastures, foster hunger
and destroy local production - which leads to rising
prices for food and other items - and limit African
goods' access to external markets for foreign exchange
earnings. Primary individual productive activity is
therefore frequently unprofitable and hunger, in its
various forms, endemic.

In view of the interconnected nature of the causes
and effects of the problem of drug trafficking in West
Africa and the Sahel, the AU has always advocated
that the best way to address the problem is by devising
and implementing holistic ways of coordinating efforts
to deal with challenges such as drug addiction and
corruption in agencies entrusted with control at ports
and entry points, and the resulting instability and
armed conflict. While we fully appreciate the fact
that today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/22)
addresses the issue of coordination, one of the main
reasons why a concerted effort is needed to address the
issues of drug trafficking at the local, national, regional
and continental levels is that drug traffickers and
their agents constantly develop their trade networks
by infiltrating law-enforcement agencies and relevant
State security authorities at transit and entry points
in the target countries. In order to do that, they count
on factors cited by many of today's speakers, such as
poverty, endemic unemployment, corrupt practices and
porous borders.

As the representative of Rwanda mentioned, the
AU is in the process of developing measures aimed at
supporting the efforts of its member States to address
drug trafficking and its associated challenges in various
regions, including West Africa and the Sahel. The
Commission has accordingly developed a framework,
the African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control
(2013-2017), which provides a strategy for targeting the
sources and destinations ofillicit drugs. It also addresses
the health and socioeconomic consequences of drug
trafficking through measures that include strengthening
the law-enforcement capacity of relevant actors at local,
national, regional and international levels. The Plan
of Action is holistic and includes capacity-building
for information-gathering, research, analysis and the
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of a
results-based matrix. It also emphasizes the importance
of strengthening collaboration with regional and
international stakeholders and, above all, of a collective
approach to addressing the scourge of drug trafficking
and its attendant threats to regional stability, peace and
security on the continent.

It is in the spirit of strengthening the international
dimensions of the fight to prevent drug trafficking
and its attendant stability and security risks that the
AU would like to propose strengthening a coordinated
continental strategy with entities that include ECOWAS
and the United Nations Office for West Africa. The
strategy should involve mainstreaming measures for
combating drug trafficking into activities aimed at
preventing conflict in the West African and the Sahel
region, in a range of areas that would include efforts
to combat piracy, terrorism, mercenarism and other
challenges that the AU has developed instruments to
address. It is also our opinion that holding a summit for
the various stakeholders to explore ways of addressing
the issues could contribute to the ongoing coordinated
efforts to address these challenges.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the delegations of outgoing members of the Council,
namely, Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan
and Togo.

(spoke in French)

We would like to say to the representative of our
brother country Togo that we heartily agree with his
assertion that he feels he has done a good job. That
is not vain triumphalism, as it might seem. Togo has
fully carried out its duty as a member of the Security
Council.

At the same time, we commend the second African
delegation leaving the Security Council, that of
Morocco. We are convinced that they will successfully
pass the baton to the delegations of Nigeria and Chad,
who are joining the Security Council, and that they
will work together in the Council for the defence and
joint development of our continent, with the undoubted
support of all Council members. We thank them today,
at what is hopefully the last official meeting for the
month.

