Ms. Bouaida (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank the delegation of Azerbaijan for
having organized this debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). We thank Secretaries-General Ban
Ki-moon and Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu for their effective
action in strengthening and giving renewed momentum
to cooperation between their two organizations.

I also welcome Mr. Iyad bin Amin Madani, who
will shortly become the new Secretary-General of the
OIC.

Morocco is proud of having been the country
chosen to host the headquarters of the OIC when it
was established 44 years ago. Since then, Morocco
has worked tirelessly to strengthen the organization
and to ensure that it became a tool for cooperation and
dialogue that would strengthen the synergy of Islamic
cooperation. We are gratified to see cooperation
between our two organizations, pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
coordination of their activities in addressing common
threats and challenges.

We welcome the fact that the two organizations
are implementing the commitments determined and
defined at the OIC-United Nations general meeting held
in Geneva from 1 to 3 May 2012. Both organizations are
working to strengthen peace and security in Somalia,
Afghanistan and the Sudan. The OIC maintains offices
in Mogadishu and Kabul in support of the work of the
United Nations. We also support the dialogue between
the Government of the Sudan and the rebel movements
in Darfur.

In the humanitarian sphere, and in the light of the
problems in the Sahel, a joint mission of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and our organization is working to ease the
suffering of the people ofthe region, especially in Mali.
We support such cooperation, which must continue
in order to assist Mali during the transition and
reconstruction period launched following the elections
and the restoration of peace and security in the country.

The vision of His Majesty King Mohammed VI,
following the inauguration of His Excellency President
Keita, aims at strengthening peace and security and
Mali's territorial integrity and is a reflection of the
King's wish to strengthen peace and security. Following
orders given by His Highness, a local hospital was set
up and 500 imams were sent from Morocco, in line with
the fraternal relations of mutual assistance that have
always existed between our two people.

Palestine is of critical importance to the OIC.
It is the very raison d'etre for the establishment of
the organization. The OIC has always supported the
cause of the Palestinian people in various ways. In
that regard, cooperation is essential and of primary
importance in the different areas in which we work,
including the mechanisms for cooperation between
the two organizations, both aimed at a lasting, fair and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian issue.

I welcome the efforts of the Administration of the
United States, especially of Secretary of State Kerry,
aimed at resuming direct negotiations. We hope those
negotiations will lead to a two-State solution, with the
Palestinians creating an independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Within the framework of those efforts, the OIC
has continued its assistance to the Palestinian people,
including through the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
the assistance provided for new construction in Gaza
through the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His
Highness King Mohammed VI, as part of concrete
efforts carried out with Al-Quds funds.

We cherish the hope ofseeing a common partnership
between our two organizations, based on a long-term
perspective of strategic cooperation that takes into
account all the needs of our two Organizations and the
complementarity between them. The OIC also needs
support to ensure that we are in a position to act in
areas where we have easier access than others. That
should take place in a similar manner to its cooperation
with other regional organizations. It should be done to
expand the field of cooperation, and therefore achieve a
greater level of cooperation through annual discussions
and debates.

We urge both organizations to strengthen dialogue
among civilizations and to act with respect for cultural
and religious diversity. International peace and
security hinge on such respect, which helps to prevent
conflicts, extremism, religious hatred and other types
of discrimination. The Kingdom of Morocco, which
is wedded to that concept of dialogue, stands ready
to support such cooperation among all peoples of the
planet and to work against narrow-minded ideas in a
firm and clear way.

