Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also congratulate your predecessor, the Ambassador of Viet Nam. I commend your choice of the important topic that we are discussing today. It is a topic that is also very close to our hearts. Lastly, I commend Mrs. Nakamitsu and the Secretary- General for his report (S/2019/1011), which Germany strongly supports, including its conclusions. As Mrs. Nakamitsu said, first and foremost, it is an issue that is specific to almost each conflict. I therefore think that it is important that, in our deliberations when we discuss mandates, we include the specific aspect of small arms and light weapons in the mandates. Secondly, it is also a thematic issue. Mrs. Nakamitsu and others explained very well that small arms and light weapons have consequences for sustainable development, terrorism and organized crime but also, in particular, women and children. I would like to echo all those who stressed that issue and requested the increased participation of women in discussions on this topic and, more generally, that women be included in all negotiations and talks concerning conflicts. With regard to the dimension, the French representative has just said that every year there are some 500,000 victims. By our estimation, there is a victim every 15 minutes, which perhaps adds to the number. It is unacceptable. With regard to what should be done now at the operational level, I agree with the remarks made by the Ambassador of the Dominican Republic, who just said that it is now time to update resolution 2220 (2015), which we adopted in 2015. Secondly, several speakers have already said it, and I agree, that we must support regional activities. I would also like to congratulate Africa on its very important Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, as well as on its regional activities. The representative of France just mentioned the Franco-German initiative on small arms and light weapons in the Western Balkans, which is essential for that region and can be replicated in others. Thirdly, we must request that States meet their obligations on the issue. The representative of China, Mr. Spleeters, in his briefing, and others have said that States are under obligation to secure their weapons. An export control system that grants export licenses is needed. Tracing mechanisms are also required. In particular, embargoes and sanctions that have been agreed upon in the Chamber must be implemented and respected. I would again like to raise the issue of Libya. It is unacceptable that, in spite of the sanctions agreed upon by the Council, some States openly violate the embargo - and we see the effects of such actions in Libya every day. Lastly, I would like to briefly turn to the discussion we had in the Council a few days ago on the sanctions imposed on the Central African Republic (see S/PV.8712) . Germany was very reticent about the lifting of the sanctions, not because we do not support the Government but because we are not yet convinced that the measures taken to secure weapons are sufficient. Some around the table have mentioned examples of weapon theft and looting, which has led to devastating repercussions in countries of the Sahel, other countries in Africa, in Afghanistan and elsewhere. It is for that reason that we are so reticent about lifting that embargo. The right conditions must be in place.
