Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): Let me first turn to
the situation in Syria and Yemen before discussing the
question of Palestine.

With regard to Syria, we were very disappointed
by the veto on the draft resolution presented to the
Council earlier this month (see S/PV.6627). We are
concerned that the use of the veto in such cases is not
conducive to peace and security in the region. On the
contrary, it can further undermine international efforts
while the situation continues to deteriorate. We call
upon the Council to revisit the situation in Syria as
soon as possible.
With regard to Yemen, we welcome the Council's
adoption of resolution 2014 (2001) last Friday (see S/PV.6634). Iceland strongly supports the
condemnation of human rights abuses and calls for the
end of violence. We also welcome the Council's
reference to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women, peace and
security. We urge the Government of Yemen to
implement the resolution in full.

The Security Council has found itself at the
centre stage of the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by having been entrusted with the application
of Palestine for membership in the United Nations. The
Council's deliberations on the application take place in
an environment where peace negotiations, which have
been ongoing for almost two decades, are at a standstill
with no tangible results. We speak of an environment
in which there is not a viable plan in sight that might
draw the parties back to the negotiating table and in
which the current situation is unsustainable, because an
occupation is inherently unsustainable.

At the same time, under the difficult
circumstances of the occupation, the Palestinian
National Authority has successfully implemented its
economic and development programme and has now
demonstrated clearly, by improving infrastructure and
through institution-building, that Palestine can stand on
its own feet. Their efforts and accomplishment have
been applauded by the international community,
including the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank.

In July, Iceland informed the Council of its
intention to support the Palestinians should they decide
to bring their case to the United Nations. In his
statement during the general debate in September, the
Icelandic Minister for Foreign Affairs informed the
General Assembly of the determination of the Icelandic
Government to fully recognize Palestine (see A/66/PV.26). I am pleased to inform the Council that
the Government of Iceland has taken steps at the
domestic level towards the recognition of Palestine by
putting forward a proposal for a parliamentary
resolution on the recognition of Palestine as an
independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders. That proposal is currently being discussed by
the Foreign Relations Committee of our Parliament.

As many others have said before us, we see no
contradiction between Palestine seeking membership in
the United Nations and the Quartet-led peace process,
which we fully support. Let me reiterate Iceland's
position that it is of the utmost importance that a
negotiated agreement should be based on the two-State
solution, where both parties can live in peace with their
neighbours.

Iceland urges the members of the Council to
contribute to the realization of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people by recommending to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations. That would allow
Palestine to follow in the footsteps of the numerous
other Member States that owe their freedom and
independence from colonialism to this very
Organization and to the determination of many of its
Members to ensure that the principles on which the
Organization was established override other interests.

