Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to see you in the Chair,
Mr. President. We welcome Mexico's initiative to hold
this meeting, and also welcome the statement made by
the Secretary-General, who has given his constant
attention to forming various partnerships in order to
fulfil the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
We would also like to welcome the high-level
representatives of the regional organizations
participating in today's debate. That participation
underscores the importance of the subject proposed by
Mexico for today's discussion.

As other speakers have noted, a wealth of
experience has been attained with regard to the
Security Council's cooperation with the organizations
participating in this meeting, as well as with other
organizations. The Council has actively cooperated
with the Organization of American States (OAS) to
resolve conflicts in Central America and in Haiti. The
Council has also had reliable partners in working to
find settlements for hot spots in Africa, including the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and other subregional
organizations of the continent. The European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) are making an important contribution
to our common efforts to resolve conflicts in the
Balkans and other parts of the world. We are convinced
that the League of Arab States (LAS) should play an
important role in the search for peaceful ways to
resolve the many problems in the Middle East.

Of course, those invited to our meeting today do
not represent the complete list of regional
organizations that, in cooperation with the Security
Council, have made, and continue to make, a
significant contribution to maintaining regional
security in various parts of the world. Among those
other organizations is the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), which works closely with the
United Nations to resolve conflicts. CIS peacekeepers
have already made a significant contribution to settling
the crisis in Tajikistan. At the moment, they and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia are
maintaining security and stability in the area of the
Georgian-Abkhaz conflict.

We would also like to emphasize the role being
played by the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
whose members were the first to raise the matter of the
need to move against the Taliban regime that ruled
Afghanistan.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is very
important to providing stability and security in the vast
Asian region, which includes the countries of Central
Asia, China and Russia.

At this complicated stage in international
relations, it is more pressing than ever that we
consistently develop and improve cooperation at the
United Nations, in particular the cooperation between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
bodies. That should be done on the solid foundation of
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly on the
basis of Article VIII, which has been referred to today
by the Secretary-General, the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States and other participants in this
meeting.

Bearing in mind the growing role of regional
peacekeeping, we support the further development of
cooperation in that field while more effectively
utilizing the potential and resources of regional
organizations and increasing coordination and
complementarity between them and the United Nations.
Such interaction should be flexible and should be
developed in the light of the leading role played by the
Organization, with a sensible division of labour among
regional and subregional structures, taking each of their
comparative advantages into account.

We continue to believe that authorization by and
accountability to the Security Council should be
inherent in any regional or coalition peacekeeping
operation, particularly when enforcement action is
included in its mandate. Here, the indisputable
guidelines continue to be the basic principles and
criteria of international peacekeeping activities,
including strict compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations and with the generally recognized
norms and principles of international law, in
accordance with which the Security Council bears
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Success in developing the interaction of the
United Nations with regional and other organizations
will, to a large extent, determine how effective the
international community's response will be to the
multitude of new challenges facing us today, including
the threat of international terrorism. That threat led to
the creation of the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). We actively support the
work of the CTC, and we support the further
development of cooperation between the Committee
and regional organizations with a view to
implementing the various decisions adopted by the
Council.

Russia is firmly convinced that the future lies
with collective efforts to resolve problems common to
the international community as a whole. We believe
that, in today's environment, in order to practically
implement the concept of collective security enshrined
in the Charter, we need to establish a global system to
deal with current challenges and threats. Clearly, this
kind of system must be universal and comprehensive in
order to ensure that effective decisions are adopted,
bearing in mind the direct link between those new
challenges and threats.

Of course, the coordinating centre for that kind of
system must be the United Nations. The Millennium
Declaration, adopted at the Millennium Summit of the
General Assembly, outlined the main goals of this
future work. The effective achievement of those goals
at this stage should be facilitated by the adoption by
consensus, during the current session of the Assembly,
of resolution 57/145, "Responding to global threats and
challenges". That resolution provides for contributions
by regional organizations to the tasks outlined therein,
and we hope that their contribution will be an
important one.

