Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Said Djinnit, for having taken the time to meet with
the Security Council this morning. I also thank him
for his presentation of the Secretary General's report
(S/2017/208).

Four years after the adoption of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, Uruguay
wishes to recognize the efforts and commitments of the
signatory parties and the guarantor organizations as
they work to implement the provisions of the agreement.
High-level meetings have taken place over recent
months, including the seventh high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, held last November in
Angola. They testify to the timeliness and relevance
of the provisions of the Framework agreement as a
political and diplomatic platform for addressing the
challenges facing the Great Lakes region. I would also
like to commend the Governments of the Republic of
the Congo and the Republic of Uganda for offering to
host the eighth and ninth high-level meetings, this year
and the next, respectively, which will help to maintain
political momentum on the issue.

However, despite some progress in implementing
the agreement, it should be noted that we continue to
see very complex political, security and humanitarian
challenges to peace and sustainable security in the
Great Lakes region. We share the Special Envoy's view
that what has been achieved so far may be negatively
affected by the continued presence of non-State armed
groups, mainly in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are concerned about the
appearance since August 2016 ofa new militia, inspired
by the Kamuina Nsapu chieftaincy and led by Jean-
Pierre Mpandi, that is especially active in Kasai, Kasai-
Central, Kasai-Oriental and Lomami. It is particularly
violent and has been recruiting minors under 14 years
old, some of whom have been given drugs. In theory,
this group was also responsible for the murder of United
Nations experts Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, to
whom the Security Council paid tribute on 31 March
(see S/PV.7910). However, the crackdown in response
has been extremely tough and at times excessive and
in situations such as have been described, the civilian
population feels terrorized, seemingly defenceless
and trapped between two equally hostile forces. The
commitment and concerted action of all the countries
that are signatories to the Framework agreement will
be essential if the destabilizing actions of armed groups
such as Ijust mentioned is to be effectively addressed.

The humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region is also very worrying, especially in South
Sudan, where it is simply a disaster. But there are also
other countries in the region, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the Central African
Republic, that are still facing serious humanitarian
problems, with millions of people displaced and whose
most basic humanitarian needs are not being addressed.
I would like to commend the tireless efforts of the
thousands of humanitarian workers who have put their
lives in the service of peace and the effort to save the
lives of millions of civilians.

On the political front, we have still not seen
concrete results from the dialogue processes ongoing in
various countries in the region. We should emphasize
how Vital it is to ensure in every case that the political
dialogue is inclusive, transparent and peaceful but,
most importantly, that it is genuine and conducted in
good faith by all the interested parties. At the same
time, it should also guarantee the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We must never stop
emphasizing the fact that dialogue is the only possible
way to resolve differences. Uruguay would also like
to commend all the mediation and facilitation efforts
being made by eminent people working on behalf
of Africa's regional and subregional organizations.
However, the Security Council must remain vigilant
and condemn any violations of human rights that could
further provoke the parties in conflict and work directly
to prevent armed clashes - the effective prevention of
conflict that we all want.

In conclusion, Uruguay urges the Governments
of the region and the international community as a
whole to come together to promote political and social
stability of the Great Lakes region through the full
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
signatories to the Framework agreement.

