Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): In my
turn, I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this debate on peacebuilding, a subject we
are addressing increasingly within the Council. I also
wish to welcome amongst us the Ambassador of Japan,
Mr. Takasu, who ably and with determination presides
over the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as the Ambassadors of Belgium, Brazil, El
Salvador, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden for
their work on the Commission in its various
configurations and for their untiring efforts to establish
the value-added of the Commission within the United
Nations system.

I would also like to welcome the role of the
Peacebuilding Support Office and thank the Secretary-
General for his support to that office and, of course,
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, who laid the first stones of the
foundation, and Ms. Holl Lute, who has recently taken
up her appointment, and we wish her every success.
Allow me also to inform her that she can count on the
full support of France and the European Union.

I also have the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the European Union. The issue of post-conflict
stabilization is at the heart of the thinking and
priorities of the European Union, arising from the 2005
Summit and the broader objectives that have been
pursued since then, in particular the request by the
Secretary-General to provide a more organized,
effective and rapid solution to the challenges of post-
conflict, post-crisis situations at the request of the
Council.

During its second year of work, the Peacebuilding
Commission has shown promising progress. The
international community has increased its focus on the
countries on the Commission's agenda. For the first
two countries on its agenda, Burundi and Sierra Leone,
the implementation of peacebuilding strategies is
currently based on a clear programme of work for
future months. On the ground, coordination has been
stepped up. Various national political actors, including
civil society, private partners as well as various donors,
are speaking with each other and are attempting to
implement a common road map.

In that context, we feel it is important to increase
the Visibility of the Commission and its ability to train
and to influence. It is astounding in that sense that the
countries that would actually benefit by participating
with the Commission are still reticent to do so. We
need more efforts at communication, particularly
among regional organizations. We might also plan to
hold some meetings of the Peacebuilding Commission
in places other than New York.

When we speak of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund, we must not forget that
the problem is not only one of financial resources. The
Peacebuilding Commission is not called upon to
become a new window for humanitarian or
development aid. All efforts and resources of the
system must be mobilized, and I am also thinking here
of the resources and efforts of the various diasporas.

It is true that, in a number of cases, the key is to
extend the circle of States and organizations that
support the efforts of the countries on the
Commission's agenda. The Central African Republic is
a particularly good example of that. It gives the
Commission the possibility to further develop its
mechanisms so as to ensure that there is adequate
mobilization on the part of the international community
for a country that has always suffered from relative
indifference.

The European Union would like to make a few
suggestions for the work of the Commission in the
coming year. First, we should encourage the efforts
deployed by the Peacebuilding Support Office aimed at
strengthening its own capacity to act in support of the
work of the Commission. Then, the Commission must
improve its working methods in order to be more
effective and more strategic, particularly with regard to
the future inclusion of new countries on its agenda.
Some tools were developed last year. Today the
Commission needs to convene meetings that are better
prepared but fewer in number and we must not hesitate
to call upon the coordination mechanisms of the
countries most involved, such as the Peacebuilding
Contact Group in the case of Guinea-Bissau, for
example. We must also work on the entry points for the
Commission's involvement and for the progressive
reduction and termination of its involvement. The work
of the Commission should be integrated into the
Security Council's strategy at as early a stage as
possible. Similarly, the Commission should encourage
development actors to operate within a political and
security stabilization strategy based on the overall
effort to strengthen the coherence of the Organization
overall, through the well-known system-wide
coherence programme.

I would like to stress the concept of the earliest
possible intervention by the Commission, which was
mentioned by the Commission's Chairman, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, and was seconded
by Italy. That approach is vital for us. Of course, we
are not yet able to speak about preventing crises, but
everyone knows that by dealing with emergence from
crisis and post-conflict management we improve a
country's ability not to fall back into a crisis. It is clear
to us that, in the long term, an ideal arrangement is that
which all institutions of the United Nations intervene
together, including, indeed - since we are here in the
Security Council - when a peacekeeping mission is
deployed. That is when we are in a position to properly
define the military component and the civilian
component of peacekeeping, the indispensable
mobilization of national energies and the coherence of
all national and regional actors. It is under those
conditions that we will also be able to address the
problems that come up in the Security Council when
we deal with persistent post-conflict situations, of
which we have several examples on the Council's
agenda. So if get an earlier start, we will be able to
shorten the time spent and be more effective across the
board. I would even suggest an idea that might seem
strange, which is that we deploy a peacebuilding
mission before we actually deploy a peacekeeping
force, if that is necessary to properly frame the
Council's overall intervention effort.

The European Union fully supports the activities
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and it shares the
priorities that Ambassador Takasu has just proposed to
us. The European Commission is actively engaged in
all the countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, where the European Union is one of the
main donors, if not the leading donor, in terms of
humanitarian aid, budget aid and development aid. The
European Union also participates in the formulation of
peacebuilding strategies. Let us also not forget that the
European Union can also support the implementation
of the political and security aspects of those strategies,
including through the instruments of the European
Security and Defence Policy, as is currently the case
with the European Union mission in support of security
sector reform in Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, like the
European Union, the international financial institutions
have begun to adapt their instruments. That is also the
case for the regional and subregional actors, in
particular for the African Union. The United Nations
system is showing that it can be more committed and
more willing to align itself with strategies defined by
the Peacebuilding Commission, and the European
Union invites all its bodies to redouble their efforts to
ensure such coherence.

