Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you - and your country, Sir - on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Wang Yingfan of China, for
his outstanding stewardship of the Council last month.

I should like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this urgent meeting of the Security Council
to consider the grave situation in the occupied Arab
territories. I should like to thank the other members of
the Council for acceding to the request for this
meeting, jointly made by the Chairman of the Islamic
Group and the Chairman of the follow-up committee of
the ninth Islamic summit conference.

My delegation is grateful to Ambassador Nasser
Al-Kidwa, the Permanent Observer for Palestine, who
briefed the Council this morning on the current grave
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem. Ten months of almost uninterrupted
violence, following the provocation of September last
year, have taken a heavy toll of human life and injuries.
Over 600 people have died, an overwhelming number
of whom are Palestinian. The cycle of violence has
continued unabated and promises to become worse in
the coming days and weeks unless the international
community, particularly this Council, intervenes to put
an end to it. Indeed, if the Council intends to carry out
its responsibility under the Charter, it will have little
choice but to intervene.

The measures taken by the Israeli Government in
the name of security have reached dangerous and
untenable proportions. These include continued
reliance on excessive use of force and the
overwhelming use of military power, the invasion of
Palestinian territory, and a vicious grip on Palestinian
life in the occupied territories through closures and
seizures, the destruction and demolition of Palestinian
properties and other forms of harassment and
intimidation of the Palestinian population in pursuance
of an indiscriminate policy of collective punishment.

The forcible seizure of Orient House in East
Jerusalem strikes at the very basis of the peace process
and further diminishes any hope of reviving it. The
takeover of Orient House and of other Palestinian
institutions, coupled with assassinations of targeted
Palestinian officials, is among the most arrogant and
provocative of these actions by the Israeli authorities.
These latest actions are tantamount to the abrogation of
all the agreements that Israel has entered into with the
Palestinian side since the Oslo Accords. The decision
of the Israeli occupying Power to take these steps,
particularly the closure of Palestinian institutions,
represents a dangerous escalation in the Israeli military
campaign that has been waged against the Palestinian
people since last September. It also represents an
assault on Palestinian national dignity and Palestinian
rights in Jerusalem.

Clearly, these actions are not likely to cow the
Palestinian people as intended. On the contrary, they
are likely to heighten Palestinian anger, frustration and
despair, and will inflame the situation even further,
resulting in even greater tension and polarization
between Israelis and Palestinians.
No peace-loving country, including my own,
condones violence, particularly against innocent
civilians. But violence begets violence. Hence the
importance of abandoning such policies forthwith, in
favour of dialogue and negotiations.

In addressing this issue at this point in time, the
Council cannot but be cognizant of two important facts
or realities which must be addressed: first, the
continued Israeli occupation of Palestine and other
Arab territories; and secondly, the continued violation
of the human rights of the Palestinians and other Arabs
living in the occupied territories. Both must come to an
end, as they are in clear and irrefutable violation of
international law, humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Israel must be
strongly and constantly reminded of its obligations
under international law and the Charter of the United
Nations to withdraw from those territories and to
respect the human rights of their inhabitants. Its
wrongful and illegal actions in those territories should
not be condoned or, least of all, protected. Israel, like
other Members of the Organization, must fulfil its
obligations under the Charter.

Pressures similar to those that have been exerted
by the Council on other errant and non-complying
Members of the Organization in the past must also now
be exerted on Israel. Failure to do so is tantamount to
treating Israel as a special case, a privileged Member of
the Organization, a Member that is somehow exempt
from complying with the requirements of international
law. Yes, Israel is a State, a Member of this
Organization, but beyond that it has no special status in
the community of nations. It should be treated like any
other State and must fulfil all its obligations and
responsibilities without exception. Like other States
that have to grapple with issues of internal peace and
security, it should have to conform, as others do, with
the rules of international and humanitarian law. There
should be no special dispensation for Israel either here
in this Council or in any other international forum.

In the past, the Council was not able to carry out
its responsibility under the Charter on this issue,
because either it was prevented from doing so or it was
unable to implement the resolutions it had passed on
the situation in Palestine. Clearly, in the light of the
grave situation obtaining in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the Council cannot afford to maintain the
same position. Non-action by the Council in the face of
continued provocative actions by Israel in the occupied
territories would be a gross dereliction of the Council's
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It would also be condoning the
continued use of force and military power by Israel
over the helpless inhabitants of the occupied territories.
More significantly, it would signal the Council's
ambivalence or lack of support for the peace process -
or, worse still, its indirect support for resolution of the
conflict by non-political means. By not doing anything,
the Council would once again be turning a deaf ear to
the pleas of the Palestinian people living under
occupation and would be demonstrating its lack of will
and its impotence on the issue of Palestine.

The Council will have to seriously ponder its role
regarding the issue of Palestine. For far too long it has
allowed itself to be sidelined on the basis of the
argument of a few that a resolution of the issue should
best be pursued by the parties directly concerned in the
conflict, or that the Council's involvement would only
"complicate" the sensitive negotiations between the
parties. Surely, in the face of recent events those
arguments can no longer be persuasive. They should
not have been persuasive in the first place.

The peace process is for all intents and purposes
dead, thanks - or rather, no thanks - to the policies
and practices of the new Israeli Government. It is
incumbent upon this Council to exert every effort to
revive the process on an urgent basis, especially in the
face of the hesitation or reluctance on the part of other
influential parties to be more directly involved in
jump-starting the process.

We, the international community, must rekindle
the faith among both Palestinians and Israelis in a
peaceful resolution of the conflict and douse any
prospects of a return to war. In that regard we must
give our strong and unqualified support to the report of
the Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-finding Committee, the
Mitchell report. That report provides a good and viable
basis on which to end the cycle of violence, break the
deadlock and build the necessary bridge back to the
negotiating process, which alone guarantees enduring
peace and security for the parties concerned - as
opposed to continuing conflict or warfare between
them.

My delegation considers the draft resolution
being circulated as rather modest in its objectives. But
we support it, as it provides the practical basis for
consensus in the Council, which is important if the
Council is to carry out its duties. The draft resolution,
inter alia, calls for the immediate cessation of all acts
of violence, provocation and destruction, and for the
return to the positions and the regimens that existed
prior to September 2000. It also calls for the speedy
and comprehensive implementation of
recommendations of the Mitchell report, for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism regarding the
implementation of that report, and for Israel to reverse
all actions taken against Orient House and other
Palestinian institutions in and around East Jerusalem.
Only those and other proposed measures contained in
the draft resolution will constitute a reasonable basis
for a return to negotiations, paving the way for lasting
peace between Palestinians and Israelis - instead of
more intimidation and harassment or further military
action in a vain attempt to break the spirit of the
Palestinian people.

My delegation also believes that the co-sponsors
of the peace process, the United States and the Russian
Federation, as well as the European Union and the
larger international community, must play a more
active role in defusing the current tense situation and in
encouraging the parties, particularly Israel, to return to
negotiations. We once again reiterate our call to the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility and to
take the necessary action in that regard. We continue to
believe that there is a need to establish an international
observer force for the protection of Palestinian
civilians, as well as to ensure compliance with relevant
Security Council resolutions, international law,
international humanitarian law and existing
Palestinian-Israeli agreements. Any attempt by this
Council to appease the occupying Power will not only
make the situation more dangerous, it will be wrong,
and it will call into question the credibility of the
Council. This must be avoided at all costs. My
delegation therefore appeals to the Council and the
Secretary-General to respond vigorously to diffuse the
current explosive situation and to help relaunch the
peace process as a matter of great urgency. Clearly, the
Council can ill afford to treat the Palestinian issue in its
present circumstances as in the past.

