The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Colombia, Lebanon and Spain, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon), Ms. Pajt'n Iraola (Spain) and
Ms. Blum (Colombia) took seats at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack on 24 June
near the town of Khiyam in south Lebanon,
which targeted the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and killed six United
Nations peacekeepers of the Spanish contingent.
"The Security Council extends its deepest
condolences to the families of those victims, who
included Colombian nationals.

"The Security Council notes the
condemnation of this attack by the Government
of Lebanon and commends the determination and
commitment of the Government of Lebanon to
bring to justice the perpetrators of this attack.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the Lebanese Government and army in
their efforts to ensure security and stability
throughout Lebanon.

"The Security Council appeals to all parties
concerned to abide scrupulously by their
obligation to respect the safety of the UNIFIL and
other United Nations personnel, including by
avoiding any course of action that endangers
United Nations personnel and by ensuring that
UNIFIL is accorded full freedom of movement
throughout its area of operations.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the UNIFIL in carrying out its mandate
to assist in the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and expresses its strong appreciation to
Member States contributing troops."

(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
07-39295

