Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I welcome
Minister Miranda to the Council Chamber this
afternoon. It is a great honour for us to have had two
such senior representatives of the Angolan Government
with us here in such a short space of time. I think it is a
testimony to the importance with which both the
Council and the Government of Angola regard the
deliberations that we have on Angola in the Chamber
and in the small room next door. I should also like to
welcome Minister Josselin. It is a great honour to have
him with us.

I can be rather brief this afternoon, partly because
the representative of Belgium will be speaking later on
in his capacity as Presidency of the European Union
and partly because of the statement made earlier in this
debate by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland, with which my
delegation finds itself in near total agreement.

The presidential statement agreed by the Council
on 20 September rightly highlighted the fact that
primary responsibility for the continued conflict in
Angola lies with UNITA, led by Jonas Savimbi. The
top priority for the people of Angola should be peace.
In the presidential statement we will adopt at the end of
today's debate, the Council will reaffirm again that the
Lusaka Protocol remains the only viable basis for a
political settlement ofthe conflict in Angola.

It is clear to us that the top priority for the people
of Angola should be peace. It is equally clear to us that
dialogue is the only way to achieve a lasting and
sustainable peace process. Military solutions are not
the answer, as bitter experience has shown in Angola
and elsewhere. The dialogue in Angola should be as
broad and as inclusive as possible, representing the
various stakeholders in the peace process. The United
Kingdom welcomes the important work of Angolan
civil society and the Angolan churches in their attempts
to bring about a resumption of the peace process. I
would join Ambassador Ryan in welcoming both the
commitment to civil society that Minister Miranda
gave us today and the extremely welcome news, passed
on to us by Mr. Gambari, of the meeting between
President Dos Santos and the leader of the Inter-
Denominational Committee for Peace in Angola.

That is an extremely welcome development. I
believe that it is right, and that it would be helpful, for
some way to be found to invite representatives from
Angolan civil society and the churches to brief the
Council on the role they are playing in the peace
process. I have every reason to believe that this would
be entirely consonant with the views of the
Government of Angola, and I welcome Minister
Josselin's support for the proposal I made when the
Council debated this matter in September i that at
some stage we might consider arranging a suitable
Arria formula meeting.

Equally important elements in the process
towards peace in Angola are those of economic reform
and the development of good governance. That is going
to need great attention, I think, as the Minister has
recognized.

The news given to us by Ambassador Gambari of
the good reception that the United Nations technical
team had in Luanda recently is very welcome. I hope
that early progress can be made by the United Nations
in responding to the Angolan Government's request for
assistance with the peace and reconciliation fund, pilot
projects and preparations for the elections. I hope also
it will be possible, perhaps as a result of Ambassador
Gambari's visit, to explore ways in which the United
Nations can help further, both in terms of the general
development and governance situation and of the
advancement of the peace process. Like Ambassador
Ryan, we regard the work of the United Nations Office
in Angola (UNOA) on human rights as of great
importance and hope that this will continue.

Finally, I would like to refer to the humanitarian
situation. Both Ambassador Ryan and Ambassador
Gambari have referred to this, and the Minister himself
has drawn graphic attention to the difficulties that
people in Angola are facing in this regard. Further
work is necessary. Further assistance is necessary. In
particular, I hope it will be possible to make progress
in terms of the development of humanitarian corridors
and of the general principle of freedom of access for
humanitarian workers and personnel throughout the
country, to wherever people are in need. It has been
almost 18 months since the Council was briefed on the
humanitarian situation. I think it would be very helpful
if, following Ambassador Gambari's return, we could
perhaps arrange another briefing of the Council by the
humanitarian agencies, which it might benefit the
wider membership to hear, to consider where more help
is needed and where we can all do more in cooperation
with the Government of Angola to try to do something
about the dreadful situation in which many people find
themselves today.

