Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset, let
me express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. Thailand also thanks
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/339), as
well as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, the Under
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and the
UNESCO Special Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation
for their informative briefings.

As a member of the Human Security Network and
the Movement of Non-Aligned countries, Thailand
aligns itself with statements to be delivered later in this
meeting by the representatives of Switzerland and the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

Thailand is no less concerned than others when
it comes to the plight of children affected by armed
conflict. The large number of children killed or injured,
as mentioned in the Secretary-General's latest report,
in the ongoing conflicts in many areas is unacceptable
and must end immediately.

Thailand, as a State party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol, is
fully committed to fulfilling its obligations under
those instruments. We have been an active supporter
of various international efforts on child protection.
However, we are concerned about certain aspects of the
Secretary-General's latest report on children and armed
conflict, which mentions the situation in the southern
border provinces of Thailand. In that connection, I
would like to present some of our observations.

First, Thailand wishes to underline that the scope
of the report should be confined only to situations of
armed conflict or those on the Council's agenda. I would
like to make clear that the situation in the southern
border provinces does not constitute armed conflict as
defined by international law. Neither is the situation in
Thailand's southern border provinces on the Security
Council agenda. Therefore, Thailand disagrees with
the inclusion of the situation in that area in the report
prepared by the Office of Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, whose mandate is, and
should be, limited solely to situations of armed conflict.

No one denies that violence against innocent children
is abhorrent. Thailand has never spared any effort to
enhance child protection in the country in an effective
and sustainable manner through law enforcement and
various protective mechanisms. We have close and
constructive cooperation in the area of child protection
with the relevant United Nations agencies under their
respective mandates, and we continue to enhance such
cooperation in the best interests of the child.

Secondly, the United Nations should be extremely
mindful of the sensitivities and complexities of
the situation on the ground, which require specific
knowledge, understanding and expertise, as well as
a tailor-made approach. The United Nations should
therefore work closely with, and have the consent of, the
Governments concerned, particularly when non-State
actors are involved.

The mentioning of, or direct engagement with,
non-State actors needs to be done with the utmost
care and only when mandated. Such engagements can
complicate the situation on the ground, give those
groups more leverage and may, in many cases, imply
recognition of such groups. In order to avoid unintended
negative consequences, the United Nations should play
a supportive role aimed at ensuring that States can carry
out their sovereign responsibility to protect children.

Thirdly, we strongly suggest that the sources
of the information included in the reports of the
Secretary-General be identifiable and verifiable. We
value objective and accurate information from all
stakeholders. Likewise, information or comments
provided by the Governments concerned should be
honoured and seriously taken into account.

Child protection is a critical issue of common
concern and requires our collective efforts and
constructive cooperation. Therefore, it is essential that
the relevant United Nations agencies and Member States
enhance mutual respect, trust and confidence. In that
light, Thailand would like to point out that the arbitrary
stretchting of mandates, the reliance on inaccurate
and biased information and a lack of sensitivity will
not serve or nurture the spirit of cooperation. On the
contrary, it can only be counter-productive, create
mistrust, misdirect future policy and resources and,
even worse, inadvertently place children in such
situations at higher risk.

In conclusion, Thailand reaffirms its decisive
determination and systematic efforts to promote and
protect human rights, particularly among women and
children. We will continue to work constructively with
the international community and the appropriately
mandated United Nations bodies, as well as with civil
society, to better safeguard our children.

