We would like to thank Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for convening this important thematic meeting and giving us the opportunity to participate. We would also express our appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for their participation, as well as to Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Centre on International Cooperation at New York University, for her valuable briefing. Since the beginning of this year, the crisis caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has been the primary concern of countries and communities around the world. It has also unexpectedly become the concern of the United Nations and the Security Council. This is because the disease affects not only those who contract it but everyone on Earth. Anyone who reads the reports published recently by various United Nations bodies and agencies will note that the pandemic has had complex and overlapping effects on security, economic and social affairs and development. Consequently, the pandemic will have long-term effects on peace and on the possibility of sustainable peace. As with peacebuilding and peacekeeping, a sharp focus on security would be unhelpful; it is necessary to address the social, economic, political and developmental dimensions of crises. The same holds true for addressing the various dimensions of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. That response must be integrated and coordinated, and the approach taken must be informed by peacebuilding, not solely by health considerations. In that connection, from the very beginning Qatar has taken action at the local level in its response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including precautionary measures and by marshalling the resources needed to enhance health care, while taking other steps to mitigate the impact of the disease, such as developing distance-learning methods for students in the aftermath of school closures. Alongside those national measures, Qatar has made concerted efforts at the international level, including by providing emergency financial and in-kind assistance to help address the threat of the pandemic. Qatar has also continued to support sustainable development, taking into account the fact that the coronavirus crisis has diverted the country's attention from those priorities, which are more vital now than ever, particularly in order to respond effectively to the coronavirus and its impact. The COVID-19 crisis is taking a much greater toll on conflict-affected countries and communities, as well as on those in the transition and post-conflict stages, given the fragility of their economies, the deterioration of their health systems, humanitarian crises and social, security and logistical challenges that make more difficult or hinder outright preventive and therapeutic measures to counter the virus and its effects. In view of the manifold threats posed by the pandemic, it is, at the very least, imperative to put an end to armed conflicts and silence guns, so that all efforts and energy can be devoted to combating the common enemy, namely, the coronavirus, and to prevent the spread of the pandemic from reversing peacebuilding gains. In that connection, we would like to reaffirm the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive ceasefire and the substance of resolution 2532 (2020). In the light of the repercussions that this pandemic, and any similar crises to come, may have for peacebuilding and peacekeeping, the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission have an important role to play in an integrated and coordinated response. Moreover, the missions that peacekeeping operations carry out to support peacebuilding efforts are just as important. Therefore, the continuity of those operations throughout the COVID-19 pandemic must be ensured. Qatar, which is cognizant of the need to maintain the continuity of the Organization's work in these particular circumstances, has facilitated the movement of United Nations staff to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the activities of peacekeeping missions. The coronavirus is a global threat that is not confined to a single country. As such, it cannot be addressed without a joint international effort. The United Nations and its agencies and programmes have an indispensable role to play in coordinating efforts to control the spread of the virus and address its implications for sustainable peace and development. Qatar is therefore committed to supporting the Organization's work and emphasizes the importance of international and regional cooperation, in spite of unilateral actions that hinder cooperation and coordination under the auspices of international and regional organizations. What everyone needs in these extraordinary circumstances is for all efforts and energies to be directed towards addressing the coronavirus and other global threats to security, peace and stability for the sake of all, without distinction.
