Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting of
the Security Council at the request of the African Group.
We have supported such a meeting because we believe
that the grave situation in Sierra Leone demands that the
wider membership of the United Nations should openly
discuss the emergency in that country. We thank the
Secretary- General for his presence at today's meeting and
for his important statement. We appreciate the valuable
statements made by Algeria as the current Chair of the
Organization of African Unity and by Mali as Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Chairman, and fully support their recommendations.

Bangladesh is extremely concerned at the
deteriorating situation in Sierra Leone. We see it as a
challenge for the United Nations and for the international
community as a whole.

The people of Sierra Leone have gone through nine
years of suffering. The Lome Peace Agreement promised
an end to that. We had placed our trust in Lome,
believing that it would work, and acted accordingly in
mandating the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). With the recent developments in Sierra
Leone, we have to take a fresh look at the peace structure
and the peacekeeping mandate we had provided. We also
have to rethink our strategy of placing too much emphasis
on the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) leadership for
reaching a peaceful solution in Sierra Leone.

We believe strongly that the United Nations cannot
and must not abandon Sierra Leone. We must not wait on

 

the sidelines as events unfold there. It would be a decisive
setback to the credibility of United Nations peacekeeping if
we allowed the largest peacekeeping mission ever to fail.

The question that we should address tonight is what
should the Security Council do to effectively address the
problem in Sierra Leone. We believe that we should pursue
the following course of action.

First, we have to bolster UNAMSIL by bringing it up
to its mandated strength at the earliest date. We continue to
believe strongly that additional numbers on the ground
would make a difference. In this regard, I would like to
inform the Council that the battalion Bangladesh promised
to UNAMSIL will be ready for airlifting along with all its
equipment by 20 May.

Secondly, we have to look into the possibility of
mobilizing more troops than the mandated strength. In this
connection, Bangladesh is encouraged that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) countries
will be providing forces to bring stability to Sierra Leone.
We welcome the Abuja summit and the determined will of
the ECOWAS members, expressed in the final communique
of the meeting, to act to bring peace to Sierra Leone. We
also thank other countries that have been forthcoming in
this regard. On the basis of past experience in Sierra Leone,
Bangladesh strongly believes that the entire international
military presence there should be under an integrated
United Nations command. There must be one international
mandate provided by the Security Council.

Allow me to digress here to mention that concerns
have been voiced in some quarters that United Nations
peacekeeping is dysfunctional because the troops the United
Nations deploys - troops mostly from the developing
countries - are often ill- equipped, ill-trained and ill-
prepared to address the situation at hand. The unfortunate
reality is that if developing countries stopped responding to
the frantic calls of the United Nations today, there would be
no peacekeeping tomorrow, barring a few of the choicest
areas in the world which are of significant strategic interest
to major Powers. We should be grateful that developing
countries continue to make contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping. Their efforts alleviate the sufferings of
millions around the world and uphold the United Nations
Charter. Blaming the failure on the peacekeeper is the easy
way out of fulfilling our collective responsibility.

We believe that in Sierra Leone, Force Commander
General Jetley and his troops have faced the situation
courageously and should have all our praise for their
valiant efforts.

Thirdly, as soon as possible, we have to make a
comprehensive assessment of the situation and weigh all
options before us. We understand Mr. Bernard Miyet
returned from Sierra Leone earlier today, and it would
have been good if this meeting could have benefited from
his preliminary assessment. However, we will expect a
full assessment by the Secretariat and also
recommendations of possible options at the earliest date.

Fourthly, we have to revisit the UNAMSIL mandate
to strengthen it. Clearly we need a much more robust
mandate for a long-term solution of the problem in Sierra
Leone. Bangladesh believes that a full Chapter VII
mandate for UNAMSIL is needed to make it effective.

Fifthly and finally, the humanitarian situation in
Sierra Leone is a matter of concern to us. United Nations
agencies and international humanitarian organizations
have suspended their operations, barring a few exceptions.
There are distressing reports of population movements
and atrocities committed against civilians. We have to
look into ways to address the needs of the innocent
victims of violence in Sierra Leone.

