President Perez Molina (spoke in Spanish):
Just two hours ago, I had the opportunity to address
the General Assembly in the general debate that has
brought us all together in New York. This also provided
me with the opportunity to attend this meeting, which is
of particular satisfaction to me. Some present here may
recall that my intention to preside over the last open
debate of the Security Council during Guatemala's
presidency in October 2012 was thwarted by storm
Sandy, and it is only now that I have the opportunity
to personally take part in this forum in order to bear
witness to the support of my Government to its work,
which is so crucial to humanity.

We thank your Government, Madam President,
for having organized this high-level meeting, as well
as for having elaborated the concept note that guides
our debate (S/2013/536). At the same time, I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Ms. Beerli, for their respective presentations.

The issue of small arms and light weapons has been
addressed more broadly within the General Assembly,
the leadership of which on the subject should be
recognized. However, we believe that this should not
prevent the Security Council from playing an active
and complementary role in the specific areas of its
competence. These have been the subject of several
reports of the Secretary-General and of numerous
presidential statements. That is why we commend
the delegation of Australia for having taken up this
initiative, and of course support the text of resolution
2117 (2013), which the Council adopted as few moments
ago. This is a historic event, taking into account that
the Council has never before adopted a resolution that
specifically addresses small arms and light weapons.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/503)
underlines the scourge of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, and its potential serious
consequences for international peace and security - in
particular, its impact on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Despite the efforts of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and mechanisms to assist States
in complying with arms embargoes, the unregulated
circulation of small arms continues to proliferate at
an alarming rate. This phenomenon persists due to the
lucrative nature of illicit trade, poor regulation and lack
of controls, including poorly or unsecured Government
stockpiles. It is worth noting that women and children
are often those who most suffer the consequences.

In addressing this phenomenon, we agree with
the Secretary-General's recommendation concerning
the importance of focusing on a comprehensive policy
approach, highlighting the role of international,
regional and subregional organizations. In particular,
we welcome the partnerships that the United Nations
has built in this area. Moreover, regarding the role of
the arms industry, although the report of the Secretary-
General recommends considering the use of new
technologies to improve stockpile management and
reduce the diversion of arms to illicit use, it would not
be remiss to encourage producing States to promote
accountability and the full implementation of existing
laws and regulations in that sector. Our common goal
should be to stop the overproduction of weapons.

We must support the existing regulatory
framework and formulate concrete steps to strengthen
and maximize the impact of the Council's responses to
threats to peace and security caused by the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. In particular, I would
like to highlight the recognition of the responsibility
of States themselves to protect their civilians - most
of all women and children - and to emphasize that
preventing the proliferation of small arms must be part
of that commitment.

Furthermore, although the responsibility for
establishing effective firearms controls and regulations
lies with the State, account should be taken of the
challenges that States in conflict or States emerging
from conflict must face, which often reveal serious
deficiencies at the institutional level and render them
especially vulnerable to arms trafficking, which is
often linked to drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime.

Our own internal conflict was resolved 17 years ago,
but we still suffer the violence, insecurity, criminality
and organized crime associated, in part, with illicit
weapons that are often purchased legally before being
diverted to the illicit market. Our Government has
striven to combat that phenomenon at the domestic,
regional and international levels. At the national level,
without providing an exhaustive list, I would like to
mention some areas of progress, which include the
renewal of the National Commission for the Prevention
of Armed Violence and the creation of the Centre for
Arms and Ammunitions Control within the judicial
branch. We are also developing a national policy for
the prevention of violence, and we have signed several
cooperation agreements with civil society.
At the international level, we actively participated
in the negotiation of the Arms Trade Treaty, which
we acceded to on 24 June, proving once again the
commitment of my country to general and complete
disarmament and strengthening the international
security system. We are currently engaging in
consultations prior to remitting the Treaty to our
Congress for its approval and subsequent ratification.
The Council, more than any other international forum,
has witnessed the high cost in human lives that the lack
of a universal instrument of that kind entails, hence the
importance of ensuring its early entry into force and
universality.

In conclusion, we are fully committed to the
implementation of the outcomes of the second United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

