Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Japan for convening this debate and for its
excellent leadership of the Council's work and of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters.

Chile supports the statement made by the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of
Switzerland on behalf of Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, to which we belong. We
shall therefore address three key areas that our recent
experience in the Council recommends for improving
interactivity, decision-making outcomes, inclusion
and accountability.

Concerning the repertoire of initiatives, the general
rule must be the selection of priority themes or those
relating to necessary preventive actions, avoiding the
misuse ofthe Council for purposes outside its functions.
Public debates should be oriented by concept notes
focused on promoting exchanges of ideas with clear
objectives to prevent unnecessary rhetoric. The concept
note prepared for this debate (S/2016/585, annex) is a
good example of that.

Procedural economy should not be at the expense
of diversity. Accordingly, we recommend that joint
statements of members of the Council be issued with
caution. Collective formats should not replace the
individual role of the elected members, whose opinions
provide necessary perspectives that are often left out
of group declarations, thereby hindering inclusive
decision-making.

Chile firmly supports the convening of formal
and public wrap-up sessions in the Chamber, with
the participation of all Council members. That format
provides an official record and translation, which
ensure transparency, the dissemination of the Council's
work and its statistical analysis, which is conducive
to accountability. Such meetings should be oriented
to public evaluation and as a projection of emerging
issues, and constitute an important instrument for the
participation of the elected 10, and should therefore
be safeguarded. With regard to their frequency, these
meetings should take place at least at the beginning
and end of the membership of the elected 10 in order
to provide a space where they can share their priorities
and assess their tenures. The use of these meetings
could be enhanced through concept notes promoting
assessment and foresight. The January wrap-up session
(see S/PV.7616), under the presidency of Uruguay, was
a successful example.

It is only through familiar formats and clear
rules that we will guarantee the transparency and
accountability of this organ. While we support the
informal briefings convened by the presidency, they
should not replace the formal wrap- up sessions but
reinforce and complement them. We note with concern
the tendency to confuse these complementary formats,
as informal briefings are primarily an instrument for
the accountability primarily of each presidency, while
the formal wrap-up is a collective and public work of
the Council as a whole.
We call for the process of drafting resolutions and
statements of the presidency include the permanent
and elected members. In the case of items related to
subsidiary bodies, that can be ensured through a
greater role given to the respective Vice-Chairs. We
reiterate that the Council's work must be inspired
by transparency, fine-tuning and close cooperation
with the General Assembly, including in regard to
the appointment of the Secretary-General, thereby
ensuring an open and inclusive process leading to the
adoption of decisions on this issue and the drafting of
the appointment by the General Assembly.

To close, although the use of the veto does not
constitute a method of work in itself, it has negative
repercussions on the unity of the Council and its work,
perpetuating the imbalance of power between the
permanent and elected members.

