Mr. Dauth (Australia): Mr. President, let me also
immediately associate ourselves with the expressions
of condolences to the Government and people of
Bangladesh and to the families of the Bangladeshi
peacekeepers killed while serving with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting.
Let me also join others in welcoming my friend, the
Foreign Minister of East Timor, Mr. Ramos-Horta, who
is with us today. I also want to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Hasegawa, for updating the Council on
developments and for the excellent work he has done
since his appointment.

It is clear that Timor-Leste has come a long way
since achieving independence. A great deal - indeed,
far and away the majority - of the credit must go to
the determination and hard work of the people and the
leaders of Timor-Leste. It is very good to have such a
distinguished representative of the leadership with us
today.

At the same time, the Council itself, and the
United Nations membership more broadly, should be
proud of the United Nations role in assisting Timor-
Leste. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/99) shows, the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), over the past 12
months, has contributed to the further consolidation of
the transition to a democratic and peaceful Timor-
Leste.

Australia is also proud of what it has done to
assist Timor-Leste in building a stable and sustainable
society. We have been a major supporter of
UNMISET's operations and continue to provide a
significant programme of bilateral assistance. Together
with the United Nations and with other neighbours of
Timor-Leste, Australia has a big stake here in ensuring
that Timor-Leste is equipped to meet the challenges
that it faces. We particularly commend the efforts of
the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia in
developing productive relations and a cooperative
approach to border management issues. The
development of close relations with its neighbours will
be crucial to Timor-Leste's long-term stability.

Although Timor Leste has made commendable
progress, clearly it requires the continued support of its
neighbours and of the international community. Thus
Australia would like to see a continuation of United
Nations involvement in Timor-Leste, beyond 20 May
2005, when UNMISET's mandate expires, to safeguard
the considerable investment made by the international
community.

However, in our view, the current external
security environment in Timor-Leste does not warrant
a continuation of peacekeepers on the border.
Australia's preference is therefore for a continued
United Nations presence to concentrate efforts on
essential nation-building tasks, especially in capacity-
building for Government institutions, development of
police and security forces and the strengthening of the
law and justice systems.

In any future United Nations mission in Timor-
Leste, a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General should continue to report to the Security
Council, which would retain oversight of the situation
in Timor-Leste. The mission should also continue to be
funded from the regular United Nations budget. We
note that there would be no military costs involved
under our preferred approach. It will be more important
to ensure that essential civilian positions are
adequately funded.

UNMISET has clearly made a significant
contribution to building a capable and vibrant
democracy in Timor Leste. But the current challenges
facing Timor Leste require a new approach. It is our
view that a continued United Nations presence post-
UNMISET should focus on the key areas of capacity-
building and governance.

Australia has been a significant contributor to
United Nations efforts in support of our close friend
and neighbour. As in the past, Australia can be relied
upon to maintain its contribution in proportionate terms
to any future United Nations presence in East Timor,
however, the Council should decide how to proceed.

