Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the United States for its leadership of the Council
this month and for organizing this very important
debate. I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his recent report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2015/942). I would like to extend my
sincere appreciation to Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and his team for their tireless efforts and
hard work in Afghanistan, a reflection of which can be
seen in the Secretary-General's report.

We recognize the importance of General Assembly
resolution 68/11 and Security Council resolution 2210
(2015) requesting the Secretary-General to report on
the situation in Afghanistan every three months. These
reports, which generally align with our insights on
the realities in Afghanistan, provide a comprehensive
account of daily developments in the country, covering
a wide range ofissues. The Security Council's quarterly
deliberations on Afghanistan ensure that Member States
remain informed about the evolving security and socio-
political dynamics in Afghanistan. It is also helpful for
the National Unity Government of Afghanistan in its
working relationship with the international community.
In addition to providing an immense wealth of
information, the Secretary-General's quarterly reports
identify problem areas relevant to the Security Council's
mandate. We hope the Council will take these debates
a step forward and deliver relevant required actions for
the problems raised.

As we deliberate here today, the first post-transition
year of Afghanistan is coming to an end. Despite some
skepticism fuelled by extensive terrorist attacks this
year and our high casualty rates, Afghanistan remains
united and its national resolve against terrorism and
violent extremism is stronger than ever before. The
National Unity Government has become an enduring
phenomenon, spreading its wings over the governance
of the country and aiming to be more inclusive through
its outreach policies. We are continuing our key goal of
improving security through the overarching two-track
policy of pursuing the peace process through regional
and international efforts and increasing Afghanistan's
defensive capacity through national reform and the
NATO Resolute Support Mission, in order to protect
our people and keep the region and the world safe.
Afghanistan is greatly appreciative of the continued
support that the international community has provided
for our ongoing transition towards a stable, secure and
prosperous nation.

Throughout the year, the National Unity
Government has continued its efforts to build trust,
improve bilateral ties and engage with the countries of
the region to foster effective partnership. It has invested
considerable political capital in the peace process. On
9 December, through the Heart ofAsia-Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference in Islamabad and the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 70/77, entitled "The
situation in Afghanistan", the region and the world at
large acknowledged that Afghanistan has been fighting
regional and international terrorist groups. They
recognized that a peace process backed by regional
actors, in particular Pakistan, and supported by the
international community is essential for achieving
long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan.

The participants in the Islamabad Conference
recognized that achieving peace and security is a shared
responsibility in which each regional country must
play its role. They agreed to put into practice specific
measures necessary for countering and eliminating
the menace of terrorism, curbing the spread of violent
extremism and the promotion of violence as a means
of achieving political objectives. They further agreed
to take action to deny terrorists' access to financial
and material resources, to dismantle their sanctuaries
and training facilities, to curtail their ability to recruit
and train, and to curb their movements. They urged all
Afghan Taliban groups and all other armed opposition
groups to enter into peace talks with the Afghan
Government. They also resolved to begin the process
of identifying and countering the threats associated
with terrorism, transnational criminal narcotics and
weapon smuggling networks. The Conference decided
to explore a collective security approach by adopting
a common counter-terrorism strategy. It tasked the
relevant Heart of Asia senior officials to meet in the
first halfof2016 and come up with measures on security
issues and counter-terrorism.

Along the margins of the Conference, during
bilateral, trilateral and quadrilateral meetings held
between the Afghan President, the Pakistani Prime
Minister, the Chinese Foreign Minister, and the United
States Deputy Secretary of State, the parties stressed
the need to enhance mutual trust and cooperation
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. It was made clear
that friendly, mutually respectful relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan are necessary if an enabling
environment for the peace process is to be created and
if the security, stability, prosperity and national interest
of both States are to be ensured. We once again heard
and welcome the Pakistan leadership's statements that
Pakistan will play a genuine and constructive role in
supporting security and facilitating peace talks with
the Taliban. President Mohammad Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai hoped that the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process, in association with regional and international
security organizations, could reach an agreement on
a verification mechanism to determine what type of
actors threaten our common interest and how to deal
with them in an effective manner.

Talking to the Taliban is not new. We have been
talking to them since they appeared on our country's
political landscape in 1994. We have experienced their
seasonal and tactical use of war and peace. The latest
potential diplomatic breakthrough in putting the peace
process back on track and opening an effective and
sustainable regional and global approach is a sign of
hope, but it can only become meaningful if words are
translated into deeds. This is the moment of truth - we
must see a genuine paradigm shift on the part of the
regional orchestrators of our insecurity. The recent
attacks in Kandahar and Helmand provinces have
shown that better relations with neighbours can only be
possible when foreign-based sanctuaries are dismantled
and violence is reduced within Afghanistan and across
the region.

Foreign planning, logistical support, safe havens, an

abundance of cash, deadly weapons and suicide bombers
are key enablers of terrorism and violent extremism. The
motivation for this level of support for terror within State
circles, in violation of resolution 1373 (2001), must be
questioned, identified and addressed. In Afghanistan's
region, apart from other root causes of terrorism,
States' trust deficit, negative rivalry, fuming hate and
excessive obsession and suspicion are causes for serious
concern. Furthermore, tension between military and
civilian control in domestic politics have instigated
policies that use violence to achieve political objectives.
This has turned our country into a theatre for a proxy
war for others and has provided a comfort zone within
which terrorists and violent extremist groups operate
at national, regional and international levels. Targeting
the promoters and drivers of such policies within
State structures through specific reform programmes,
especially in the security apparatus, together with
travel and financial sanctions, would certainly make
the world safer. We also hope the update and expansion
of sanction regimes through resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1988 (2011) will further tighten the noose on the
activities of Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and the Taliban.

The incursions of different kinds across the Durand
Line, in clear violation of paragraph 4 of Article of the
United Nations Charter and resolution 2131 (2013),
continued throughout 2015. The flow of militant
infiltrations and large-scale weapon smuggling in our
region, providing manpower, firearms and ammunitions
to the terrorist networks, must be disrupted. Deriding
Afghanistan for its genuine concern over violations of
United Nations Charter and resolutions is not helpful
for any healthy dialogue. We expect better treatment
for our concerns than routinely branding them "rhetoric
from Kabul" or "resorting to the blame game".

The rapid growth of ISIS in the eastern and other
parts of Afghanistan should be a serious concern for
all of us. Some sections of the Taliban have sworn
allegiance to ISIS. The recent inhumane attacks in
California, Paris, Beirut and Nairobi, and the bombing
of the Russian airliner, have demonstrated how through
a new brand of terrorism a leading global non-State
terrorist actor has emerged and can no longer be
confined to the Middle East or our region. We need a
unified response to strengthen global collaboration and
develop strategies to denounce the extremist ideology
of ISIS and their ilk and combat terrorism in all its
forms.

Despite continuing challenges, 15 years of
collaborative work and joint sacrifices by Afghanistan
and the international community have had significant
gains of which we should all be proud. Given the
emerging challenges, today we fight the world's war
against international terrorism and violent extremism,
with an average of 30 to 40 civilian causalities a day.
The consolidation and sustainability of our gains are
absolutely vital. The cost of an insecure Afghanistan
and its consequences is far greater than that ofa secure
Afghanistan. Handling the fresh flow of Afghan
refugees in Europe is a reminder of that. Removing the
drivers of threats and making Afghanistan capable of
defending itself and its citizens is in fact an investment
in the safety of the world. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF) need sustainability and
the right enablers to face the war that has been imposed
on us. We welcome the 1 December NATO decision
to extend its training mission in Afghanistan during
2016 and secure funding for ANDSF until the end of
2020. We also look forward to the 2016 Warsaw NATO
Summit's deliberations on Afghanistan.

Beside the security challenges, the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan has remained focused on
economic issues, in particular addressing the fiscal
gap, poverty, unemployment and delivery of basic
services through a series of initiatives within the Self-
Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework
and in line with 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). Our
efforts in the promotion and advancement of regional
economic cooperation within the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan Process have
already yielded results. The recent start of construction
of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas
pipeline, our accession to the World Trade Organization
and the establishment of a series of special economic
zones in the country as part of Afghanistan's economic
development plan are great news for our people, our
partners in the region and the rest of the world. Our
self-reliance reform plan requires the effective use of
development aid and an increase in national revenue.
We look forward to discussing our more vigorous
programmes with the international community
during the 2016 Brussels international conference on
Afghanistan. The relevant actors in our region should
realize that they can benefit from the peace dividend of
Afghanistan.

We are diligently working to strengthen good
governance and the rule of law, protect and promote
the rights of all Afghans, and enhance the fight against
narcotics. In this effort, we are building the internal
capabilities of our nation. We are making progress in
the restoration of credibility in the electoral process. We
have already begun to implement the recommendations
of the Special Electoral Reform Commission.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that despite
constant attacks on our sovereignty and people,
Afghanistan stands strong and united in the face of
terror. We will not be defeated by extremist elements that
want to destroy the progress that we have collectively
achieved since 2001. We have demonstrated time and
again that we are willing to move forward and are
committed to working towards bringing about peace.
Currently, extremism worldwide threatens our core
values and aims to divide us. Afghanistan is fighting
terrorist threats every day, and we expect there to be a
stronger global partnership to holistically address the
root causes of those threatening activities. We must
ensure that the voice of reason prevails and present a
unified front against terrorism in all its aspects and
wherever it exists.

In that regard, we are very grateful for the
unconditional support of the Council in the past and look
forward to a fruitful and effective relationship in the
future to create a world of justice and peace. I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the courageous
men and women of so many nations that have served and
sacrificed their lives alongside their Afghan comrades
and partners in combating terrorism and seeking a
better future for the people of Afghanistan. We shall
honour their courage and memory by finishing our task
at hand. We also extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of those civilians who tragically lost their lives
during the recent barbaric attacks by Daesh in various
parts of the world.

As the new representative of a transformed
Afghanistan with a strong popular mandate and high
expectations from the United Nations, I hope that the
Council will continue to act on the plight of millions
of my people who have seen nearly four decades of
imposed conflicts. Let us therefore reaffirm our long-
standing commitment to guarantee an Afghanistan that
stands in peace and security because its implications
are, by all accounts, far-reaching and essential for
global peace and security.

