Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me to join previous
speakers in welcoming the Vice-Minister of External
Relations of Angola, and to thank him for his heartfelt
statement on behalf of the Government and the people of
his country.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report on the situation in Angola (S/2000/23) -
including on the activities of the United Nations Office in
Angola (UNOA) - which was introduced to us this
morning by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Sir. Kieran Prendergast. The report provides a
useful update of political developments, as well as of the
military, human rights, humanitarian, socio-economic and
other aspects since the adoption of resolution 1268 (1999)
in October 1999. My delegation supports the analyses and
observations contained in the report.

My delegation also wishes to thank Ambassador
Fowler for his briefing this morning, including the vivid
video tape. It is largely thanks to his effective leadership
of the sanctions Committee that we now have sanctions
that are beginning to yield results and reduce UNITA's
ability to obtain weapons to prosecute the war. We look
forward to receiving the report of the expert panel in
March, which will enable the Council to take further
action.

While some measure of stability has been achieved
in several areas of Angola in which there has been a re-
establishment of State authority, the general security
situation - with its risk of spillover into the
neighbouring countries, particularly into Namibia - must
continue to be of concern to the international community.
The Secretary-General has, in his report, referred to
recent high-level meetings focusing on issues related to
security along Angola's borders. We hope that the
bilateral understandings and agreements reportedly
reached will reduce the threat to regional peace and
security.

My delegation agrees that the establishment of
stability, security and harmony in Angola is largely
dependent on the achievement of national reconciliation.
We therefore welcome the Angolan Government's
recommitment to the Lusaka Protocol as a valid basis for
the peace process. We believe that the path to peace can
be successful only if all parties commit themselves to
national reconciliation. The perpetuation of the conflict
diverts scarce resources into sterile confrontation, which
can only lead to further suffering for the war-weary
people of Angola and the further destruction of the
country's infrastructure.

We were pleased to learn from the Vice-Minister
that the Government's plans to hold legislative and
presidential elections will be implemented by 2001.

We call on UNITA to spare the innocent people of
Angola the continued hardship that can be the only result
of the continuation of this conflict by ending the fighting
and by complying with its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. In particular, UNITA must demilitarize its
forces and allow the return of State administration
throughout the country.

We cannot fail to acknowledge the precarious
humanitarian situation prevailing in the country. The
estimated 3.7 million people who have been affected
within Angola's borders, as well as refugees who have
fled to neighbouring countries, have little or no access to
humanitarian aid, and their circumstances remain dire.

 

The reported situation of malnutrition among children is
particularly disturbing. We hope that the recent restoration
of stability in those areas where the Angolan Government
has resumed control will lead to the resumption of
humanitarian aid to the people who are so desperately in
need of assistance. We also hope that the international
donor community will respond positively to the United
Nations Inter-agency Appeal.

The international community will need to assist the
Angolan Government in those tasks which will be of
paramount importance upon the cessation of hostilities -
namely the reintegration of ex-combatants and the
resettlement of internally displaced persons and refugees
into the mainstream of Angolan life. The rebuilding of
Angola's infrastructure will also require close coordination
on the part of the international community and various
United Nations organizations, many of which have had to
curtail their activities due to the war. These programmes
must address such areas as employment generation and
capacity-building through micro-financing, community
recovery and longer-term infrastructure rehabilitation. In
this regard, we note the urgent need for a resumption of
demining activities and for the rehabilitation of the victims
of landmines.
It is not only the people of Angola who have been the
victims of this war. Among these have been international
civil servants, including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye, and humanitarian
workers, who have given their lives in the cause of peace.
There are also families who do not know the fate of their
loved ones who have been caught in the crossfire. In this
regard, we urge UNITA to give account of the missing
persons and those being held captive.

My delegation adheres to the view that a continued
United Nations presence in Angola can contribute greatly
to the promotion of peace, national reconciliation, human
rights and regional security, and we therefore hope that the
draft Status-of-Mission Agreement can be concluded
without further delay so that the UNOA may begin to
assume its functions in accordance with resolution 1268
(1999).

In this regard, we welcome the appointment of Mr.
Gambari as Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Africa. We know that he will make a valuable contribution
to the efforts of the Secretary-General in restoring trust and
confidence between the United Nations and the Government
of Angola. We wish him every success.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the Angolan
problem remains an international problem and must
continue to be addressed internationally if peace and
prosperity are to return to that war-torn country.

