Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, the Chinese delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate.

The Chinese delegation believes that preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and their delivery systems is a real and
pressing task facing the international community. Non-
proliferation is conducive to maintaining international
peace and security, in addition to being in the common
interests of all countries. China is adamantly opposed
to the proliferation of WMD. We support, and actively
participate in, relevant international non-proliferation
efforts. We welcome the fact that the United Nations is
playing its proper role in this area.

China believes that the proliferation of WMD has
complex underlying causes that require an integrated
approach to address both symptoms and causes. First,
it requires the building of a global security
environment of cooperation and mutual trust. Secondly,
it requires efforts to deal with proliferation through
political and diplomatic means. Thirdly, it requires the
full participation of the United Nations in its central
role, as well as that of other international
organizations. Fourthly, it requires proper management
of the relationship between non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
11

In 2004, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1540 (2004) on non-proliferation,
thereby establishing a Committee whose aim was to fill
the gaps in existing international non-proliferation
mechanisms in order to cope with illegal WMD
proliferation activities by non-State actors. That was of
great importance to the deepening of the international
consensus on non-proliferation and to the promotion of
the non-proliferation process. In April 2006, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1673 (2006),
which renewed the Committee's mandate for another
two years, thereby laying the groundwork for further
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

In the past three years, with the assistance of
experts, the Committee has done much work and made
steady progress in collecting and reviewing national
implementation reports and in carrying out outreach
activities and facilitating international assistance and
cooperation to promote the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). China appreciates all those
efforts.

We have also been pleased to note that the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization have also 7 utilizing their
resources and expertise - made positive contributions
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in
their respective areas of responsibility.

It goes without saying that the implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) is a long-term
task for all countries that cannot be accomplished
overnight. The implementation of those resolutions
depends largely on unflagging national efforts. At the
same time, it is important for full and effective
implementation of the resolutions that the 1540
Committee play a constructive role in enhancing
outreach, promoting international assistance and
maintaining the necessary exchanges and cooperation
with the relevant international organizations.

China attaches great importance to resolution
1540 (2004) and has always participated constructively
and actively in the work of the 1540 Committee. As
required by the resolution, China has submitted its
national report and supplementary notes. In July 2006,
we co-sponsored, with the United Nations and a
number of other interested countries, a seminar on
implementing Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
12

in Asia and the Pacific. That formed part of our
contribution to promoting the implementation of the
resolution in the Asia-Pacific region.

China will, as always, continue to actively
support and participate in the work of the Committee
and will work with all other actors in a concerted effort
to effectively implement resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006). China supports the issuance today of a
presidential statement on this item.

