Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
support the statement delivered by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the region of the Middle East
continues to be of grave concern to the international
community. Just a year after Israel's most recent
attack on the Gaza Strip, in which more than 2,000
Palestinians lost their lives, among them at least 299
women and 556 children, and which plunged that
territory into terror, death and mass destruction, the
Palestinian people continue to be the victims of acts
of aggression perpetrated by Israel, which continues to
occupy their land, murder their children, destroy their
homeland and shred their inalienable rights, including
the right to self-determination.

Despite the periodic open debates in the Security
Council, which have demonstrated overwhelming
support for the Palestinian cause, the Council has
unfortunately failed to adopt a single resolution
demanding that Israel put an immediate end to its
military occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories;
that it lift the blockade against the Gaza Strip; that it halt
the construction and expansion of its illegal settlements
and of the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory; and that Israel be held accountable for the war
crimes it has committed and its collective punishment of
the Palestinian people. We cannot allow the Palestinian
cause to continue without a just resolution.

This organ must fulfil its obligation to promote
a negotiated settlement that guarantees the end of
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory; the
peaceful coexistence of two independent States; the
establishment of the independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with its capital in East Jerusalem and
with the pre-l967 borders; along with a just solution to
the problem of Palestine refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

We are convinced that the solution to this long-
standing conflict could contribute to significantly
reducing current tensions in the Middle East.

My delegation once again reiterates in this Chamber
its strong condemnation of the Israeli settlement
campaign in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and of all the measures,
policies and practices connected to that campaign,
which, in addition to the construction and expansion of
illegal settlements and the wall, includes the destruction
and confiscation of Palestinian land and property,
the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian families and the transfer of settlers into
occupied Palestinian territory, among other violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and United Nations resolutions. My delegation also
condemns the violence, provocations and incitement to
hatred and terror by Israeli settlers, and the arbitrary
detentions and mass incarcerations, and demands
that they end once and for all. Cuba reaffirms its full
support for the admission of Palestine as a full Member
of this Organization.

Many of the pledges made for the reconstruction
of the Gaza Strip following the terrible bombings and
massive destruction inflicted by Israel in July and
August 2014 have not materialized. We call on all
members of the international community to fulfil their
commitments and work to rebuild that devastated area.

Achieving peace in Syria will be possible only
through respect for its people's right to decide their
own destiny. A political solution through dialogue and
negotiation is the only alternative to the conflict in
Syria. Anyone fuelling the conflict from outside with
a declared goal of regime change bears responsibility
for the thousands of civilian casualties that have
mounted up during four years of fighting. We would
like to once again emphasize our alarm at the loss of
innocent lives as a result of the conflict in Syria and
once again condemn every act of violence committed
against civilians there. But claiming to protect human
lives and combat extremist elements cannot be a pretext
for foreign intervention. That is why we call for the
withdrawal of any foreign presence in Syria without
the consent of the Syrian Government and appropriate
coordination with its authorities. The United Nations,
particularly the Council, should urge for an immediate
ceasefire as a preliminary to dialogue and negotiations,
and should not promote initiatives that encourage
further tensions and that have yet to produce concrete
results.

The world's leaders recently adopted the new 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development for the next 15
years (General Assembly resolution 70/1). Now begins
the most difficult stage, which will require significant
financial and human resources to implement. We have
no right to sacrifice present and future generations
to the horrors of war and the devastation it causes,
no matter where it occurs. The Security Council has
a crucial role to play in helping all the peoples of the
Middle East to achieve their aspirations to the well-
being, peace and development that they deserve. Its
members should be advocates for peaceful solutions,
without foreign interference, that will safeguard
States' sovereignty and territorial integrity and make
a decisive contribution to preserving the lives of the
people affected by the conflicts in the region.

