Mr. Bencosme Castafios (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham for their briefings this morning, which painted a very full and detailed picture of the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We express our gratitude to both of them for the immense efforts made in their respective fields to achieve peace and meet the pressing needs of the affected population. At the outset, I should like to recognize the progress being made in the talks between the Government of Saudi Arabia and the Houthis, which have led to a partial de-escalation in hostilities. Notwithstanding that observation, we condemn the recent attacks, especially those targeting humanitarian infrastructure in Al Dhale'e on 22 December. We reiterate as we have on other occasions that all parties to the conflict have an obligation to respect international humanitarian law and refrain from this type of indiscriminate attacks, which have greatest effect on the civilian population. We have listened very carefully to the reports of progress in implementing the Riyadh agreement and we understand that we must maintain the momentum to reach a broad and inclusive political agreementbased on mutual respect and full implementation of the commitments undertaken. With regard to the implementation of the Hodeidah Agreement, we commend the ongoing work of General Guha together with the parties to improve humanitarian access. We urge the parties to continue cooperating under the auspices of the Redeployment Coordination Committee, and, in this regard, we stress that the parties must ensure there are no restrictions on the movement of Mission personnel within the city. Such restriction undermines the overall implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, recently renewed by the Security Council unanimously in resolution 2505 (2020) (see S/PV.8701). We acknowledge the progress made in the prisoner exchange, with the release of 200 detainees by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as part of implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We also welcome the announcement of the facilitation of flights for health reasons from Sana'a airport to countries where patients can receive badly needed treatment. The humanitarian situation remains alarming. In particular, we are concerned at the alerts issued by humanitarian organizations on the ground about a possible epidemic of dengue-related diseases. The climate situation, combined with the virtual collapse of water and sanitation services as a result of the conflict, has made it difficult to control this type of disease, which primarily affects children. We are further concerned at reports about food security in the country. The conflict in Yemen continues to restrict access to livelihoods and prolong the food- and nutrition-insecurity situation of the population for generations to come. According to reports from specialized agendas, agricultural production is well below average, and the prices of food and non-food commodities remain significantly elevated compared to pre-conflict levels. We also wish to echo the representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines by expressing that any political process in Yemen must include the participation of women as well as men and fully take into account their needs. It is therefore crucial to provide safe spaces for women to make their valuable contributions. We are likewise concerned by reports about food security in the country. Against a backdrop of reduced access to income and decreased purchasing power, most Yemenis cannot meet their essential food and non-food needs. Under these circumstances, malnutrition remains a serious concern in many areas. We encourage the parties to commit to the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and a definitive ceasefire, while working on an inclusive peace process that will permanently open the door to new paths leading towards development and prosperity for the Yemeni people.
