Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and the Prosecutors,
Serge Brammertz of the ICTY and Hassan Bubacar
Jallow of the ICTR for their reports on the completion
strategies of their respective Tribunals. I would also
like to warmly congratulate Mr. Koffi Afande of Togo
for his outstanding election as Judge of the ICTY and
Mr. Mandiaye Niang of Senegal for his appointment
as a Judge of the ICTR. I remain convinced that those
two judges will contribute to the swift conclusion of the
remaining proceedings in the two Tribunals.

While progress in the two International Criminal
Tribunals is not symmetrical, the work of each is
progressively drawing to a close. However, my delegation
is concerned about the challenges encountered by the
two Tribunals, including attrition of staff who naturally
want to secure the next part of their careers. I call on the
General Assembly to cooperate more closely with the
two Tribunals to take measures to combat staff attrition
on the basis of the reasonable proposals formulated by
the ICTR and ICTY.

Rwanda welcomes the fact that the cases at the trial
level have concluded in the ICTR. However, the delays
in the appeals proceedings are a cause for concern, in
particular in the Nyiramasuhuko et al. ("Butare") case,
for which delivery of the appeal judgement is projected
in July 2015 at the earliest. We know that there are
challenges relating to the staff and new requests from
parties, but we nevertheless feel that other reasons put
forward by the ICTR, such as translation of documents,
could have been planned for. We would therefore call
on the Tribunal to do all it can to speed up the appeals
proceedings so as to guarantee that all cases conclude
before the expiration of its mandate on 31 December
2014.

Regarding the cases transferred to national
jurisdiction under rule 11 bis of the rules of procedure
and evidence of the Tribunal, the results are very mixed.
While Jean Uwinkindi and Bernard Munyagishari,
who were transferred to Rwanda in April 2012 and
July 2013 respectively, have appeared before the
judges under the monitoring of Tribunal monitors, the
procedures for Mr. Laurent Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka, transferred to France in November 2007,
have practically stopped. It is totally incomprehensible
that so many years after their transfer there is no
end in sight for the two indictees. We also regret that
despite our repeated calls the report of the ICTR under
consideration provides no detail regarding progress on
the cases in France.

We would once again regard that rule 11 bis allows
the Tribunals to rescind transfer orders to national
jurisdictions at any time. In that regard, ifthose French
proceedings remain in the current deadlock, the ICTR
should envisage transferring the Laurent Bucyibaruta
and Wenceslas Munyeshyaka cases to Rwanda.

Rwanda is pleased to note that there are no longer
any fugitives from the ICTY. However, that is far
from being the case for the ICTR, from which nine
fugitives remain at large. We reiterate our support for
the continuous calls from the Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, and from the Council urging the
countries concerned to cooperate with the Office of
the Prosecutor in tracking and arresting the remaining
fugitives, including Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana, who were among those who
planned the genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi in
Rwanda.

Similarly, we call on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to redouble their efforts to arrest the genocidal
members of the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR), a group that was recently described
by the Security Council as a subject to United Nations
sanctions and whose leaders and members include
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, who
continue to promote and commit ethnic killings
and other massacres in Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In that regard, we reiterate our gratitude to Germany
for having begun trials against the leaders of the FDLR,
and we take this opportunity to call on other countries
of the European Union that are harbouring perpetrators
of the Rwandan genocide, including FDLR leaders,
to do likewise. We profoundly regret that the justice
systems in certain of those States, instead of bringing
justice to the Victims of the genocide, for which they
have been waiting for 20 years, have preferred to
issue arrest warrants against those who arrested them,
thereby flagrantly abusing the principle of universal
jurisdiction. We urge those States to return to reason,
bring justice to the victims of genocide and abstain
from using justice for political purposes.

Rwanda welcomes the awareness-raising activities
of the Tribunal, in particular those of Umusanzu
Information and Documentation Centre in Kigali and
the 10 additional provincial information centres. Those
centres are indispensable tools that allow the Rwandan
justice system, students, researchers and individuals to
have access to the jurisprudence and other documents of
the ICTR. Rwanda believes that that fruitful initiative
should be a first step towards the transfer of the ICTR
archives to Rwanda at the end of the Mechanism's
mandate. Those archives are an integral part of the
history and heritage of Rwanda. They are crucial for
the preservation of memory and for the education of
future generations. We remain fully committed to
continuing consultations with all interested parties
with a view to ensuring that that request, which we
have repeated many times before the Council, will be
met with concrete action.

I could not conclude my statement without paying
enthusiastic tribute to Ambassador Gert Rosenthal
of Guatemala, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, for his devotion over the
past several years to the fight against impunity and to
international criminal justice, in particular through the
ad hoc Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide carried out against the Tutsi in Rwanda, I
must also pay tribute to Nelson Mandela for his life
devoted to justice and reconciliation.

