Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all, allow me to
express our warmest welcome to the President of
Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic', to the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
and to the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon.

We certainly cannot say that yesterday's
declaration of independence by the Kosovo Assembly
has caught any one of us unprepared. As we already
pointed out during last Thursday's debate, there has
been a growing perception that momentum was
building on the Kosovo future status issue. That
momentum is the result of long and intensive efforts by
the international community, through which we had
hoped to bridge the differences between the two parties
directly involved in this issue.

We have strongly supported the extensive
negotiations that have taken place under the aegis of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, President
Ahtisaari, and later by the Troika. As the European
Union representative on the Troika, Ambassador
Ischinger, has assured us, no stone has been left
unturned. A continuation of negotiations would not
make sense, because it would prove useless, as all
avenues for reaching an agreement between the two
parties have been explored. Nothing leads us to believe
that a few more months - or, more likely, a few more
years - of talks would allow us to reach a shared
solution. Unfortunately, the potential for reaching a
negotiated solution has been exhausted.

We have often expressed our concern over the
unsustainability of an unresolved situation and over the
heightened security risks that a prolonged status quo
could cause. As Italy already stated here in this
Chamber during last December's debate on the Contact
Group Troika report, there is a profound contradiction
between calling for further negotiations among the
parties and assuming that the status quo in Kosovo is
no longer sustainable, as has been repeatedly
underscored here at the United Nations and in other
relevant multilateral forums. Growing uncertainties
affect both the local population and the international
presences on the ground. Clarity on the future status of
Kosovo is needed for the benefit of all. We must now
move on to a new phase.

We deeply regret the failure to secure a mutually
agreed outcome, and we also deeply regret that the
Security Council cannot agree on a way forward. We
have long argued, and we continue to believe, that if
the status quo remains unsustainable, with no room for
a negotiated solution, the United Nations Special
Envoy's proposal for Kosovo's internationally
supervised independence is the only Viable option to
deliver stability and security in Kosovo and in the
region as a whole.

Kosovo's independence is today a fact. It is a new
reality that we must face and acknowledge. It is time to
look ahead. We intend, together with the majority of
the European Union member States, to proceed swiftly
with the recognition of Kosovo's new status of
independence under international supervision. The
limits of its sovereignty are clear. The presence of the
international community on the ground is strong, while
its role will be intrusive in all of the more delicate and
significant sectors, especially when facing any real but
manageable risks for regional stability.

Italy will do its part by continuing to endeavour
for the development of a European perspective, which
is becoming more and more tangible, both for Belgrade
and for Pristina. The inevitable tension between Serbia
and Kosovo can be assuaged only within the
framework of a credible process of integration of both
parties into the European Union structures.

We will also continue our endeavours to reach an
agreement between Serbia and Kosovo that can mend
their torn relations and put them back on the track of
cooperation. We will continue to make our determined
contribution through the participation of our men in the
European Union and NATO missions aimed at
maintaining regional stability, an issue that is directly
connected with Italy's national security.

The European Union's future role in Kosovo is
part of a strategic commitment to the region aimed at
promoting stability and reinforcing a European
perspective for all countries of the Western Balkans.
We must move on to a stage in which the European
Union takes up an extensive share of responsibility in
the administration of the territory. For more than one
and a half years, a planning team has been operating on
the ground to prepare the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo). It has been
working closely with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and other
international players. We acknowledge the excellent
cooperation established with the United Nations
throughout this period. Significantly, the European
Security and Defence Policy mission is going to be the
largest international operation ever carried out by the
European Union.

We must also consider that the strong and
decisive role assigned to the EULEX Kosovo mission,
recently approved by the European Union, is a central
aspect of a complex international administrative
arrangement designed for Kosovo. It has been carefully
moulded in accordance with the provisions set forth by
the Secretary-General's status Envoy in the
comprehensive settlement proposal submitted to us one
year ago.

Through the EULEX Kosovo mission and the
International Civilian Office, the European Union will
be able to monitor respect for those provisions and to
contribute to the consolidation of democratic
institutions and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Our project, building a multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo that must reinforce regional stability with the
active support of the international community, is fully
consistent with international law and the relevant
international documents, including resolution 1244
(1999).

The Secretary-General has taken note of the
significant endeavour being embarked upon by the
European Union. We look forward to continuing to
work with the Secretary-General, building on the
impressive contribution the United Nations has made
to Kosovo in the past eight and half years of
administration. Our goal is, as I have already said, to
establish an appropriate multi-ethnic framework in
which the rights of all communities are upheld and
democratic institutions are built based on the rule of
law.

We call upon all parties involved to approach
these matters constructively, and we urge all sides to
stand by their commitments to maintain peace in the
region and to avoid violence, threats or intimidation.
We welcome the commitments expressed in Kosovo's
declaration of independence, to "protect and promote
the rights of all communities in Kosovo" and to act
consistent with principles of international law and
resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 1244 (1999), as well as the full acceptance
of the obligations for Kosovo contained in the plan set
out by Special Envoy Ahtisaari. We welcome Kosovo's
invitation to an international civilian presence to
supervise the implementation of the Ahtisaari plan and
to the international military presence to continue to
play its role to ensure Kosovo's future peace,
prosperity and stability.

We also stress Italy's strong appreciation,
gratitude and support to the Secretary-General, along
with the Special Representative and UNMIK, for their
continuing efforts. We fully trust in his good judgement
on how to deal with the process under way, which is
crucial in order to continue providing overall safe and
orderly conditions for all communities in Kosovo.

Italy has a large military contingent operating in
the International Security Force in Kosovo, and is set
to become one of the main contributors to the EULEX
Kosovo mission. We strongly support the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and all the
international organizations active on the ground. We
must work together to ensure for Kosovo a stable and
democratic future, in which all communities live
peacefully and prosper together.

Italy will continue to actively promote regional
stability and a European future for all countries of the
Western Balkans. Serbia is an essential factor in this
strategy. A stable and prosperous Serbia, fully
integrated into the family of European nations, is
essential for the stability of the region. The European
Union is the long-term solution to the Kosovo issue.
The European Union is the goal that Serbia also must
achieve.

