Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month. We are confident that your
wisdom will make it possible for us to achieve the best
results. I would also like to thank you for having
organized this important debate on peacekeeping
operations and congratulate Ambassador Rugunda and
the delegation of Uganda for the excellent way in
which they conducted the Council's work last month. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their excellent
briefings.

My delegation supports the statement to be made
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I will therefore simply raise a
few points here. I will be brief.

Major efforts have been made to reform the
planning and management of peacekeeping operations.
This began with the Brahimi report (S/2000/809),
which was followed by the "Peace Operations 2010"
report, the restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the establishment of the
Department of Field Support. The work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has guaranteed
the follow-up to and assessment of that report.
We hope that today's debate will enable us to
achieve concrete results by establishing a broad
partnership that includes all actors. That partnership
should benefit from the expertise and experience of
troop- and police-contributing countries in improving
the planning of peacekeeping operations and from our
consideration of how we can strengthen their
effectiveness within the framework of clear, achievable
and consensual mandates.

We believe it is high time to broaden the
participation of troop-contributing countries in
peacekeeping operations so that more developed
countries can contribute troops, financial resources and
materiel, and peacekeeping operations can have the
weapons and equipment they need to function.

We reiterate that the establishment or renewal of
a mandate must be in line with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and based on
the guidelines agreed between the various parties.

The growing demand for peacekeeping requires
us to consider enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations so that the
latter are encouraged to play a greater role in
peacebuilding and in preserving peace. There is no
doubt, in this connection, that the African Union, with
Libya as its Chairman, is at the forefront of these
regional organizations, first because most current
armed conflicts are in Africa and, secondly, it has its
own peacekeeping mechanisms. Indeed, the African
Union created the Peace and Security Council, is
playing a growing role in the area of peacekeeping and
has launched numerous initiatives that deserve support
and encouragement. We therefore reaffirm the need to
continue to implement the joint action plan between
the African Union and the United Nations for short-
and midterm peacekeeping capacity-building. We would
also like to strengthen direct cooperation on capacity-
building for the African Union Mission in Somalia.

Finally, we reaffirm that successful peacekeeping
is based on a given mission's full deployment and on a
parallel active political process involving all parties to
a conflict, in which they express their willingness to
reject violence and their commitment to dialogue in
order to resolve their differences. We believe that the
draft presidential statement before us will contribute
enormously to peacekeeping operations.

