Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank Venezuela for
organizing today's open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. In a world beset with conflicts, turmoil
and suffering, this is an opportune moment to discuss
that important subject.

Pakistan was among the pioneers promoting the idea
of a dedicated United Nations institutional mechanism
for peacebuilding. In 2004, Pakistan first proposed an
ad hoc arrangement to draw various United Nations
bodies together to address complex crises. Building on
that, Pakistan actively participated in discussions on
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) during the 2005
World Summit and the subsequent negotiations on and
adoption of General Assembly resolution 60/180, which
established the Commission.
Peacebuilding works best, we feel, as an integral
part of a continuum - from conflict prevention
to peacekeeping to post-conflict reconstruction.
Peacekeepers, as early peacebuilders, help to lay the
foundation for durable peace. Unfortunately, the focus
of the international community has remained on the
conflict phase alone - so long as media attention is
focused there as well - to the detriment of the other
two phases. The support of the international community
often wanes with the departure of television crews in
the aftermath of conflict, which leaves the country
concerned with weak State institutions, a power
vacuum, a weak economy and a lack of financial
resources - the confluence of which is a recipe for a
descent into chaos.

Today, the bulk of peacekeeping resources are
deployed in multidimensional missions. Resolution
2086 (2013), adopted during Pakistan's presidency of
the Security Council in January 2013, was a landmark
in that regard. It reinforced the strategic relationship
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

The Peacebuilding Commission has not been able to
live up to its promise. While it is an essential component
for supporting peacebuilding activities, including post-
conflict stabilization and the strengthening of the
capacity of Governments, national and local institutions
and transitional or other authorities, critical evaluation
and stocktaking is necessary.

The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture is comprehensive and very thoughtful.
We commend Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and the
members of the Advisory Group for their work.
The report rightly places emphasis on prioritizing
peacebuilding, enhancing PBC's interaction with the
principal organs of the United Nations and the need for
political, security and development actors to support
each other in striving for sustainable peace.

The failure to prioritize leads to tragic cycles of
relapse into turmoil and conflict. Addressing the root
causes of conflict is extremely important to avoid its
recurrence, but that obviously requires long-term
commitment and adequate and predictable financing.
Strengthened peacebuilding is in the interest of us
all. To achieve that, we need to give attention to the
following.

First, we must prioritize prevention. It may be
axiomatic to say this, but it remains true that the
best way to deal with growing humanitarian needs is
to address their root causes. Secondly, there should
be a holistic approach to sustaining peace, which
must involve conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. Thirdly,
domestic resource mobilization needs to be given due
importance while working on enhancing international
financial support for peacebuilding and ensuring
its predictability. Fourthly, greater collaboration
should be encouraged between the United Nations
and the World Bank Group and other regional and
international partners in order to assist countries in the
mobilization and effective use of domestic resources.
Fifthly, inclusive national ownership is essential. In
the final analysis, only national actors can drive peace
processes. Sixthly, the PBC should present the Security
Council with concise, realistic and context-specific
recommendations and benchmarks, and the Council
should regularly request and draw upon the advice of the
Commission, especially while discussing mandates and
reviewing peacekeeping operations. Finally, for issues
such as the timing of mission transitions, decisions
should be based on discussions between among the
Security Council, the Secretariat, the relevant troop-
contributing countries and national authorities in
conflict-afflicted countries.

Countries emerging from conflict face imposing
challenges as they seek to overcome the legacy of war
and find a durable path to peace and security. As we move
towards the final stage of the peacebuilding architecture
review process, what is critical is the acknowledgement
that the objective of those review efforts should be to
revitalize the peacebuilding mechanism to better assist
States and societies to recover from conflict and avoid
a calamitous return to violence.

