Mr. Gaviria (spoke in Spanish): I wish to express
my thanks to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico, President of the Security Council, for the
invitation extended to the Organization of American
States. Without doubt, this meeting is timely because
we have recently seen that peace and security cannot be
achieved in isolation but require decisions, sustained
political will, resources and sacrifice. We in the
Organization of American States have assumed the
responsibilities set out in Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, which grants regional organizations
responsibility for the maintenance of peace. For us, that
includes the task of preventing local disputes from
becoming international crises.

In the Americas, in just over a century, since
1890, we have succeeded in creating a number of
political institutions and instruments that have enabled
us, in general, to preserve peace and security, although
we had some problems during the cold war. We
achieved that by constructing instruments that have
helped us fundamentally in achieving the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Especially over the last decade,
we have achieved a good amount of reconciliation on
how to make the defence of democracy the pillar of
peace and security in our hemisphere. We have ensured
that the defence of democracy and the protection of
human rights are compatible with the principles
enshrined in the Charter: non-intervention, self-
determination, the legal equality of States, respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity and, above all, the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

As well, simultaneously, in particular in the
1990s, we worked on a series of conferences on
confidence- and security-building measures that have
greatly assisted us in eradicating many regional
disputes. That has also enabled a process of integration
based on regional instruments and on a process of
integration at the hemispheric level, which we are
seeking through trade. We are resolving many of the
regional differences and disputes.

Today we can say that the principal challenges to
security in the Americas lie in non-military threats. In
the Americas of today, our principal problems are
terrorism, drug trafficking and the illicit trade in arms.
Further, in the Caribbean States, natural disasters
constitute the greatest challenge to regional security.
Faced with such non-military challenges, we have
created a series of regional instruments.

A few months ago, we had the opportunity to
come before the Security Council to describe how we
are dealing with the problem of terrorism in the
Americas and how the events of 11 September 2001
have led us to be relatively well-prepared. Over the last
decade, we held two conferences to combat terrorism.
We created plans of action. We established a committee
against terrorism in the Americas. When those
incidents occurred, we were able to rapidly create a
secretariat and actively work on a series of issues,
which we had the opportunity to explain here. We put
particular emphasis on cooperation to deal with
problems of a financial nature. In doing that, we were
able to take advantage of an institution within our
organization: the Inter-American Drug Control
Commission. It gave us the ability to work especially
on issues such as money laundering. In that case, it was
possible to use those structures and mechanisms to
tackle the problems of terrorism.

As I said, we tackled the problem of drug
trafficking within the framework of the Commission I
mentioned. First, we formulated a strategy among all
countries of the Americas. Then we created a
multilateral evaluation mechanism. Today, there exists
more trust, a common language and a series of
strategies that take into account all aspects of drug use
and production. I believe that we have eliminated much
of the confrontational language that prevailed in our
hemisphere and have replaced it with a language of
cooperation.

In connection with money laundering, we have
broad regional experience in addressing its connections
to terrorism, as well as links with other organizations,
such as the Inter-American Bank, that have cooperated
closely with us. We have been able to develop training
for financial intelligence units. In particular, we have
received assistance from the European Union and such
countries as Spain, France, Canada and the United
States. That has been quite useful in enabling us to
tackle this kind of non-military challenge.

I also wish to note that, in the inter-American
system, we have autonomous human rights institutions,
including the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
These have made a significant contribution in
addressing human rights problems, especially under
military dictatorships. In more recent times, they have
assisted in protecting a new generation of rights. With
respect to the problems of illicit arms trafficking and
manufacturing, with Mexico's assistance we now have
the first regional convention on illicit arms trafficking,
which is fully in force.

In the Americas, we have also developed an
instrument that we regard as particularly important: the
Meetings of Ministers of Justice and Attorneys General
of the Americas. The purpose of these Meetings is to
address threats of a non-military nature and crimes
committed by transnational organizations. This has all
been developed on the basis of legal and judicial
cooperation among the countries of the Americas,
which is allowing us to tackle a number of different
problems, including corruption.

Over the past 15 years, moreover, we in the inter-
American system have learned to cope with the
problem of anti-personnel landmines before it became
of worldwide concern. We have been working on this
issue since 1991 and have largely succeeded in our
demining tasks in the Central American republics
following the lengthy conflicts of the 1980s. Peace now
prevails there and we have managed to demine most of
those countries, although some, such as Nicaragua,
have a little way to go. We have worked intensively in
recent months on the destruction of mines held by
armed forces. About 500,000 of these have been
destroyed this year in Ecuador, Honduras, Nicaragua
and Peru. In Peru and Ecuador, we are also working on
associated problems.

Since 1994, we have been convening Meetings of
Defense Ministers of the Americas. This is a standing
instrument designed to address the question of
confidence-building measures, white papers on defence
and compliance with the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and our own registers. We have a
convention on transparency in strategic arms. We have
managed to create a climate of trust, transparency and
predictability. In the past few years, we have also
considered the issue of conflict prevention.

We have worked on a variety of problems, in
some cases to ensure that confidence-building
measures are respected when cases are referred to the
International Court of Justice or arbitration machinery,
as in the case of Honduras and Nicaragua. We have
also acted as facilitator in negotiations between
countries, such as those recently held between Belize
and Guatemala.

I wish to note that we are working primarily
through peaceful means to prevent conflicts. We have
made progress with our traditional instrument, the
Inter-American Treaty on Reciprocal Assistance, which
was invoked in the case of the attack against the United
States. A series of instruments constitutes our
framework for dealing with the new generation of
security threats that has arisen since the end of the cold
war. To that end, in order to give effect to such
instruments, we have scheduled a security conference
to take place in Mexico in May.

I conclude by once again extending our thanks to
the Foreign Minister of Mexico for having organized
and convened this meeting. I also thank the Secretary-
General, for whom we in the Organization of American
States have the greatest respect.

