Let me, at the outset, thank Germany for convening this important debate. My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the delegation of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20), but nonetheless wishes to make the following additional remarks in its national capacity. It has become a periodic ritual for Member States to meet to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine, without any concrete forward movement. Despite the fact that there has not been any traction in negotiations and that tensions between the Israelis and Palestinians continue to be sustained, we must not give in to despair. For our part, Nigeria will continue to join others in giving voice to the need for a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to this protracted crisis. Nigeria's position on this issue remains constant. We call for a two-State solution heralding a viable, contiguous Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on 1967 borders, in accordance with numerous United Nations and Security Council resolutions. We wish once again to appeal to States with influence over the parties concerned to muster enough political will and encourage the two parties' re-engagement in dialogue based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing agreements. We once again wish to renew this appeal for influential States to muster enough political will and bring the parties to the negotiating table. We must begin to think out of the box in order to find innovative ways to address the prevailing challenges and gaps for the implementation of all relevant United Nations and Security Council resolutions on this subject matter. To this end, we once again call on Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all settlement- related activities in the West Bank and occupied East Jerusalem as a confidence- building measure, while the State of Palestine, for its part, should embark upon confidence-building measures by signalling, first of all, their readiness to return to the negotiating table. They should also deal with acts of militancy to allow for efforts to forge unity and peace. We note that the prolonged absence of a political horizon to resolve the broader conflict has coincided with a steady deterioration of the living conditions of the Palestinians. The situation is further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with the Palestinian Authorities reporting 862 confirmed cases of virus infections, with 174 recoveries and three fatalities as of 13 July 2020. We express deep appreciation for the invaluable work of the Non-Aligned Movement through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, including its essential emergency assistance that enables refugees to confront the COVID-19 pandemic. Once again, my delegation reiterates its call on the international community to continue to support and encourage Israel and Palestine to embrace the peace process as a means of resolving the lingering conflicts. In conclusion, we wish to re-echo our firm belief that achieving lasting peace in the Middle East will depend not on bullets or blockades but on determination and the commitment to making painful sacrifices in support of peace. This would bring about much desired peace and justice, reduce threats to regional and international peace and security and create more development vistas for both States.
