Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2073 (2012), which
comes at a time when progress continues to be registered
in the consolidation of Somalia's post-transition phase,
as witnessed by the appointment of the lO-member
Cabinet on 4 November. The political progress is
a tribute to the political will and determination of
ordinary Somalis and their political leadership to bring
an end to two decades of violence and instability. South
Africa applauds those efforts.

At the same time, we pay tribute to the leadership
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union (AU), which are heavily invested
in supporting Somalia to advance peace and security in
the country. The success registered in Somalia is the
result of the joint efforts by the international community
and the United Nations in the context of resolution 2033
(2012), working in close cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations to find lasting solutions to
the challenges of peace and security. We pay particular
tribute to Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Ethiopia, Djibouti
and Sierra Leone for supporting the Somali National
Security Forces in liberating the country from the
militant Al-Shabaab and in creating the enabling
security environment necessary for facilitating political
progress in the country.

While significant political and military gains have
been registered since the adoption of resolution 2036
(2012) in February, the international community must

jealaously guard the gains registered in Somalia, so
that what has been achieved at great cost to troop-
contributing countries to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and with the substantive
investment by the international community is not lost.
In that regard, we welcome the increase, pursuant to
paragraph 2 of resolution 2073 (2012), of an additional
50 civilian personnel under the United Nations logistical
support package to AMISOM. That increase is in line
with the request of the AU contained in the letter from
the Chair of the AU Commission of 18 October.

My delegation regrets, however, that owing to
disagreements among Council members, the AU's
request for the logistical support package to be extended
to the AMISOM. maritime component was not accepted.
As explained by the Chair of the AU Commission in his
letter dated 18 October, the maritime component was to
play a key role in the operation to dislodge Al-Shabaab
from its coastal stronghold and in subsequent efforts
to deny the group its ability to resupply, infiltrate and
ferry fighters. South Africa, the AU and neighbouring
States strongly maintain that the United Nations should
support the AMISOM. maritime component. We urge
the international community to remain vigilant and not
to allow complacency to rob us of the gains that we
have achieved at high human and material cost.

My delegation deeply regrets the fact that
Council members could not agree on the Secretary-
General's submitting to the Council, in the context
of the upcoming United Nations review, options and
recommendations for improving the predictability and
sustainability of AMISOM's funding, in view of the
uncertain financial situation confronting the Mission
next year. Also regrettable is the fact that the AU's
request for the lifting of the arms embargo on the
Somali National Security Forces is not addressed in the
current resolution.

In the context of the upcoming reviews of the AU
and the United Nations, we trust that the four-month
extension will provide the Council with an opportunity
to further engage the AU and the Somali authorities as
we seek to drive greater synergy and coordination in
aligning the efforts of the United Nations with those
of the AU. Doing so will be in the best interests of
achieving sustainable peace in Somalia.

