Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate.
At the outset, I express my country's deepest
condolences and profound sympathy for the
indescribable human tragedy and senseless deaths
among the civilian population in the Gaza Strip, most
of whom are innocent women, children and the elderly,
and the countless injured - all of whom are victims of
a collective punishment.

I would like to express Kazakhstan's great
concern at the latest developments in the Gaza Strip,
where heavy, brutal air strikes and aggressive ground
operations by the Israeli army have resulted in the
deaths of more than 600 Palestinians, violating norms
of international human rights and humanitarian laws.
It is clearly evident that the persistence of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict continues to threaten regional and
international peace and security, mainly aggravated by
Israel. The rule oflaw has to be applied internationally,
and it is the duty of the Security Council to enforce
it and not fail in its obligations. In that context, we
support Cairo's peace initiative as a framework to
end the violence, and the efforts of the international
community and the Secretary-General to broker a
ceasefire and resume peace talks.

We recognize the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and their right to create
an independent State of Palestine within the 1967
borders, peacefully coexisting with Israel. We advocate
for the Observer State of Palestine to obtain full-
fledged membership in the United Nations, and we
call on Israel to urgently end its illegal occupation and
stop expanding settlements and the illegal separation
wall - some of the key causes of the ongoing conflict.

We are convinced that Israel does not have the right
to use its force the way it does on whatever pretext.
We call on the Security Council to end this systematic
aggression.

We regret that the prospects for a ceasefire are
becoming bleak. The humanitarian situation in Gaza
has deteriorated drastically. The human toll on the
Palestinian side has increased dramatically, owing to
the asymmetrical and disproportionate war. We also
call for the lifting of the Israeli blockade on Gaza,
which imposes severe and unbearable limitations. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon himself pointed out,
this is an "atrocious action," stressing that "Israel must
exercise maximum restraint and do far more to protect
civilians."

We support the call of all Member States for an
immediate ceasefire between the parties, a return to
negotiations, and for de-escalating tensions, providing
support for the grave humanitarian crisis and lifting
Israeli restrictions on the movement of persons and
goods into and out of Gaza.

We are equally concerned about the increasing
violence in Syria and the devastating humanitarian
consequences. We call for the de-escalation of
hostilities and the halting of aerial bombardment, and
for mobilizing cross-border aid operations for hard-to-
reach areas.

The various tensions elsewhere in the Middle East
are destabilizing the region. We therefore urgently call
on all parties to commit their political will to ensuring
lasting peace and security, freedom and justice for all
people through a genuine multilateral approach.

