Mr. Cerdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The conflict in the Balkans has continued to grow
qualitatively worse in a whirlwind that has swept away the
resolutions of this Council and breached all the limits
established by civilization. Meanwhile, as on other
occasions, we in the Security Council are striving, given the
circumstances, to prevent the deterioration of a situation
created by the flagrant violation of established norms in this
sphere.

The unjustifiable attacks on the safe areas of Zepa and
Srebrenica constitute yet another step towards the abyss. In
our View, they also mark a fresh challenge to the decisions
of the organized international community and a spectacle as
cowardly as it is senseless.

With resolution 1004 (1995) we sought to remedy the
consequences of one of these attacks, and to avoid worse
ills by attempting to facilitate intervention by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), among other humanitarian organizations,
whose presence has been made essential by this shameful
situation. Unfortunately, once more today we are obliged to
say to the Bosnian Serbs that free access to these areas is
essential for all personnel of humanitarian agencies. The
Serb party must meet this requirement. Otherwise, it will
give credence to the grave accusations and suppositions
concerning its possible serious and repeated violations of
international humanitarian law in these areas. We must
say in this connection that the evidence of these violations
presented to us day after day challenges our ability to
absorb it. Today has been such a day.

Of course, our action does not end there. We must
also remind the Bosnian Serbs of the self-evident fact that
they, like everyone else, are accountable to the
international community for any violations of
humanitarian law they may have committed. That account
will be settled sooner or later; it is only a matter of time.

I want to touch on two final points. The first is the
rather bitter taste left in the mouth of my delegation by
the two resolutions we have adopted today, and by their
having been considered as a sort of package. In both
resolutions we address possible or alleged violations of
humanitarian law. No Violation of such norms is more or
less serious, appalling or unacceptable just because
another party to a conflict may also have committed
similar violations. That can never be the case.

The second concerns the ever more pressing need to
find a political solution to the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. My delegation hopes that countries with a
real capacity to take action towards a settlement will pool
their efforts and act now. Only their concerted action can
make the parties abandon the option of armed conflict,
which, as we have repeatedly said, cannot be used to
build a lasting peace.

