Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to keep the Security Council abreast of
developments in Rwanda over the course of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR). His
report (S/ 1996/149) of 29 February 1996 contains
invaluable information about and an analysis of the extent
of Rwanda's achievements and the obstacles that it must
still overcome if it is to achieve genuine national
reconciliation. In a more immediate sense, the report
provides the Council with a number of innovative options
as we explore and evaluate future opportunities for the
United Nations and the international community in
Rwanda after UNAMIR's mandate is terminated.

As has been the case with many United Nations
operations, UNAMIR shows how much can be achieved
when cooperation prevails. It is as a result of the tireless
and integrated efforts of the people of Rwanda; of
UNAMIR; of other United Nations and international
agencies and of non-governmental organizations that the
Rwandan people's prospects for hope and peace are today
that much brighter and more promising. Indeed, in a
relatively short time, Rwanda has come a long way from
its destructive civil war and tragic genocide, and this is
reflected in the relative calm and stability that generally
characterize the situation.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the progress
achieved in restoring basic infrastructure and
rehabilitating vital sectors of the economy. We welcome
the encouraging statistics from and positive developments
in the fields of agriculture, health, industry, transportation
and education. In this connection, my delegation calls on
the international community to continue to provide the

 

necessary assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Rwanda's infrastructure.

My delegation has always been of the opinion that
dialogue and mutual trust are fundamental prerequisites for
providing an environment conducive to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. We therefore encourage the parties
within Rwanda to continue their dialogue, which is the
appropriate means to promote national reconciliation.

We also attach great importance to the recent visits by
officials between Rwanda and its neighbouring countries in
the Great Lakes region. We view these increased contacts
as valuable because they provide an opportunity to discuss
and identify the underlying problems those countries share
and to promote the normalization of relations between
them.

While my delegation recognizes that substantial
progress has indeed been achieved, the picture we painted
would, however, be less than accurate and complete if we
did not focus on some of the formidable challenges that
still confront Rwanda. The most prominent of these is that
of repatriating and resettling 1.7 million refugees. We note,
however, that many refugees are finding it difficult to
return to their homes because of their vivid fears resulting
from past atrocities, and because of economic uncertainty.
That being the case, my delegation cannot foresee any
possibility of long-term peace unless this dire problem is
resolved, for the refugee problem is indeed taking a severe
toll of the resources of Rwanda's neighbouring States, and
this in turn is fostering the general climate of instability. In
order better to accommodate and expedite the voluntary
return and safe repatriation of refugees, we believe that the
Government of Rwanda should do its utmost to provide a
climate of confidence, security and trust.

It is my delegation's view that a long-term peace will
remain elusive until the perpetrators of genocide are
brought to justice. In this connection, we consider the role
of the International Tribunal for Rwanda to be
indispensable. We therefore attach much importance to
protection for its personnel and premises, and hope that the
necessary arrangements will be concluded, before
UNAMIR's complete withdrawal, between the Government
of Rwanda and the United Nations in order to provide
sustained protection.
My delegation also wishes to emphasize the need to
intensify initiatives to rehabilitate the judicial system. It is
our view that a restructured system of justice will be
conducive for national reconciliation and the return of
refugees. We deem the forthcoming round-table meeting
in Geneva, which is to focus on justice and security,
capacity-building and the transition from humanitarian
assistance to development, to be a step in the right
direction. We are also encouraged by the proposed plan
by the Rwandan Ministry of Justice to recruit legal
advisors, establish special courts to handle genocide cases,
and secure greater funding for personnel and equipment.

Alongside ways and means to bolster Rwanda's
internal security, my delegation considers the promotion
and protection of human rights to be a critical element for
the safe repatriation of refugees. Without a doubt, in the
absence of basic humanitarian guarantees voluntary
repatriation will prove difficult. Given the important role
the Human Rights Field Operation in Rwanda (HRFOR),
together with the International Committee of the Red
Cross, are playing in redressing violations of human
rights and improving conditions for detainees, my
delegation is concerned at the rapid rate of depletion of
the voluntary funds needed for them to continue their
work. While underlining the Government of Rwanda's
intention to maintain HRFOR in Rwanda after
UNAMIR's mandate expires, my delegation urgently calls
on the international community to provide whatever
resources they can to enable HRFOR to continue its
activities.

In light of these considerations, my delegation will
vote for the draft resolution before the Council today. We
believe that the draft resolution provides assurances to
Rwanda that the United Nations and the international
community will continue to provide assistance by
establishing a small political office. It is our view that
such an office will prove to be a valuable factor for
promoting national reconciliation, strengthening the
judicial system, facilitating the return of refugees and
rehabilitating Rwanda's infrastructure. In this connection,
we commend the positive response by the Government of
Rwanda to this proposal, and its acceptance of it, as set
forth in the letter from the Rwandan Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation to the Secretary-General
(S/1996/176, annex).

My delegation also believes that a case can be made
for permitting Rwanda to retain non-lethal UNAMIR
equipment for productive purposes. This equipment, in
our view, will be useful for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Rwanda. While we are fully cognizant
of the procedures that govern the use of post-mandate
equipment of this kind, we none the less appeal to the

 

General Assembly to be flexible, given the circumstances
in Rwanda.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay a
special tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all the personnel associated with
UNAMIR. Their steadfast determination and ability to rise
to the challenge under very difficult circumstances has
indeed helped to lay the foundation for securing national
reconciliation in Rwanda.

