Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by joining in the condolences that
have been extended to the representative of the
People's Republic of China on the recent earthquake in
the country. Earthquakes are a phenomenon well
known to Chile, and we know their devastating effects.

Allow me also to express my thanks for the useful
documentation presented by the State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Mr. Hans Dahlgren, on the
results of the Stockholm Process, as well as for the
valuable contribution to the process made by Professor
Wallensteen. We also welcome the contribution of
Mr. Danilo Turk, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, who offered us some intelligent points
of consideration, as is usual in him.

The process initiated by the Government of
Sweden, which is to conclude a broader process,
constitutes a significant advance in the quest to
improve the concept and implementation of the
sanctions regimes imposed by the Security Council.
The Stockholm, Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes
have put forward very interesting and important
proposals that should be carefully studied. They have
also made proposals of a more complex nature, such as
the so-called secondary sanctions, which require more
thorough study.

I think it is important to recall here what the
Chilean Government's position on sanctions has been.
While we attach utmost importance to the effective
implementation of the instruments and mechanisms,
including sanctions, established under the Charter with
a View to helping foster and ensure respect for
international peace and security, we believe that the use
of indiscriminate, total and open sanctions has in some
cases proven not to be effective. The speed of the
impact of sanctions on the civilian population is often
much greater than the speed of any change produced by
the Government - if in fact it does make a change in
its conduct.

Consequently, for some time now, Chile has
favoured, within the framework of the Charter and the
powers and authority it grants the Security Council,
drawing up sanctions that are better focused and better
targeted in order to change the conduct of those with
the power to change, rather than - as was the logic of
previous sanctions - to make the life of the population
so difficult that it rebelled and produced a change in
leadership. That does not usually happen. As a
consequence, the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes
are extremely welcome.

In general, I think that the documents that the
Council has received today on the Stockholm Process
deserve our recognition. We endorse both the Process
and its recommendations.

On this basis, we should decisively improve the
capacity of the United Nations and its Member States
in implementing sanctions, including through better
cooperation and coordination and technical assistance,
attain better management, and allow more effective
monitoring. In this process, we have affirmed the need
to ensure the proportionality of the measures adopted,
to adapt sanctions according to developments in the
political situation, and to bear proportionality in mind
in political developments.

In his intervention, Assistant Secretary-General
Turk made a point that I find interesting. He spoke of
the possibility of using smart sanctions as a
contribution to preventive diplomacy. One area in
which this might be explored, in theory at this stage, is
that of financial sanctions. Some difficulties might
arise in the effective implementation of that type of
sanctions if we start with the supposition that a State is
given a certain period of time to modify its conduct
before a sanction is applied. In the case of financial
sanctions, given technological capacities and the speed
with which financial resources can be moved, there
might be a problem in reconciling the time limit a State
is given with the effectiveness of the sanctions to be
imposed. So, I think we need to explore how this can
be done within the perspective of preventive
diplomacy. Perhaps State Secretary Dahlgren could
comment on that.

I think that the Stockholm Process completes a
cycle in which there was a general appreciation of the
need to explore targeted sanctions, as was done in
those three processes, and that now it is time for the
Council to make progress on how those sanctions are to
be implemented. To that end, there is a group of
experts on sanctions; their task relates to the choice of
sanctions, their effectiveness, their implementation and
their consequences. They could also explore the
feasibility of the so-called exit strategy, which might
also play a role in this process.

Lastly, I would like to stress that my country
considers the proposal to appoint a coordinator for
sanctions to be an interesting suggestion that could be
further studied.

