Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz
for presenting the third annual report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2009/444) and to
congratulate him and to thank him for his work as
Chair of the Commission.

The United Nations has learned and accepted that
the prevention of resurgence of armed conflict means
early work on peacebuilding and continuing the work
on consolidating the peace beyond the implementation
of any agreements that put an end to conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission is the tangible expression
of that conviction. The international community now
realizes that peace cannot be achieved merely by
ending an armed conflict but that it requires a
painstaking and complex construct to support
development and create conditions for lasting peace.
That is now construed as the creative coexistence of a
human community in harmony with its natural and
political environment.

The Peacebuilding Commission has also learned
to quickly provide the strategic and comprehensive
support needed by countries to build peace and has
shown itself to be a dynamic, innovative and flexible
body, able to adapt to the various requirements arising
in the countries on its agenda. Here, we commend the
leadership and dedication of the chairs of the country-
specific configurations - the former Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, Ambassador Frank
Majoor; the Permanent Representatives of Sweden and
Switzerland, Ambassadors Anders Linden and Peter
Maurer; Ambassador John McNee, Permanent
Representative of Canada; Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil; and
Ambassador Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of
Belgium.
Over the last two years we have seen how the
Security Council has increasingly taken in the
peacebuilding perspective. Costa Rica welcomes the
practice whereby the chairs of the configurations
participate in debates on the respective national
situations. The Council has also transformed the United
Nations offices in the Central African Republic, Guinea
Bissau and Sierra Leone into integrated peacebuilding
offices. It has thus sought to act in a more
comprehensive and strategic fashion for the entire
United Nations system in those countries. We are sure
that the success achieved will be a valuable stimulus to
improve the work in that area and to strengthen the
Council's relationship with the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially with the respective country-
specific configurations.

The revision of the Commission's mandate will
be a valuable opportunity to evaluate results, to
consider the lessons learned and to strengthen the
Commission's work and its relation with other organs
and agencies of the United Nations system.

Peacebuilding will no longer be the last thing to
be considered in preparing for an exit or for closure of
peacekeeping operations. It is, and must continue to be,
a central axis for all United Nations actions, included
from the earliest stages of all peace operations. Soon
the Peacebuilding Commission will have valuable
experience of which the Council must take advantage
in drawing up and renewing mandates for peace
missions that it authorizes. The Secretariat also bears a
responsibility to recommend, from the very earliest
stages of peace operations, the inclusion of
recommendations on peacebuilding actions in its
reports.

Costa Rica enthusiastically welcomes the idea of
strengthening United Nations capacities in
peacebuilding by establishing and consolidating a team
of competent civilian experts able to deploy rapidly to
support tasks such as, inter alia, security sector reform,
institutional strengthening and support for judicial
systems. Here, we support the endeavours to broaden
and deepen the body of experts and civilian volunteers
for peacebuilding, and we concur that it is necessary to
pay particular attention to capturing and mobilizing
greater capacity from developing countries,
particularly women.

National actors must be both the engine and the
drivers of peacebuilding processes in their own
countries. Hence, the role of the international
community must be one of support, not of protagonist.
All peacebuilding efforts must have as a goal the
construction and enhancement of national capacities to
ensure sustainable peace once the international
presence decreases in those countries that have lived
through armed conflicts. Costa Rica considers it vital
to involve civil society, including the private sector, to
generate and promote ideas and changes in their
communities.

Lastly, we wish to express once again our support
for the Commission's endeavours to construct and
enhance alliances and partnerships among donors,
institutions, regional and subregional organizations and
civil society to support peacebuilding processes.
Certainly those partnerships contribute to ensuring
more consistent and strategic participation of the
international community.

