Mr. Koonjul: For the same reasons that
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani mentioned earlier,
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting.
I welcome this opportunity to provide a briefing on the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, over which I had
the honour to preside for the past 10 months.

As members will recall, the Working Group was
established following the public meeting on the
situation in Africa held last January with the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Amara Essy,
Secretary-General of the then Organization of African
Unity - now the African Union - and of several
ministerial delegations, which led to the Security
Council's adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2002/2. That presidential statement requested
the Council to give serious consideration to the setting
up of an ad hoc working group to monitor the
recommendations contained in the statement and to
enhance coordination and cooperation with the
Economic and Social Council - whose President, by
the way, participated in a Council meeting for the first
time on that occasion.

The Security Council subsequently established
the Working Group in February with the following
mandate: first, to monitor the implementation of
recommendations contained in the presidential
statement and in previous presidential statements and
resolutions regarding conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa; secondly, to propose recommendations on
the enhancement of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council as well
as with other United Nations agencies dealing with
Africa; thirdly, to examine, in particular, regional and
cross-conflict issues that affect the Security Council's
work on African conflict prevention and resolution;
and fourthly, to propose recommendations to the
Security Council aimed at enhancing cooperation in
conflict prevention and resolution between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity as well
as with other subregional organizations.

The very first meeting of the Working Group,
which was held at the ambassadorial level, provided an
opportunity for a very rich exchange of views and a
powerful brainstorming session, which in turn gave the
Group a general sense of direction and the broad
parameters of its work. It was agreed that, in fulfilling
its mandate, the Working Group would not duplicate
the Security Council's work but would rather bring
added value to it by looking at issues of importance to
Africa, which generally are not adequately discussed in
the Council.

In May, under the Singaporean presidency of the
Council, I had the opportunity to present the Working
Group's programme of work to the general membership
at a public briefing presided over by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Singapore. The debate that followed
confirmed the general membership's approbation of the
relevance of the Working Group and of the work
programme that I had outlined. Here, I should like to
express my gratitude for the wide support and
encouragement that my Working Group received from
the general membership at that meeting. I am also
thankful to the Singaporean presidency for the very
succinct report that it presented at the end of the
meeting.

After a number of meetings, my Working Group
presented a first set of recommendations to the Security
Council in August this year (see 5/2002/979, annex);
they related to a group of friends, to cooperation with
the African Union and to Guinea-Bissau.

In brief, with regard to the group of friends, the
Working Group based its discussions on background
information provided by the Department of Political
Affairs on the work of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General as well as on the experiences of
Member States that had launched similar groups.

On cooperation with the African Union, the
Working Group discussed extensively the question of
enhancing cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union. In that regard, the Working
Group heard the views of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union in New York and formulated a
number of recommendations. I am pleased to report
that there is now general and greater awareness among
Council members of the African Union's activities with
respect to conflicts in Africa.

With regard to Guinea-Bissau, the Working
Group had a rich exchange of views with the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau, the President of the Economic and
Social Council, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Development Programme, the
International Peace Academy and the Permanent
Representative of the Gambia, who acted as Chair of
the Group of Friends on Guinea-Bissau. After
discussing Guinea-Bissau's current peace-building
needs and the obstacles that were being encountered by
that country in addressing those needs, the Working
Group made a number of practical recommendations.

A second set of recommendations, relating to the
enhancement of the effectiveness of the
Representatives and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in Africa, were made by the
Working Group on 9 December (see S/2002/I352, annex). While preparing those recommendations, the
Working Group consulted with the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office of the African Union and
the Office of the Secretary-General. I should like to
stress here that the recommendations concerning
Representatives and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General do not in any way reflect the
performance of existing Representatives and Special
Representatives but are intended to suggest ways and
means to enhance their effectiveness.

The Working Group also held briefing sessions on
the New Partnership for Africa's Development and on
the activities of the United Nations Electoral
Assistance Division in order to provide the delegations
of Council members with a better understanding of
those issues while they deal with their work in the
Council. In addition, the International Crisis Group
was invited to brief the members of the Working Group
on the Mano River Union prior to the workshop that
the United Kingdom presidency organized in the month
of July.

The most significant achievement of the Working
Group has been the promotion of close cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. Indeed, there is a growing recognition
that the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council should cooperate and coordinate their
activities for lasting solutions to conflicts. It was in
that spirit that the President of the Economic and
Social Council was invited to participate in the public
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Africa in January and in the meetings that the Working
Group held subsequently.

Likewise, the President of the Economic and
Social Council invited me, in my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council's Working Group, to participate in
the Economic and Social Council's commemoration of
the tenth anniversary of the General Peace Agreement
for Mozambique, which was held on 4 October 2002.
More recently, at the invitation of the Economic and
Social Council, I participated in the joint Security
Council-Economic and Social Council mission to
Guinea-Bissau with the Economic and Social Council
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries
Emerging from Conflict. We had a very constructive
meeting in Guinea-Bissau, and later in Washington
with the Bretton Woods institutions, and it is hoped
that very useful recommendations will be made that
will help Guinea-Bissau. Such joint activity illustrates
the close cooperation that we have been able to
establish between those two important organs of the
United Nations.

As the Mauritius membership of the Council will
be ending this month, and since the Working Group
will come up for review in February next year, I should
like, in my personal capacity, to make certain
observations on the future of the Working Group. In
our opinion, the Working Group's informal nature
makes it an ideal forum for discussion of issues
relating to Africa, especially because the Group invites
speakers from various organizations to brainstorm on
African issues. Although the Security Council spends
most of its time on African issues, it hardly has the
time to devote itself to in-depth discussions. The
Working Group compensates for that shortcoming.
With the events of 11 September 2001 and other
pressing problems that the Council must address -
combined with a number of positive developments in
Africa - there may be a tendency to move the focus
away from African problems. The Working Group, we
feel, will greatly help in maintaining the focus on
African issues.

The link that has been created by the Working
Group with the Economic and Social Council will not,
we believe, survive on its own. The cooperation
between the two Councils is of vital importance, and
the Working Group can provide the vital link for the
continuation of such cooperation. The approach that
the Working Group and the Economic and Social
Council have taken with regard to Guinea-Bissau can
also be applied to many other countries emerging from
conflict, such as, for example, the Central African
Republic, Burundi, Angola and even Liberia at some
stage in the future.

The African Union and subregional organizations
in Africa are important partners of the Security Council
with respect to dealing with conflicts in Africa. We
believe that the Working Group can be of significant
importance in strengthening the partnership among the
Security Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa. It is therefore our view that
there is merit in maintaining and in strengthening the
Working Group well beyond its current mandate. We
also believe that the dialogue that was initiated with the
African Union by inviting the Secretary-General of the
African Union to participate in the Council's public
meeting last January, should continue. We certainly
hope that next year the new Council will follow up on
that.
Finally, I would like to thank all Council
members for the support which they have given me in
the Working Group. I would like, in particular, to thank
the Department of Political Affairs - Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh and Ms. Vogt - as well as
the whole Secretariat team for the continuous
assistance that they have provided to the Working
Group. I would like to make a special mention of the
support that I received from Ambassador Gerry Corr,
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Ireland, for
the comprehensive paper that he presented on the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, from the United
States delegation, in particular Mr. Rick Mills, for their
contribution on the role of Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all the members of my own team,
in particular Mr. Jingree, for their dedicated support,
which made the work of my Committee easier, and for
the recommendations which we have made in regard to
the work of the Working Group. We certainly hope that
Council members will give serious consideration next
year to continuing the Working Group and even to
strengthening it further.

