Mr. Motomura (Japan): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for having convened this open
meeting of the Security Council, which provides us
with a very good opportunity for an exchange of views
on the future of Timor-Leste and the role of the United
Nations. I would like also to thank Mr. Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his comprehensive briefing, and to take this
opportunity to welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta, Foreign
Minister of Timor Leste.

The Government of Japan welcomes the fact that,
since the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) initiated its activities, much has
been accomplished in the areas of public
administration, serious crimes, and internal and
external security matters, including progress on border-
control issues. We also welcome the news that Timor-
Leste's relationship with Indonesia has been further
strengthened.
UNMISET's mandate will conclude this May. We
believe, however, that it will continue to be necessary
for the international community to extend its support to
Timor-Leste, as the Secretary-General's report points
out, in such areas as public administration, the
judiciary, and national security and stability. My
Government recognizes the consolidation and building
of peace as one of the major challenges faced by the
international community, and we believe it is crucially
important for the United Nations and the international
community to make certain that those valuable
incipient achievements in the areas of peace, the rule of
law, respect for human rights, and development take
root and endure.

What has been achieved by the international
community in Timor-Leste since the start of the United
Nations transitional administration there can be
regarded as a striking success story, and we therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's proposal to extend
the mandate of UNMISET for one additional year, in
order to consolidate what has been achieved up to this
point on as firm a foundation as possible.

The Government of Japan would like to make two
comments relating to the extension of UNMISET. First,
it is of crucial importance for a young country such as
Timor-Leste to be provided support in the area of
nation-building by civilian experts. For that reason, we
endorse the report's recommendation that the extended
UNMISET should have 58 civilian advisers in all areas
of Government administration, including financial
management, and in the justice sector.

The second point relates to the issue of security
and safety in Timor-Leste. Japan believes that we
should pay serious attention to the situation in Timor-
Leste, described in the report as follows:

as

there appears to be a lack of confidence
among the Timorese public in the security
situation after May 2004" (S/2004/117, para. 49).

The Secretary-General's report also points out
tasks for the extended UNMISET and suggests that
there remain a small number of military liaison officers
deployed in the border area, a minimum contingent of
peacekeeping forces to provide protection for all
United Nations personnel, and civilian police advisers
to support the development of Timor-Leste's police
force. The Japanese Government considers these
proposals to be the result of the assessment of the
situation in Timor-Leste and to reflect the will of the
Government and people of Timor-Leste. We believe
that United Nations peacekeeping operations work
most effectively when they are in accord with the
intentions of the Governments and peoples of the
recipient countries, and when they are implemented
based on a unified consensus within the international
community. We expect that the Council will seriously
consider the Secretary-General's report in indicating
what kinds of tasks should be retained in the extended
UNMISET.

In support of building a self-sustainable Timor-
Leste, Japan has pledged, and has been steadily
implementing, assistance of up to $60 million over the
three-year period following independence, with a focus
on peace-building and reconstruction in three key
areas - agriculture, infrastructure, and human
resources development. We are pleased to learn that the
roads and bridges which the Engineering Group of our
Self-Defence Forces has constructed and repaired for
UNMISET's activities are benefiting the people of
Timor-Leste as well. We believe that such support is in
line with the needs of Timor-Leste, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General.

I wish to reiterate how important it is for the
leaders of Timor-Leste to be united in governing their
country, for the people of Timor-Leste to participate in
nation-building efforts as a matter of their own
responsibility, and for the international community to
continue to extend its support. The Government of
Japan, for its part, will continue to provide appropriate
assistance for the consolidation of peace and
development in Timor-Leste.

