Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the friendly
Kingdom of Jordan on your assumption of the Arab seat
on the Council and your presidency of the Council for
this month. I would also like to congratulate Lithuania,
Nigeria, Chad and Chile on having been elected as
members of the Council and wish them every success
in their task. Iraq is fully prepared to cooperate with
all of them. I would also like to congratulate the entire
membership of the Security Council and wish them a
very happy new year in 2014.

On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
extend our thanks and appreciation to the Council
for the presidential statement it has just adopted
(S/PRST/2014/1) in support ofIraq's efforts in combating
terrorism in the form of Al-Qaida elements in Iraq.
My Government highly appreciates the full support of
the entire membership of the Security Council for the
efforts of the Iraqi Government, its armed forces, the
local police and the sons and daughters of the tribes of
Anbar, and in particular Fallujah, who have stood fast
and united against Al-Qaida and its elements in order to
save Fallujah and Anbar at this time.

Terrorism is an international scourge that we
should all work to eliminate. This will happen only
with the full cooperation of all States and international
organizations, the implementation of binding
resolutions, and coherent, good faith efforts to protect
international peace and security. The defeat of Al-Qaida
and the remnants of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant marks the start of their defeat in the
other States of the region. International efforts should
be coordinated with a view to achieving that noble
objective.

Today all elements, factions and tribes of Iraq have
stood as one united front against terrorism throughout
the country with a view to restoring Anbar and Fallujah
to their inhabitants. I offer our sincere thanks and
appreciation to the brave Iraqi soldiers, police personnel
and tribal men and women who have all played an
extremely important role in combating terrorism and
containing and putting an end to the control of their
cities by Al-Qaida elements.
