Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
important debate on peacebuilding in Africa and its
particular focus on institution-building. We know from
experience that strengthening national institutions
is essential to managing conflict and breaking cycles
of violence and fragility. We also know that building
inclusive and accountable institutions is a long-term
endeavour.To enable local actors to meet the needs and
aspirations of African States, the process must rely on
the commitment and efforts of those actors.

I would like to briefly highlight three points: the
need to support and promote African ownership of
peacebuilding efforts in Africa, the importance of
creating inclusive institutions that meet the needs of
all sectors of society, and the importance of ensuring
coherence across the United Nations system.

First, supporting and promoting national
ownership * in line with the commitments to country
ownership set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States - should be an essential part of
our peacebuilding efforts in Africa. The African
Union and regional economic communities have
taken on a greater role in responding to conflict and
peacebuilding, supported by the United Nations and its
regional offices. Strengthening the capacity of these
organizations and further strengthening the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union will
contribute to ensuring effective responses to conflict
and establishing a lasting peace.

Canada is committed to supporting its partners in
Africa in further developing continental capacity in
peacebuilding. For example, Canada has strengthened
the capacities of the Tanzanian Peacekeeping Training
Centre to conduct peacekeeping training for African
peacekeepers.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, for institutions to be effective, we know
that they must be both inclusive and accountable. This
is reflected in Sustainable Development Goal 16 (see resolution 70/1, annex). If we are serious about building
inclusive and accountable institutions that can sustain

peace, we must ensure that traditionally marginalized
voices have a voice at the table. This means engaging
women, youth and civil society at all levels of
decision-making.

In Mali, for example, Canada is supporting efforts
to strengthen the justice system by increasing access
of those affected by conflict, particularly women
and youth. Canada is also proud to be supporting the
work of Malian civil society organizations to ensure
that the criminal justice system is able to judge
cases of corruption and human rights crimes in a fair
manner. These initiatives are implemented through a
peacebuilding lens, supporting local leaders, especially
women and young people, working in reconciliation
and conflict prevention.

Thirdly, we must address the deficiencies and
shortcomings in our own approach to peacebuilding. We
know that institution-building takes time - measured in
decades, not years - yet we design mission mandates on
a short-term basis. We also know that some institutions
seem to matter more for sustaining peace, particularly
institutions that provide security to citizens, access
to justice, and jobs, yet these are the areas where we
invest the fewest resources. We know the importance
of broad engagement in laying the foundation for
sustainable peace and development, and we develop
ambitious mandates for our United Nations operations.
Yet the United Nations programmes that carry out most
of this work in-country are underresourced. There is
something fundamentally wrong with this approach,
and it needs to change.

In closing, let me highlight again that the
development of inclusive and accountable institutions
must be at the heart of United Nations efforts to sustain
peace. The 2030 Agenda and the recent resolutions on
the peacebuilding architecture lay out a clear road map
for how the entire United Nations system can improve
its effectiveness in support of sustaining peace. Canada
looks forward to supporting those efforts.

