Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Mr. President,
you have before you the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/305) on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), which presents to the Council the
significant process made in the country over the past
few months.

Today, I would like to update the Council on
key developments that have taken place since the
issuance of the report. On 30 March, Faustin-Archange
Touadera was sworn in as President of the Central
African Republic, and that step formally ended the
country's transition phase. The promulgation of the
new Constitution by the outgoing Head of State of
the Transition on the very day of the inauguration
symbolized in the strongest possible terms a return to
constitutional order and marked an important milestone
after three years of severe and arduous crisis.

On 31 March, the day after the inauguration
of President Touadera, the country held the second
round of legislative elections. Those elections went
off peacefully throughout the country, which I think
is worth noting. The final results of this round were
announced on 5 April, with the result that some key
political figures, including some former presidential
candidates Dologuele', Meckassoua and Ziguele, won
parliamentary seats. By-elections will have to be
organized for some 10 constituencies in the country
where formal results from the second round were
invalidated. In the interim, transitional institutions
such as the Transitional National Council and the
Transitional Constitutional Court will remain in place
until the legislative process is completed and the Court
has validated the final results ofall legislative elections,
which is expected to take place later this month.

Meanwhile, President Touadera has moved quickly
to form a new Government. On 11 April, last Monday,
following the appointment of Prime Minister Sarandji a
week earlier, on 2 April, the President issued a decree on
the formation of the Government. The new Government
is much leaner than the previous one, with some
23 ministerial posts, including four women. It is also
worth underscoring that four appointees are members
of the Muslim community. The new Government a it
should also be mentioned - includes representatives
from each of the country's 16 prefectures. On the flip
side, no representatives of armed groups are among the
new members of the Government.

I would now like to share some impressions
from my recent visit to the Central African Republic
to attend the inauguration of President Touadera on
behalf of the Secretary-General. Like many others, I
was very much struck by the President's attachment to
democratic values. He vowed publicly, for example, to
respect the newly promulgated Constitution, including
the two-term limit for presidential mandates. He also
made it clear that he was prepared to work tirelessly
towards national unity. When I met with the President,
he told me that his priorities for the country would
be to re-establish security, with a particular focus on
disarming armed groups. He also said that it was a
priority for him to advance reconciliation, economic
and social development and good governance. He
robustly reaffirmed that he is determined to continue
working very closely with international partners.

During my visit, I personally witnessed the
important progress made in the Central African
Republic towards healing past rifts among the various
communities in the country. As an illustration, when
I visited the Boeing district in Bangui - an outlying
district where Muslim and Christian communities were
until very recently viciously fighting each another and
causing much damage - to my great astonishment
I found the two communities engaged in a local
reconciliation process, which stands as a model and
is supported by MINUSCA. This is worth noting as
a positive step. The Ambassador of the United States
was also in Bangui on that day and he joined me in the
discussion with the communities in Boeing.

IfI may say so, it is very heartwarming to see
how, in the space of a few months, the attitudes of
the communities have changed so much. Experiences
such as these - and there are many I could point to in
the country - can serve as a basis for the long-term
process of reconciliation. I think that it also shows
the resilience of the Central African people and their
widely-held feeling that they have to work collectively
peace and unity.

As I said at the outset, the Central African Republic
has reached a critical milestone with the successful
holding of free and fair elections. If I may, I would say
that in that part of the world there are not that many
presidential elections where the winner is not known in
advance. There are few elections that take place without
difficulties or whose results are not challenged by the
loser or where the post-election transition is smooth.
I therefore think that the Central African Republic
elections serve as an excellent model.

That marks the conclusion of the transition and
the start of a new phase for the country. The new
Government must now deliver tangible progress for the
Central African people because the expectations are
high - expectations of peace and of lasting security,
and, simply, of the improvement of living conditions
for people. I told the President that the first 100 days
will be decisive.

Throughout the electoral process, there was positive
momentum upon which, I think, we must build, based
on the principles and the agreements reached last May
during the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation.
It is the Government's responsibility to work for the
establishment of a lasting peace and stability that will
benefit all citizens. And rapid tangible progress must
be achieved in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. I would highlight - as I believe
it is important - the repatriation of too high a number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, which
Will not be easy. However, expectations are high, and
this will be important.

What will also be important is the launch of key
reforms in the security and defence sector, that is, with
regard to the future ofthe Central African armed forces.
To stimulate economic development, which has been
a problem for decades, the State's authority must be
extended throughout the country. I understand that all
the prefects are already in place in the 16 prefectures.
I also understand that almost all of the sub-prefects
are in place. However, that must then be reinforced
in the various administrations. It is also necessary to
improve access to basic security services, strengthen
the judicial and penal chain, make progress in the
fight against impunity - an element important to
national reconciliation - and ensure universal respect
for human rights. As far as MINUSCA is concerned,
it will continue to provide its full support to the new
Government as it works to realize those changes.

As I said previously, very significant progress
has been achieved over the last two years. Although
considerable challenges remain, I think we can be
reasonably hopeful. What is important now is that
we continue to focus on the key priorities. It is also
important that the various international partners of the
Central African Republic work together to ensure that
the measures taken have as large an impact as possible.
We have a window of opportunity to help the Central
African Republic. We must not allow that window to
close. The opportunity must not be wasted.

I have just spoken of the positive developments;
now I must mention the absolutely catastrophic and
shocking increase in allegations of sexual misconduct
by the MINUSCA forces and international forces. It is
all deeply regrettable and appalling. Certain cases are
extremely shocking and shameful. It is a genuine scourge.
To address that scourge, as members of the Council are
aware, MINUSCA has established a transparent and
victim-centred approach. In addition, the Secretary-
General's Special Coordinator on Improving United
Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
Ms. Jane Holl Lute, recently travelled to the Central
African Republic to examine the best ways to better
support MINUSCA.

In parallel, my counterpart, the Under-Secretary-
General for Field Support, Mr. Atul Khare, and I have
engaged with all of the contingents and the countries
that provide uniformed personnel to MINUSCA.
I did that personally in Bangui. Mr. Khare and I did
it together in New York in order to insist, more than
ever, on the imperative need for swift investigation
and, of course, once the facts have been established,
for deterrent punishments for the perpetrators. We
stand firmly with the victims, who have demonstrated
courage in coming forward and reporting the events
in question. We continue to do everything possible to
ensure that those victims receive the assistance they
need and that justice is delivered as quickly as possible.

I take this opportunity to repeat to all troop- and
police-contributing countries that we are redoubling
our efforts to really address these events, which
are profoundly unacceptable. It is a must that we do
everything possible to put an end to these practices,
which are committed by a handful of individuals. Their
actions utterly compromise the image and the quality
of the contributions and courage demonstrated by the
great majority of their colleagues. I am personally,
along with my colleagues, very directly and actively
engaged in the handling of this problem.

In conclusion, as the members of the Council are
aware, MINUSCA's mandate is set to expire on 30 April.
The Secretary-General has recommended a technical
roll-over of the mandate to allow the Secretariat to
consult in some depth with the new Central African
authorities before making recommendations to the
Council on the definitive mandate, which should take
the new situation into account, to the extent possible.

I would also like to inform the Council that it is our
intention to work very closely with the Central African
authorities as well our international partners in order to
establish what we sometimes refer to as the compact.
That compact is a framework of mutual engagement
to be formalized between the United Nations and
the Central African authorities and its international
partners, including the major donors. I talked about it
with President Touadera. He seemed very interested, in
principle. We will therefore focus on that. I consider
it a pilot project within the framework of the Security
Council, but something that should hopefully serve
to consolidate the activities of the international
community during the next two or three years in the
Central African Republic, with a focus on accepted
priorities. I believe that with benchmarks and periodic
reviews, every action and all the actors involved in
the country should become more effective. Of course
our colleagues working to consolidate peace are fully
involved in this process, which we will continue over
the next few months.

