We thank Geir Pedersen for his briefing. We listened to Ms. Noura Ghazi. I think that the next time we engage in a political discussion about Syria, it would be fair to invite a representative of Syrian civil society to hear stories of suffering under the yoke of terrorists, foreign occupation and bombings. War is a very cruel thing. Nine years of war brought terrible suffering to all Syrian people, whether abroad or within Syria. As the Special Envoy informed us, he maintains contact with the Syrian parties with the aim of holding a third meeting of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva as soon as the restrictions caused by the global pandemic allow. Some tentative dates have been proposed, and the Syrian parties demonstrate the will and readiness to engage in dialogue on the basis of the agreed agenda. We support the Special Envoy's efforts. For our part, we will continue to promote intra-Syrian dialogue both in our national capacity and together with Turkey and Iran within the framework of the Astana format, which has proved its effectiveness. At the same time, we note that this should remain a Syrian-owned and -led process. There must not be any external interference or imposition of foreign agendas. In general, the ceasefire holds in the Idlib de-escalation zone, where joint Russian-Turkish patrols continue. Nevertheless, terrorists continue their provocative actions and attacks, some of which have killed Turkish troops. My American colleague appealed to Russia and Syria to respect the ceasefire, but I would appeal to her to understand who is violating the ceasefire, as detailed by Geir Pedersen himself. There was an attempt to seize several settlements, but Syrian Government forces managed to repel those attacks. That once again proves that Idlib is controlled by terrorists. We hope that our Turkish partners will fulfil their obligations to neutralize those elements. At the same time, we will not allow the rebranding of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham into the moderate opposition, as some are promoting. In recent months, terrorists have intensified their activities in other parts of the country, primarily to the east of Euphrates. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams attacked Kurdish units and militants escaped from prisons. Nothing is being done to improve the situation in the Al-Hol refugee camp, or that of the Al-Tanf area or the Rukban camp. Stability and security in those areas is possible only if the control of legitimate Government is restored. For those who demand that Damascus implement resolution 2254 (2015), we recall its first lines, which reaffirm the "strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic". We propose starting from the beginning and implementing that paragraph first and foremost. In that regard, we stress the need to find solutions to Syrian problems through inclusive dialogue and to put an end to foreign occupation. That would also help Syrian refugees return to their homes. Their return process has now resumed after having been temporarily suspended due to coronavirus restrictions. The Syrian authorities are taking all the necessary measures to accommodate returnees and prevent the spread of the pandemic. Attempts to consort with terrorists or to use them for one's own purposes is just one example of how the situation in Syria is politicized. We are convinced that all Security Council meetings on Syria in fact have a political motive because the so-called chemical and humanitarian dossiers have simply become a tool to pressure Damascus. Invoking the need for humanitarian assistance to Syria, as done by some colleagues when discussing humanitarian access to Government territories and to areas beyond Damascus's control, is one of the clearest examples of political blackmail. We will discuss that issue in the coming days. We were appalled by the attack on the World Food Programme humanitarian convoy in Lebanon, which was intended for Syria. In the Lebanese city of Tripoli, several trucks were attacked and burned by locals due to suspicions that it was smuggling Lebanese goods. Tomorrow the so-called Caesar Act will enter into force in the United States. We heard today that United States officials proudly boast that it is because of their sanctions that the economic situation of the Syrian people has become so complicated. In doing so, they recognize that the sanctions imposed, allegedly against the Syrian leadership, in fact hit ordinary people. That said, they confirm that the purpose of these measures is to overthrow the legitimate authorities of Syria. In late May, the European Union also extended unilateral sanctions against Damascus. We have repeatedly said that this not only cripples the country's economy, but also hinders humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria. Advertised exemptions do not work, which is confirmed by the humanitarian workers themselves. Regrettably, the United Nations is also used for political purposes, as is the case with the Board of Inquiry established by the Secretary-General to investigate attacks in north-west Syria. Despite the fact that we do not consider the creation of this Board to be legitimate, the Russian Ministry of Defence examined the summary of its report on an exceptional basis and conducted its own investigation. We have repeatedly denied accusations that the Russian Air Force attacked civilian targets. We held a special press conference at the United Nations on 16 September - exactly 10 months ago - and presented photo evidence. That information was ignored because of the ongoing political directive to put pressure on Russia. Unfortunately, it has become business as usual to rely on unverified, false data and banal fakes. The problem lies, first and foremost, in the sources of information. We know full well why those sources are carefully hidden. They are always opponents of the Syrian authorities and masters of staged chemical attacks. At the same time, the methodology for collecting so-called evidence is always the same - social networks, remote interviews with witnesses who actually live in European and Western capitals, Photoshop and, my favourite and the most ridiculous source, interceptions of pilot exchanges. For its part, the Russian military physically visited the sites of alleged strikes and was able to inspect the buildings and take photographs. One site is under terrorist control for the time being, so we have only satellite and reconnaissance imagery. Evidence gathered by our Ministry of Defence proves that the sites were not subject to air or artillery strikes. At the same time, the Al-Nayrab Palestinian refugee camp was indeed shelled by militants, resulting in civilian casualties. Our Mission has photos and eyewitness testimonies. We do not hide their names, because they are real people who give true testimonies. Analysis of the report's summary leads to one more conclusion: the deconflicting mechanism has more than just gaps - to put it mildly - and yet it is used for misinformation. A special United Nations Board was created on the basis of false data. It is as if we were coming back to test tubes with alleged Iraqi chemical weapons. Some deconflicted objects did not actually correspond to the declared status, and some buildings were used by militants as headquarters. We handed over all the evidence to the Secretary-General. We are ready to present those documents to all parties concerned, but I wonder whether the Council would be interested to study them.
