The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tadmoary
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), document S/2000/460.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following other documents:
S/2000/443 and S/2000/465, letters dated 15 and 22
May 2000 respectively, from Lebanon addressed to the
Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes and
strongly endorses the report of the Secretary-
General of 22 May 2000 (S/2000/460). The
Council stresses again the importance of, and the
need to achieve, a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, based on all its relevant
resolutions, including its resolutions 242 (1967)

of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22
October 1973.
"The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to take all
necessary measures to enable the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to confirm
that a complete withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Lebanon has taken place in compliance with its
resolution 425 (1978), and to take all necessary
steps in order to deal with possible eventualities,
bearing in mind that the cooperation of all parties
will be essential. The Council welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to report on the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon in
accordance with its resolution 425 (1978).

"The Security Council fully endorses the
requirements put forward by the Secretary-
General for confirming the compliance of all
parties concerned with its resolution 425 (1978),
calls on all parties concerned to cooperate fully in
implementing the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-
General to report on their fulfilment of the
requirements when he reports on the withdrawal.

"The Security Council calls upon the States
and other parties concerned to exercise utmost
restraint and to cooperate with UNIFIL and the
United Nations to ensure the full implementation
of its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). The
Council shares the View of the Secretary-General
that it is crucial that the States and other parties
concerned do their part to calm the situation,
ensure the safety of the civilian population, and
cooperate fully with the United Nations in its
efforts to stabilize the situation, to restore
international peace and security and to assist the
Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of
its effective authority in the area following
confirmation of withdrawal.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to send his
Special Envoy back to the region immediately to
ensure that the requirements put forward by the
Secretary-General are met and to ensure the
commitment of all the parties concerned to
cooperate fully with the United Nations in the
complete implementation of its resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978).

"The Security Council takes this
opportunity to express its appreciation and its full

support for the continuing efforts of
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy to

the
the
region and his staff. It commends UNIFIL's
troops and troop-contributing countries for their
commitment to the cause of international peace
and security under difficult circumstances. The
Council stresses its concern that all the parties
concerned cooperate with the United Nations, and
recalls the relevant principles contained in the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 1994."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2000/18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10 pm.

