Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to the Special Envoys of
the Secretary-General and of the African Union, Jan
Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim, for their substantive
briefings on ways to move the Darfur political process
forward in order to ensure an effective settlement of
the crisis there. The analysis provided by the Special
Envoys reaffirms that international efforts on a Darfur
settlement, in particular through the Security Council,
must be focused on maintaining a maximally inclusive
negotiating process among the sides in Darfur under
the aegis of the United Nations and the African Union.

In our view, resuming political contacts between
the Government and the Darfur opposition in order to
achieve speedy agreements on the cessation of
hostilities is of the highest priority. Moving forward
the political process would unquestionably promote a
strengthening of security in Darfur. It would also allow
for the speeding up of the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The lack of such consistent progress on a
political settlement makes the efforts undertaken,
including peacekeeping efforts, ineffective as regards a
long-term solution to the crisis in Darfur. It is obvious
that the deployment of UNAMID, which indeed should
be speeded up as soon as possible, in itself will not
lead to a long-term solution to the crisis.

We share the views of the Special Envoys
regarding the primary responsibility of the Sudanese
themselves for the fate of the settlement and, in the last
analysis, for the fate of the country. The obstacles on the
road to a political settlement as of today are primarily
being created by some of the Darfur rebel groups.
Today we have heard confirmation from the
Special Envoys of the highly negative fact that there
continues to be a splintering of the rebel groups. The
leaders of the rebel groups are not in a position to
agree upon a unified political negotiating platform.
Moreover, the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) is
openly embarking upon the path of armed struggle
against the Government of the Sudan. It is also obvious
that the rebels have well-developed channels for the
purchase of arms and for obtaining financial assistance.
There is no need to reiterate that all of the Security
Council decisions on Darfur, including on the arms
embargo, must be implemented fully by all parties.

We believe that, as regards the leaders of the
irreconcilable rebel groups, appropriate measures must
be taken, up to and including sanctions. We have
listened very carefully to the views presented by
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa, and we share
those views. We also express our hope that the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a joint
mediator for the political process in Darfur, which we
expect very soon, will provide a substantive impetus for
the resumption of negotiations among the Darfur sides.

Naturally, we welcome the great contribution of
the Special Envoys, Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim, to the
cause of re-establishing peace and normal life in
Darfur. Their experience and knowledge will
undoubtedly be required in the future as well.

We fully support and share the argument of the
Secretary-General regarding the indivisibility of peace
in Sudan. Progress on a settlement for the south of
Sudan will determine to a significant extent progress in
resolving the conflict in Darfur. We welcome, in that
connection, the recent agreements on the settlement of
the problem in Abyei, and we are counting on the fact
that those agreements will be fully implemented by
both parties. The Security Council recently had an
opportunity to take a stand on that issue, and we
remain devoted to that stand.

What is also of the greatest importance is the
normalization of bilateral relations between Sudan and
Chad. Once again, I would like to state that we share
the views of the Special Envoys on that subject. We
agree with their conclusions with regard to the
significance of the regional dimension in resolving the
problems of Sudan and also of the importance, for the
stability of the entire African continent, of preserving
the unity and territorial integrity of Sudan.

