Mr. Williamson (United States): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, in your capacity as the
Norwegian Foreign Minister, for the strong interest that
your country has shown in this issue and the critical
role you have already played in advancing the peace
process. I would also like to note at the outset my
appreciation and debt to Ambassador Kolby for his
leadership with respect to the mission, the report and
this particular issue in general.

The Council mission travelled to Ethiopia and
Eritrea to underscore the international community's
support for the statesmanship that both Governments
are demonstrating in resolving their border conflict
through peaceful means. In particular, we travelled to
the region to convey the Council's welcome for the
public statements both Governments have made
reaffirming that the Boundary Commission's decision
is final and binding. With this early action to reaffirm
their commitments to honour the Commission's
decision, the groundwork has been laid for the two
Governments, the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea (UNMEE) and this Council to turn to the
next stage in the peace process - the modalities of
implementing the Commission's decision. I believe that
that should be the focus of the Council's attention, and
that is what I would like to focus on in my brief
remarks today.

The report of the Council mission contains
recommendations on the main issues relating to
implementation. My delegation endorses those
recommendations. There are two points I would like to
make in the light of those recommendations in order to
clarify United States thinking as the Council and the
parties focus on implementation of the Commission
decision.

First, the mission's discussions in both capitals
only reaffirmed our View that the parties need to act
quickly to work out the modalities of implementation.
We do not doubt that both parties will carry out their
commitments under the Algiers Agreements and that
they are committed to maintaining peace.
Unfortunately, we also do not doubt that the lack of
direct communication and trust between the parties
risks having a simple misunderstanding by one side
spiral into a series of miscalculations that could lead to
a breakdown of this peace process. For that reason,
both Governments need to fully engage with UNMEE
to reach an understanding on the modalities of
implementation.

In the ceasefire and Algiers Agreements, the
parties laid down the basic principles to govern the
post-implementation period, but the exact
implementation procedures and responsibilities for
implementation need to be worked out and confirmed.
In the absence of confirmation on the exact sequence of
steps during the implementation phase, the risks of
miscalculation by either side remain high. We urge the
parties to move forward now, without waiting for the
Commission's decision to be announced, and to work
with UNMEE on spelling out the procedures for
implementation as soon as possible.

We also agree with the report's recommendation
that the parties would benefit from having another
parallel forum or interlocutor for discussion of broader
implementation issues and problem-solving. The
parties need to identify a third party or mechanism to
which they can turn for direct mediation or good
offices, as they work out implementation issues in
coordination with UNMEE. This forum or third party
could be the "911" the parties could call when they
cannot reach agreement on an implementation issue, or
when they need clarification of one side's action to
avoid a spiral of counter-actions. As the mission's
report suggests, this is a role that one or more of the
friends of Ethiopia and Eritrea or the witnesses to the
Algiers Agreements might play. We encourage the
parties to consider this suggestion and, in coordination
with UNMEE, to identify now an organization or third
parties that could play that role during the next phase
of the peace process.

Secondly, the United States remains concerned at
the parties' lack of planning on how they will
implement the demining required to complete border
demarcation. As the mission notes in paragraph 21 of
its report, under the Algiers Agreements the primary
responsibility for demining lies with the parties. The
United States Government envisioned that UNMEE
would provide technical demining advice and training
support to the parties. But we look to the parties to
undertake, in line with their commitments, the actual
demining needed for demarcation. In our view, the
parties' original decision to carry out demining
themselves was important, because their demining
efforts would be valuable confidence-building
measures. Having the parties engage in demining could
create an environment of good faith as the
implementation phase moves forward.

To help both sides prepare to carry out that
demining responsibility, the United States Government
has provided demining training and resources to both
the Ethiopian and Eritrean Governments. In each
country, an American contractor is currently overseeing
two trained companies in surveying and demining.

Given that background, we are disappointed that
during the mission we heard no evidence that either
side is preparing plans for how they can carry out the
needed demining. There has been inadequate
consultation between the parties and UNMEE on the
demining plans ofthe parties.

The United States Government supports the
proposal contained in paragraph 35 of the mission's
report that the Council request the Secretary-General to
submit recommendations at an early stage on how to
implement demarcation, including the necessary
demining. In making his recommendations, the
Secretary-General will need to consider the demining
capacity of the parties, UNMEE's current demining
capabilities and the political need for demarcation to be
completed as expeditiously as possible. The Secretary-
General will also need to consider the parties' existing
commitment to carry out demining, the importance of
the confidence-building contribution the parties
carrying out demining can provide and the need to limit
UNMEE's costs and size as much as possible.

We look forward to considering the Secretary-
General's recommendations. Those recommendations
will, by necessity, follow after the Commission's
decision, in late March. In our view, after a technical
rollover in UNMEE's current mandate this month, the
Council should take up the issue of demining and the
respective roles of the parties and UNMEE later this
spring. The United States calls upon both parties to
work with UNMEE in the interim to develop realistic
plans for carrying out their demining commitments in
the best way possible. The parties need to engage with
UNMEE in good faith on this issue so that the
Secretary-General will have all the information he
needs in order to make useful recommendations.

Let me close by echoing the comments of others
in thanking you, Mr. President, and your staff on the
Norwegian delegation for orchestrating such a
productive and successful mission. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Kolby for his effective leadership.
Through you, Mr. President, let me also extend my
warmest thanks to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations here in New York and to UNMEE on the
ground for their work in planning our visit and making
our arrangements. I was most impressed with the
knowledge, dedication and patience of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations staff who travelled with us
and of the UNMEE representatives with whom we met
in each country. I also extend, through you,
Mr. President, my appreciation to the Governments of
Ethiopia and Eritrea for their hospitality during our
visits and for their willingness to engage in frank
discussions with us.

