Mr. Desta (Eritrea): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Security Council
for the opportunity accorded to my delegation to
08-56550
participate in this meeting of the Council requested by
His Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of
the Republic of Djibouti, in connection with the
so-called Djibouti-Eritrea question, under the agenda
item "Peace and security in Africa".

On 24 June 2008, during a similar meeting of the
Security Council attended by the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Djibouti, my delegation expressed its
views on how the crisis was instigated and had been
internationalized. The series of hostile campaigns
waged against Eritrea and the unwarranted statements
that followed without any concrete evidence were also
addressed. I do not wish, therefore, to dwell on the
genesis of the manufactured problem, but allow me to
briefly highlight the following points.

There have been no new developments since the
brief incident in June that was instigated by the
unprovoked attack unleashed by Djibouti against our
units inside our own territory. The deliberate design to
unleash a new crisis in our region has fortunately been
forestalled.

Despite the negative campaigns, Eritrea has all
along chosen the path of restraint and patience in order
to avoid falling into the trap of escalating a crisis not
of Djibouti's making but created by others. Contrary to
the claims made, Eritrea has not taken any land that
belongs to Djibouti, and it does not have any territorial
ambitions.

Although this is not related to the issue at hand,
Eritrea has communicated its security concerns about
the Eritrea-Ethiopia-Djibouti border area, as stated in
document S/2008/446. Ethiopia has set up a new
military camp on Mount Musa Ali, perched at the
junction of the three countries. Ethiopia has built, from
the Djiboutian side, a network of roads winding up the
mountain and deployed offensive long-range artillery
and heavy equipment directed at Eritrea.

Eritrea would also like to take this occasion to
remind Council members that Ethiopia continues to
occupy sovereign Eritrean territories in violation of the
United Nations Charter and the Algiers Peace
Agreement. Members have received the most recent
report of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission,
which identifies the dimensions of the problem with
full clarity and will be addressed exhaustively in due
time.
08-56550

As far as this manufactured problem with
Djibouti is concerned, it must be recalled that the two
leaders had spoken about the issue when President
Isaias Afwerki took the initiative to call President
Guelleh and decided to address it in a calm and quiet
manner that takes into account the sisterly ties that
existed between the two countries and the need to
ensure peace and security in the subregion. This
occurred when Eritrea was approached by the Emir of
Qatar, to whom Eritrea showed its openness to solve
any real or perceived source of problems between the
two States.

Eritrea's desire continues to be the restoration
and cultivation of good-neighbourly relations with
Djibouti on the basis of full mutual respect for
territorial integrity and sovereignty. However, Eritrea
will not allow itself to be dragged into or invited to
engage in a diversionary and fabricated conflict, or to
be obliged to have an exchange on a situation designed
to foment conflict on the ground.

