Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking all those who have
addressed kind words to me and the French delegation.

I also wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for
his briefing, to which we listened with great interest.
My delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made by the presidency of the European Union.

I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to convey our appreciation for the role played by
Germany in providing support for Afghanistan. The
Berlin conference was a success which we welcome. I
believe that this is an important moment, because the
conference demonstrated the readiness of the
international community to help the Afghan people
over the long term. It was an important moment, too,
because of the announcement of the dates for
presidential and legislative elections. My country
welcomes that development and hopes that the
simultaneous elections will promote the essential
political dynamic. This is also an important time
because of the commitment undertaken by the Afghan
authorities to undertaking reform. We pay tribute to the
work of President Karzai in that regard.

It was also an important occasion because of the
work done at the margins of the conference, in
particular the agreement - mentioned by all
delegations and by you, Sir - to increase cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours in the anti-
narcotics campaign. Not only Afghanistan and the
region, but the countries of Europe as well, are
threatened by poppy cultivation. We must lay the
foundations for a sustainable economy in Afghanistan
by finding alternatives to opium production and we
must take the appropriate path to ensure Afghanistan's
economic future.

We must now focus all our efforts on the common
political objective and priority of the proper conduct of
elections. 1 share the View of Mr. Guehenno, who in
that context stressed the importance of security issues.
In that regard, France will strengthen its own
commitment to making the country safe and will
continue, together with the United States and other
partners, to assist in the establishment of a stable and
multi-ethnic Afghan National Army. Following the
training of three battalions, we are now completing the
training of more than 600 army officers, after which we
will initiate the training of instructors for the future
military academy in Kabul. Furthermore, in addition to
our contingent of 550 troops, we will increase our
commitment to the International Security Assistance
Force by assuming, together with Eurocorps, the
command of that broadened force this summer. We will
also continue actively to participate in Operation
Enduring Freedom for the dismantling of the last
Taliban networks, which are keeping Afghanistan in a
state of fragility.
Still in the context of preparations for the
elections, we fully support the statement of Jean-Marie
Guehenno on the importance of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which to a great
extent will depend, of course, on the commitment of
the Afghan Government. I would add that, in
connection with the elections, efforts to enhance the
organization of those elections are important. In
addition to its overall effort in 2004, France will
provide additional assistance to the electoral process
and will, inter alia, be responsible for the initial
training of members of the electoral commission and
contribute support for physical education. This effort is
essential, as this is an opportunity for the electorate to
take its destiny in hand and to build its own future. We
hope that the elections will also prove to be an
opportunity for considerable participation, including by
Afghan women.

At a time when the international community
wishes to express its resolve to help Afghanistan over
the long term, I believe that it is appropriate to
emphasize the quality of the work being done by the
United Nations in that country. We express our fullest
support for the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jean Arnault.

In Afghanistan, the international community has
acted in various complex modalities, but with good
coordination and affirmation of Afghan sovereignty,
which are essential. The United Nations is the locus of
coordination where political orientation is established,
which the various actors then implement on the ground.

In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the Afghan
people, who have demonstrated their pride and dignity
in exercising their recovered sovereignty. They have
shown their sense of responsibility and their will to
lead the Afghan nation along the path to peace. We, the
international community, want to assure the Afghan
people that we will remain at their side because it is
together that we will succeed. I think that is the main
message of the Berlin conference.

