Mr. Velasquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting. We
thank Mr. Mladenov and Ms. Raemer for their
valuable briefings.

Peru is deeply concerned about the increasing
deterioration of the political and humanitarian
conditions underpinning the Palestinian issue. The
situation is unsustainable and destabilizing for the
Middle East and for the international community.

We must continue to condemn the ongoing
indiscriminate attacks against civilians by Hamas
and other radical Palestinian actors, as Ms. Raemer
apprised us, as well as the disproportionate Israeli
responses. International law and human rights are
openly flouted, creating a climate of impunity that
exacerbates the conflict. That dynamic, together with
the Council's inaction and the passivity of certain key
actors, has negative repercussions in an environment
that is already highly volatile. Putting an end to that
serious situation is a major undertaking but it is urgent.

In these difficult circumstances, we wish to
reaffirm our commitment to the only solution that we
believe to be viable and consistent with international
law: that of two States with internationally recognized
and secure borders, to be negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of the borders in force
until 1967, which should also lead to the resolution of
the final status of Jerusalem.

It is imperative, in the immediate term, that
the leaders of both sides show real signs of genuine
commitment and political will, replacing unilateral
actions that undermine the trust required with genuine
signs of compromise. We refer specifically to the
noted intensification of settlement, demolition and
eviction practices in occupied Palestinian territories,
which specifically undermine the two-State solution
and violate the provisions of the Council pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016). Those illegal practices
must cease.

We also believe it essential to condemn hate speech,
anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its forms. In any
society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must be
seen as an asset and never as a threat. In line with its
sensitive responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, the Security Council must also be able to
achieve minimum consensus and act when the situation
on the ground so warrants.

The emphasis placed on political and security
developments should not in any way detract from
the urgent need to immediately address in parallel
the humanitarian crisis looming over the Palestinian
people, aggravated in recent years by recurrent episodes
of violence and reductions in the funding of assistance
programmes. In particular, we believe it vital to meet
the basic needs of the people of Gaza, since poverty and
marginalization are fertile ground for radicalization
and violent extremism. It is important to continue
to promote a lasting peace by linking humanitarian
assistance with development plans that provide hope
and opportunities to the youngest. We also call for
stepping up efforts to advance the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process, as its success would alleviate
the humanitarian situation and give impetus to the
resumption of dialogue with Israel.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
gratitude for the written report (S/20l9/938) on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which was
requested of the Secretary-General by 10 members
of the Council. We hope that that practice will be
maintained in a semi-annual format, since it brings
greater transparency to the consideration of this
sensitive issue.

