Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I thank you, Mr.
President, for calling this open meeting of the Security
Council and for the opportunity to address it.

As I have said previously in the Council, New
Zealand has a direct interest in the security and the
stability of East Timor. In fact, as I speak, my Prime
Minister is in Dili and will shortly be meeting New
Zealand troops stationed with the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
in Suai. And earlier this week New Zealand United
Nations peacekeepers clashed yet again with heavily
armed and aggressive militia units in the Suai district,
just eight kilometres from the West Timor border.
We therefore strongly add our voice to calls by
Council members and others for all the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000) to be
implemented without delay by the Government of
Indonesia. West Timor must be rid of dangerous militia
units that have demonstrated to the world that they care
little for the stability of either East or West Timor. By
their presence and actions these militia units are
preventing the international community from helping
the Government of Indonesia provide much-needed
assistance to East Timorese refugees. The longer these
militias prevail in West Timor, the more unstable the
border with East Timor will remain, a situation no one
can tolerate. Militia members, and especially their
leaders, who are suspects in the recent murders of
United Nations civilian and military personnel and
innocent civilians, must be arrested immediately and
put on trial.

We say this not without understanding of the
complexities facing the Government of President
Abdurrahman Wahid of Indonesia. It is the New
Zealand Government's wish to provide more
assistance, but we can do so only when peace and
security are restored to West Timor and international
humanitarian personnel are able to return without
fearing for their lives. We therefore call again for the
earliest dispatch of the Security Council mission to
Indonesia and East Timor to help this serious situation.

Finally we wish to express our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello, and all UNTAET staff for their
ongoing dedication to the preparation of East Timor for
independence. New Zealand will continue to provide
support to the East Timorese people and UNTAET as
East Timor's journey to nationhood continues.

