Ms. Makotose: In 2016, the situation in Darfur
was characterized by three factors. First, despite the
continuing negotiations, the Government and the armed
movements have yet to reach a comprehensive political
solution to the conflict.

Secondly, the conflict between Government forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid began
with intense clashes during the first half of the year,
followed by continued intermittent fighting in Jebel
Marra. More than 80,000 civilians were confirmed
displaced as a result, while an additional 117,000 have
not been verified due to a denial of access to conflict
areas.

Thirdly, while the mediation efforts of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) in the more proactive role of State
Governments contributed to a decrease in the overall
number of intercommunal clashes, the root causes
remained largely unaddressed. Incidents of violence
against the civilian population, including internally
displaced persons (IDPs), continued to be commonplace.
UNAMID and humanitarian actors continued to face
challenges in implementing their mandates.

In line with the strategic priorities of the Mission,
the police component prioritizes its resources and
activities to support the physical protection of civilians,
thereby creating a protective environment through
the development of community-oriented policing. As
illustrated in the police-to-task review in April and
the special report of the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission (see S/2016/510), gender-sensitive policing is essential
to fulfil those tasks. Currently, UNAMID has the
greatest number of female police officers among all
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Two hundred
and sixty-seven, or 19 per cent, of UNAMID's
individual police officers are women. Women hold 17
key positions. Four are professional or higher ranking
positions, including my own. Thirteen female officers
also hold commanding and supervisory positions at
Headquarters. Female officers are encouraged to apply
for senior positions, and special consideration is given
in granting them extensions to their tour of duty.

That is not only important with regard to gender
balancing but also contributes to the effective
implementation of mandated tasks. Female officers
participate in all activities, including patrols,
family and child protection, gender-awareness and
community-oriented policing. They also act as role
models, inspiring Darfuri women and girls to advocate
for and defend their rights. In particular, female officers
contribute to greater and wider access to vulnerable
groups. Interaction with communities is critical for
information gathering and analysis and enhances
early warning. UNAMID police collate information
on security and receive reports of criminal incidents
including sexual and gender-based violence and other
human rights violations. The information is verified
and shared with other Mission components, the police
of the host State and the local population in line with
the do-no-harm principle. Furthermore, UNAMID
police, in collaboration with the military, conduct
targeted patrols that focus on areas in which violations
perpetrated against women and children occur most
frequently, such as water points, firewood-collection
areas and markets.

To effectively meet the security needs of IDPs,
primarily focusing on women and children at risk,
UNAMID police have fully embraced gender sensitivity
policing practices. Notably, UNAMID has ensured that
UNAMID women police officers are deployed at every
team site. UNAMID police also support the recruitment
and training of women in both the Government of the
Sudanese police force and the community policing
volunteers among IDPs. The current strength of the
Sudanese police in Darfur stands at approximately
14,000, 4 per cent of whom are women. Gender balance
is critical to building confidence in communities and
encouraging victims to report abuses to Sudanese
police officers of their choosing. Given that women
are disproportionately affected by sexual and gender-
based violence and conflict-related sexual violence, an
increased female police presence across Darfur will
ensure more access to justice for the victims.

Through outreach initiatives in communities,
UNAMID police encourages Darfuri women, including
IDPs, to enlist in the police force. In parallel, UNAMID
police's interactions with the senior leadership of the
Government of the Sudanese police force focus on
increasing the number of women and transforming it
into an increasingly representative police force. More
specifically, the UNAMID Police Women's Network
supported the establishment of seven family- and
child-protection units in the Government of Sudan's
police force across the five States. While continuing
sensitization on gender mainstreaming and sexual
and gender-based violence, they also work towards
empowering female officers in the Sudanese police by
supporting the founding and operationalization of the
Sudanese Police Women's Network.

UNAMID police have also strengthened community-
oriented policing practices through the recruitment
and training of 3,529 community policing volunteers,
29 per cent of whom are women. As part of the
operationalization of the United Nations police gender
toolkit, UNAMID has developed a guideline on gender
mainstreaming, as well as a community policing
framework to guide the selection and qualification
process of community policing volunteers. The
community policing volunteer system has contributed
increasingly to the safety and security in IDP camps
through their joint efforts with UNAMID police and
in some cases with the Sudanese police. That has
contributed to a reduction of crime and enhanced the
sense of security in communities. Information sharing
with the Government of the Sudan's police has improved
and helped speed up investigations. It has also assisted
in improving trust and promoting partnership between
communities and the Sudanese police on security
coordination matters.

UNAMID police fully adhere to and implement the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. That extends to addressing other
forms of misconduct through preventative measures.
The conduct of United Nations police personnel is key
to ensuring that our efforts are sustainable and not in
vain. More specifically, I have issued a directive to
ensure that all members of the police component are
to be briefed on the United Nations policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.

As role models, police commanders and team
leaders are trained to strictly comply with the Secretary-
General's directives on sexual exploitation and abuse.
A communication strategy has been developed and is
being implemented to ensure that information materials
on sexual exploitation and abuse are available at all
team sites. Furthermore, UNAMID police play a vital
role in facilitating the outreach of the Conduct and
Discipline Team of the Mission to increase awareness
of sexual exploitation and abuse and other forms of
misconduct, as well as available reporting mechanisms.
UNAMID police have also actively participated in
the Mission's task force on sexual exploitation and
abuse and contributed to improved reporting and
swift investigations by the Immediate Response Team.
UNAMID police have recorded no substantial case of
sexual exploitation and abuse. As the only female Police
Commissioner out of all United Nations peacekeeping
missions, I have been and remain fully committed to
that important and ongoing effort.

Finally, allow me to reiterate, Sir, our commitment
to Member States and the people in Darfur. As we all
know, there are many challenges that UNAMID police
face in implementing its mandate. However, United
Nations police officers are the daily interface between
Darfuris, the United Nations and the African Union.
I appeal for the continued support from the Security
Council in our endeavour and would like to express
my sincere gratitude for the opportunity to present our
gender mainstreaming efforts to you.
