Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union. The year 2020 marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security. At the same time, the first-ever report of the Secretary- General on the topic was issued last month (S/2020/167). The report recognizes some positive trends, namely, the growing awareness of the role that young people are playing in the peace and security agenda. The report also underlines the obstacles and barriers that remain. This is the moment to assess the progress made, share good practices and lessons learned, and set the path for a stronger youth and peace and security agenda for the years to come. We therefore thank the Dominican Republic for organizing today's timely debate. In order to track the progress of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2418), Portugal strongly supports the establishment of a regular reporting structure on youth and peace and security backed by a global set of indicators that could serve to measure the progress of the resolutions' implementation. A translation of resolution 2250 (2015) into Portuguese has been disseminated in Portugal and is used to raise awareness as part of human rights training under the auspices of the National Youth Plan, adopted in 2018, which is an interdepartmental instrument for action in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and all its Sustainable Development Goals. The Portuguese authorities have issued practical guidebooks and toolkits that address how to tackle specific challenges that young refugees are facing. Our aim is to help them overcome uncertainty and support them in building a long-term perspective. At the same time, these forms of guidance are designed to reinforce the resilience of our hosting socioeconomic structures in building trust, acceptance and intercultural dialogue. In the context of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), a Youth Action Plan 2018-2022 was approved. High among the Plan's priorities is post- conflict reconstruction. A study on youth violence is being prepared, and the sharing of programmes and experiences among member States to prevent marginalization, violent radicalization and youth criminality is being incentivized. In addition, the Ibero-American Youth Pact, formalized in 2016 at the Conference of Ministers of Youth of the International Youth Organization for Ibero- America, effectively contributes to the implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda. We encourage member States of the CPLP to adopt national plans to make progress on, inter alia, the youth and peace and security agenda through meaningful consultations and engagement with youth-led organizations. In order to guarantee the safety of students, Portugal is implementing the Safe School Programme. The Programme diagnoses the areas with the highest incidence of violent acts, and its intervention model has been designed based, inter alia, on non-formal education methodologies. Furthermore, in the domain of education for citizenship, Portugal has developed specific awareness-raising guidelines on defence and security, gender equality, addiction and dependency prevention, aquatic and maritime security, cybersecurity, environmental education and citizenship. Last but not least, in 2019 the Portuguese Government, in cooperation with partners from the United Nations system and the participation of the Secretary- General, the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session and the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, among many others, organized the World Conference of Ministers Responsible for Youth 2019 and Youth Forum, known as Lisboa+21. The outcome of the Conference and Youth Forum was the Lisbon Declaration on Youth Policies and Programmes, which was welcomed in the youth resolution adopted in Geneva and in the Third Committee resolution on policies and programmes involving youth, adopted by the General Assembly last December as resolution 74/121. Among the several commitments set forth in the Lisboa+21 Declaration is the recognition of young people's contribution to peace processes and conflict prevention and resolution. The Declaration also expresses the concern that, among civilians, youth is one of the groups that is most affected by armed conflict. The women and peace and security agenda and the youth and peace and security agenda are mutually reinforcing, especially when it comes to girls and young women. The promotion and protection of the rights of women and girls can be successful only if both agendas are fully implemented. In line with what is being done on the women and peace and security agenda, we encourage the establishment of a network of United Nations youth and peace and security advisers and focal points to implement the youth and peace and security agenda at the country level, including in peacekeeping and political missions. Finally, Portugal considers that young people have a key role to play in the coronavirus disease pandemic, for example through volunteering, youth activism in social media, and raising awareness in the fight against hate speech. In Portugal, many activities, including workshops and webinars on youth and youth rights, remain ongoing.
