Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I want to welcome the presence of Mr. Trujillo
Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, here
today. I would like to make four points.

First, Belgium welcomes the renewed commitment
of the Colombian Government to the peace process,
which represents a unique opportunity to break
the cycle of violence, ensure the rights of victims
and create momentum for change. Many indicators
point to significant progress and the country can be
rightly proud of its achievements. The finalization
of territorial development plans is an important step.
It is no exaggeration to say that the peace process in
Colombia is a true source of inspiration for the whole
world. In that context, it is worrying to note the
increase in polarization and tensions in recent months.
Some measures could ease those tensions, particularly
accelerating the socioeconomic reintegration process,
promoting better access to land and clarifying the
future of the areas of concentration, with the full
participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun in the forums established under the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace.

Secondly, we would like to draw attention to the
role of women. The gender aspects included in the
peace agreement represent some of the world's best
practices. Belgium calls for implementing the national
gender-related reintegration strategy and forming the
intersectoral commission of guarantees for women,
leaders and human rights defenders as soon as possible.
Particular attention should also be paid to protecting
the rights of children and combating violations against
them such as their recruitment and use by non-State
armed groups.

My third point concerns the ongoing violence
against human rights defenders and social leaders
outside the security perimeters. We strongly encourage
the Colombian authorities to affirm the State's presence
throughout its territory, including through social
programmes. Such measures will also help to address
the issue of violence against former combatants of
the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). The reports of an
increase in forced displacement are also very worrying.
We therefore echo the appeal launched by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in his
latest report regarding respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law by all parties.

My fourth point is about transitional justice, the
cornerstone of the peace agreement. In order to be
implemented as well as possible, the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace must be able to operate in complete autonomy
and independence. Belgium therefore echoes the call of
the Secretary-General and urges all the relevant parties
to take steps to ensure the speedy enactment of the
statutory law for the Special Jurisdiction, in accordance
with the peace agreement. This is important not only
for the legal authority and credibility of the Special
Jurisdiction, but also to ensure the legal security of
former FARC-EP members and military officers who
have already appeared before the Special Jurisdiction
or plan to do so.

Finally, Belgium is concerned about the situation
in Venezuela and understands that the crisis there is
having serious consequences in Colombia. We welcome
the solidarity shown by Colombians towards the many
refugees and migrants arriving from Venezuela.

In conclusion, 2019 will be a crucial year for
peacebuilding in Colombia. We are firmly convinced
that the comprehensive implementation of the peace
agreement will enable Colombian society to achieve its
objectives in an inclusive and sustainable manner.

