Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan and for his courageous work as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We listened closely to the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.

For many years now, developments in the security
situation in Afghanistan continue to be the subject
of our extreme concern. Unfortunately, the situation
is going from bad to worse. We fear that the armed
opposition and terrorist groups will this year pursue
their efforts to seize strategically important towns
and gain control over large swathes of the country's
territory. The Taliban movement, having announced the
start of its spring offensive, is systematically carrying
out high-profile attacks in various parts ofAfghanistan,
and most of them are against civilian populations. The
series of terrorist attacks that took place on 20 June
in various parts of the country is further evidence of
this fact. I would ask Ambassador Saikal to convey our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Afghanistan.

We are particularly concerned about the increase in
the number of members of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the attempts of that group to absorb
other armed opposition groups, mainly in the north of
Afghanistan. It is our hope that the future leadership of
UNAMA, in particular the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Yamamoto, will pay
careful attention to this dangerous phenomenon.
We support the Government's approach to
achieving national reconciliation. We are ready to
support progress in the negotiations process, including
being flexible on the possible softening of sanctions
set up by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), on the Taliban, if it
is not contrary to Afghanistan's national interests.

We welcome the appointment of the country's
leading religious figure, Mr. Gilani, to the Head
of the High Peace Council. We hope that, with his
participation, the national reconciliation process will
be given renewed dynamism.

We take note of the Afghan Government's intention
to develop a dialogue with the armed opposition. We
support any efforts made in that regard, but we are
convinced that national reconciliation will be lasting
only when it takes on a genuinely national character.

The main challenge in terms ofreconciliation means
involving the Taliban movement in the peace talks,
but that has not yet been achieved. The Quadrilateral
Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace and
Reconciliation Process needs to organize direct talks
between the Government and the Taliban, although the
important decisions that have already been taken have
not, it would seem, led to any significant results. We
call on the armed opposition to rise to the level of State
responsibility for the fate ofAfghanistan and its people,
end its military activities, stop its reprisals and acts
of terrorism and enter into a significant, substantive
dialogue with the country's legitimate authorities.

Russia is ready to establish constructive cooperation
with the Afghan leadership in order to support stability
and an independent path forward for Afghanistan, so
that the country can be free from terrorism and the
drug threat.

We take note of the world's growing understanding
of the important regional dimension of settling the
conflict in Afghanistan, as well as the increased
number of regional platforms that focus on Afghan
issues. We believe it is important that, in the contex
of such activities, regional stakeholders themselves
should have a decisive role to play.

We are convinced that efforts to support
Afghanistan should mainly be undertaken using the
structures that have proved their worth, for example,
first of all, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), whose stakeholders, observers or partners
in dialogue include practically all of the countries
of the region, including Afghanistan. We welcome
Afghanistan's official application to become a member
of the SCO. We actively support steps by the Afghan
Government, to which Ambassador Saikal referred, to
establish economic cooperation and integration with
regional neighbours.

We see considerable potential in enhancing
counter-terrorism and anti-narcotics cooperation
between Afghanistan and the SCO and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization. However, in this context
we must say that the new NATO Resolute Support
Mission has not yet achieved its declared goals. The
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, which is
courageously fighting the terrorist threat, is suffering
major losses as it counters the opposition, as well as
experiencing serious difficulties in effectively pushing
back the opposition's onslaught. We take note of the
decision of the United States Administration to halt
its withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan,
which reflects a recognition that the security problem
has not yet been resolved.

It must not be forgotten that Russia voted in favour
of resolution 2189 (2014), on launching the Resolute
Support operation, based on the belief that the North
Atlantic alliance would report to the Security Council
on the situation in Afghanistan in the context of that
operation. NATO and the United States of America
have a special responsibility for training the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and ensuring
its effectiveness and security in Afghanistan. Another
area of work is to ensure that no threat to third-party
countries should come from Afghan territory. That
said, the situation in this area - and I will say this
directly - is alarming. An example of this is the
situation in northern districts of Afghanistan, where
there is a growing presence of foreign terrorist fighters
and an increase in the activities of ISIL.

The drug problem poses a serious threat to the
stability of Afghanistan itself, its neighbours in the
region and the world at large. In addition to the direct
harm it causes, drug production provides substantial
and determinative financial support for terrorism.
In that context, we believe it is necessary to step up
efforts by the international community to fight drug
trafficking from Afghan territory. We have no illusions
about the 2015 statistics showing a significant drop in
opium production in Afghanistan. We are concerned at
forecasts of a significant increase in the poppy harvest
this year.

The key to improved stability of the situation in
Afghanistan is a militarily capable Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, which should on its own
be able to ensure peace and stability in its own country.
In February, Russia provided free delivery of weapons
and munitions to meet the needs of Afghanistan's
security forces. We will continue to help Kabul in
training members of the structures of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces through the
relevant Russian services, particularly since our two
countries historically enjoy a high level of cooperation
and mutual assistance in these areas. We will continue
that work both bilaterally and through cooperation
with international partners, despite the changes in the
approach of the United States, NATO and many Western
countries to implementing, together with the Russian
Federation, joint projects to support Afghanistan.

The task of consolidating the efforts of the main
external players remains the primary precondition
for resolving the main problems in Afghanistan.
Competition over areas ofinfluence shouldbe eliminated
immediately, as should involvement in domestic affairs.
We need to combine our efforts to ensure that there is
national reconciliation in the country, that we eliminate
the problem of terrorism and that we help Afghanistan
back onto the path of sustainable development. We
particularly stress the fact that the situation can be
resolved only through good-neighbourliness, open
international and regional cooperation and cooperation
with the legitimate Government of Afghanistan, while
respecting that State's sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

