Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. This debate is about our
children and grandchildren. There cannot be a more
important matter than this.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden.

Children bear the heaviest burden of armed
conflict, although they are the least responsible for it.
The Nordic countries would like to reiterate their deep
gratitude for the tireless efforts made by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to
record violations against children, to bring them to the
attention of the international community, to call the
perpetrators to account and to make proposals for
concrete action to monitor the violence and to bring
relief to the children who are suffering. We fully
endorse the report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/ l 5 8) and the
recommendations made therein.

All forms of violence against children must be
condemned. Each of the six categories of grave
violations set out in resolution 1612 (2005) must be
addressed with equal vigour. Rape and other forms of
sexual violence are heinous crimes. In addition to the
immediate physical, mental and emotional damage,
they often cause lasting harm to sexual and
reproductive health. They spread HIV and other serious
diseases. They cause disabilities that diminish the
capacity for learning, safe parenthood and social
interaction. All too often, it is the victim who is
stigmatized while the perpetrator escapes punishment.

Girls and women constitute the largest group of
victims in armed conflict. As the Secretary-General's
report shows, they are particularly vulnerable to
gender-based and sexual violence perpetrated by all
sides in conflicts, sometimes even by the peacekeepers
who are supposed to safeguard them. The united
condemnation of such crimes by the international
community has been heartening. However, urgent and
forceful action is still required. The Nordic countries
fully endorse the recommendation that the Security
Council expand, at a minimum, the criteria that trigger
listing in the annexes to this report to include rape and
other grave sexual violence.

The efforts to monitor and address gender-based
and sexual violence and other grave violations set out
in resolution 1612 (2005) could benefit from increasing
interaction and collaboration among the United Nations
and regional actors. For example, synergies should be
established between the monitoring mechanisms
established to support the implementation of resolution
1612 (2005) and resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) on women, peace and security and the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

We would like to express our satisfaction with the
work undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in designing a global policy on child
protection advisers and in mainstreaming child
protection issues in the work of the peacekeeping and
political missions of the United Nations. We look
forward to the implementation of that policy by rolling
it out to the field.
The Nordic countries strongly commend the
efforts of civil society. In spite of their often limited
resources and the most dangerous working conditions,
local non-governmental organizations provide
invaluable information and concrete action that no
other actor could provide with such intensity, reach and
effectiveness. We note with deep appreciation the
support provided by civil society organizations in
developing more effective policies and other tools to
protect children in armed conflict. We welcome the
emphasis of the Secretary-General on cooperation with
non-State actors.

Recruitment and use of children by armed groups
is a persistent problem and a reason for deep concern.
The recruitment of boys and girls to take part in
hostilities is a violation of international law and a war
crime in both international and non-international armed
conflicts. The prohibition on recruiting or using child
soldiers must be matched by effective implementation
at the domestic level. The Nordic countries again wish
to emphasize the need for all parties to armed conflicts
to present concrete, time-bound action plans ending
and preventing the recruitment of child soldiers.
Among the greatest challenges we face is that of
impunity.

The first case before the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to have proceeded to trial phase, the one
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, is a milestone in the
efforts to end impunity for the use of child soldiers.
The Nordic countries call on all States to become
parties to the Rome Statute and to effectively
implement its provisions in their national legislations.
Moreover, we urge the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to use the full range of measures at its
disposal, especially when it comes to persistent
perpetrators. We call upon the Council to ensure that
interaction and cooperation among the Working Group
and the sanctions committees is made more speedy and
effective, and to use the most effective measures at its
disposal, including targeted sanctions. The Council
should refer violations against children in armed
conflict to the ICC for investigation and prosecution
when national Governments fail to carry out their
responsibility to protect those children. At the same
time, we wish to recall that the rule of law, including a
functioning judicial system at the national level, is a
necessary condition for peace and stability.

The growing incidence of attacks on schools
recounted in the Secretary-General's report is of deep
concern to the Nordic countries. We call upon United
Nations country teams, peacekeepers and Governments
to actively negotiate among community stakeholders
and parties to armed conflict to designate schools as
safe sanctuaries.

In concluding, the Nordic countries wish to
express their deep concern with the unacceptable
suffering of children in the military end game in
northern Sri Lanka. The ongoing recruitment of
children into the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE), as well as the fact that civilians continue to be
prevented from leaving the war zone, fill us with dread.
We urge the Government of Sri Lanka to protect all the
civilians in the area, especially children, in accordance
with its obligations under humanitarian law.

This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. We call for universal adherence and
implementation of the Convention and its two Optional
Protocols. The Nordic countries would like to reiterate
their encouragement to the Security Council and to the
entire United Nations system to give children in armed
conflict the attention they deserve and to constantly
seek the most effective means to improve their
situation. Institutional prerogatives or procedural
traditions should never stand in the way of concrete
action.

