Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Mr. President, we want to welcome you to the Council
and to give Singapore its due for having taken the
initiative to organize and convene this discussion,
which I found very interesting this morning, as, I am
sure, did my colleagues.

I have taken heed of the suggestion that we take
advantage of the lunch period to think about some of
the items that were broached this morning by the troop
contributors who spoke. There were a lot of
recommendations and a lot of thoughts advanced. As
the paper the presidency produced points out, there is
already a long history of decisions in regard to the
question of how consultations between the Security
Council and the troop contributors should be organized.
It is obvious - and I do not think this is a question of
ill will on anybody's part; in fact, I am quite sure it is
not - that the situation is still not satisfactory, as has
been made clear repeatedly over the years and was
made perfectly clear this morning.

Let me add that the situation is not satisfactory
from our point of view, either. We have given lots of
thought to the need to improve the exchange of
information. The members of the Security Council
need, and the United Nations as a whole needs,
stronger cooperation between the troop-contributing
countries and the Security Council and, I would add,
between the Secretary-General and the Secretariat. We
have at least three major actors here, not just two.

I think our shared goal, as it came out this
morning as well, is that we want to make the operations
of peacekeeping more effective and more efficient. To
do that, we need a real partnership, and that requires
somewhat of a change in mentality, I think, as some of
the speakers noted this morning. We need the troop
contributors, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to look at each other as partners in a common
endeavour with a common purpose.

I want to recall Ambassador Heinbecker's
exhortation this morning about integrating authority
with risk. I think that is a very good way to look at the
issue. This requires input, will and commitment from
each participant in this partnership to make it work
better. That means meaningful and active participation,
thought and some consideration for the other partners.
It does not necessarily mean new mechanisms as such.
We have lots of mechanisms and there are lots of ideas
that have been floated and tried in the past. We can
have regular meeting upon meeting upon meeting in
various orders and sequences, but they risk becoming,
as at least one speaker said this morning, ritualistic if
we do not put the proper content and spirit into them.

I also want to note i in connection with those
who spoke about the effectiveness of United Nations
operations and the need to ensure the security of
peacekeeping operations - that the United States
remains the largest contributor of United Nations
civilian police, with well over 800 personnel deployed
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Therefore
we are more than sympathetic with the concerns of
troop contributors for the safety of their personnel.

The bottom line here is that we should all want
the means of exchange that works, that informs the
troop contributors adequately and on a timely basis,
that really provides input to Security Council decision-
making, that improves implementation and improves
the clarity of mandates and, at the end of the day, that
produces clearer goals and better performance. This
will require meaningful, interactive exchanges among
the troop contributors, the Secretariat and the Security
Council. A good example - the best one that I have
seen so far and one that others have also cited this
morning - was the series of meetings that we had in
connection with the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) this fall and the Security Council
mission that Visited UNAMSIL, where we had good
informal and informed exchanges that really did fit the
parameters that I have just been discussing.

My delegation is open to new ideas to build a
better process and to overcome inertia. Our other
overriding concern has to be that Security Council
efficiency and fulfilment of responsibilities is
maintained, as is set out under the Charter. Several
people spoke about that also this morning. We would
not think it wise to blur the responsibilities of the
participants in this partnership or to hinder Council
decision-making. We are confident that we can
improve on this partnership without doing so.

We can use existing mechanisms. We can find
ways to have more interactive exchanges between the
troop contributors, the Secretariat and the Security
Council. The troop contributors should take the
initiative when they feel it appropriate, or when an
individual troop contributor, for that matter, feels the
need to so do. In that regard, I applaud the Deputy
Secretary-General's comments this morning about her
openness, and that of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in that regard. That is the right attitude,
and it should be taken advantage of.
We have accomplished a great deal in the past six
months with the Brahimi report and follow-up to
strengthen the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
as well as United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
need to continue that effort, since this work is at the
heart of providing real capabilities to the problems we
have been discussing. We should work to make
Security Council resolution 1327 (2000) a reality. It
contains good ideas and good intentions, and we need
to work to bring them into being. I want also to echo
the suggestion of the representative of Pakistan and
others that, as we are going through this effort, we take
a look at the resources of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, not only to make sure that it
has the resources it needs for mounting an operation
but also the resources required to conduct effective
liaison with the Security Council and the troop
contributors.

My delegation is willing to look at new ideas to
bolster this process, but as I have stated, we do not
confuse mechanisms and more meetings with
substance, cooperation and partnership. We all know
the problem; it has been around for a while. We are
willing to work very hard to address it, and we suggest
that we proceed to do so without further delay.

