Mr. Gomez Robledo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Introducing his report on the work of the
Organization in 2004 (A/59/1), the Secretary-General
stated that "Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it"
(A/59/PV.3, p. 3).

Mexico hopes that the debate that has brought us
together today will enable us to renew our belief in
international law as the best instrument for ensuring
peace, the rule of law and development. My delegation
therefore fully supports Denmark's purpose in
convening this debate, "to consider the Security
Council's particular role in promoting international
law" and, in particular, "the legal tools applied by the
Security Council in its endeavours to maintain
international peace and security" (5/2006/367, annex).

It is a serious matter that, as the Secretary-
General pointed out on the occasion to which I have
referred, "Where enforcement capacity does exist, as in
the Security Council, many feel it is not always used
fairly or effectively". Mexico believes that that is the
issue that needs to be addressed today.

Mexico is in no doubt about the primary
responsibility entrusted to the Council by the Charter
regarding the maintenance of international peace and
security. In this regard, Mexico does not customarily
distinguish between decisions that the Council may
take under Chapter VII of the Charter and those that it
may take on the basis of Chapter VI. All of its
decisions are governed by Article 25 of the Charter
and, given their substantive content, have a binding
character for those to whom they are directed.
For that reason, we welcome Denmark's
emphasis on the question of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and agree that the Council can "take steps to
ensure compliance with international law", provided
that it "operates within the framework of international
law in all its functions" (S/2006/367, annex).

The Council must develop its institutional
capacity to prevent the outbreak of situations that
threaten peace and, in particular, strive to help the
parties to a dispute to resolve it in keeping with the
procedures set out in the Charter, emphasizing the
recommendation that legal disputes should be referred
to the International Court of Justice.
As a former Legal Counsel of the United
Nations - one of Mr. Michel's predecessors - said,

experience proves that almost all international disputes
have a legal component. That is something that the
President of the International Court of Justice also
recalled today. Generally speaking, therefore, all
disputes between States stem from differences
concerning the interpretation of some rule of
international law.

If - as has often occurred - such disputes give
rise to a situation that constitutes a threat to the peace,
a breach of the peace or an act of aggression, it is
logical to suppose that the determination made by the
Council pursuant to Article 39 of the Charter and the
actions that it decides to take would be grounded in
and motivated by international law. The Security
Council is bound to discharge its duties in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
as set out in Article 24, paragraph 2, of the Charter.

Mexico does not question the Council's discretion
to make determinations under Article 39 or to change
the list of acts that constitute aggression - discretion
that the General Assembly recognized in its resolution
3314 (XXIX). Nonetheless, the Council is bound by
the purposes and principles set out in Articles 1 and 2.

I should like to clarify my delegation's thinking
in this regard. When the Security Council has sought to
influence the interpretation of international law, it has
done so in a forthright manner. The principle of non-
intervention in affairs that are essentially a matter for
the internal jurisdiction of States has been the subject
of extensive interpretation in terms of substantive
content and the legal regime that governs it, even
running counter to what the Council itself had
determined at other times. This can be seen in
particular from the Council's expansion since the
1990s of the very concept of a threat to the peace,
determining that grave breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law constitute a threat to the
peace. Through such measures, the Council has
undoubtedly assumed the role of guarantor of
compliance with international humanitarian law, as
provided for in Protocol I Additional to the Geneva
Conventions. The same can be said of the measures
taken by the Council in combating terrorism,
particularly since the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001).
However, when making a determination under
Article 39 as a prerequisite to the adoption of measures
to maintain or restore peace, the Council generally
takes an empirical attitude and settles for a general
reference to Chapter VII in the preambular part of its
resolutions as the legal foundation for its actions.
Experience has shown that, as an essentially political
body, the Council does not seem to want to define a
breach of the peace or an act of aggression from the
standpoint of the commission of an internationally
wrongful act. It prefers to have recourse to the broader
notion of a threat to peace or to a general reference to
Chapter VII.

In the view of some, there is no reason at all for
the Council to make determinations of a legal nature,
for fear that they may have an impact on the
international responsibility of States as a result of the
attribution of the internationally wrongful act. We
believe that to be a groundless fear and that in any case
the mandate of the Security Council clearly does not
presuppose taking decisions that create international
responsibility of States. That falls within the purview
of courts, and in particular the International Court of
Justice. Nevertheless, when it has deemed it
appropriate, the Council has even established that a
State is liable under international law for losses and
damages stemming from breaches of international law,
as set out in paragraph 16 of resolution 687 (1991).

For those reasons, when determining whether
there has been a breach of the peace or an act of
aggression, the Council should be able to rely on the
international legal rule that has been violated and base
its decisions in international law. Peace as an end in
itself cannot justify any action.

We therefore note with concern not only the trend
towards excessive recourse to Chapter VII and certain
abuses of the notion of a threat to peace, but also the
way in which key criteria governing the rule of self-
defence have been diluted, such as the immediacy and
attribution of constitutive elements of armed attack
against a State - something that no doubt began with
resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001).

As has been noted, peace does not mean just the
absence of an international armed conflict. The
evolution of that notion makes international peace and
security the result of a combination of factors - such
as respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, the right of peoples to self-

determination, the validity of democratic institutions,
the non-proliferation of all sorts of weapons and the
prevention and punishment of acts of terrorism.

The 2005 World Summit adopted, in its Outcome
document, a new, multidimensional concept of security
that encouraged a new kind of cooperation between the
Security Council and the other principal organs of the
United Nations, with a view not only to the
maintenance of international peace in the narrow sense
but to the international order in its contemporary
meaning. In that regard, the General Assembly and the
International Court of Justice must play a more active
role, in line with the functions conferred upon each of
them by the Charter.

Mexico proposes that the Security Council
consider the desirability of adopting certain measures,
such as the following.

First, in proposing options to parties to a dispute,
the Council should have more frequent recourse to the
peaceful means available under Chapter VI, without
creating any doubt as to the obligation of States to
submit to the mechanisms for peaceful settlement
provided for under Article 2, paragraph 3, of the
Charter.

Secondly, the Council should propose to parties
to a dispute that has been settled by the International
Court of Justice the assistance they may need to
execute and implement the judgement. In that regard,
the Secretary-General should also develop his ability to
advise the parties.

Thirdly, the Council should have recourse to
advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice.
Unlike some States, my delegation does not believe
that the material scope of such opinions should be
confined solely to matters pertaining to problems
having to do with a conflict of competence between the
organs of the United Nations system. The advisory
jurisprudence of the Court has been of great service to
the international community as a whole in the various
issues of the growing sphere in which international law
is evolving.

Fourthly, the Council should recommend to the
General Assembly that it authorize the Secretary-
General to seek advisory opinions from the Court. That
would not entail amending the Charter, but merely the
granting of a general authorization to the Secretary-
General, as has been the case in specialized agencies.
If the Secretary-General had that power, he would,
with the agreement of the parties to a dispute, be able
to request an opinion from the Court while avoiding
the need for the parties to present their points of View
before political bodies, which could prejudice their
respective positions concerning the merits of the
dispute.

Fifthly, the Council should refrain from taking
decisions of a legislative nature. That falls under the
purview of the General Assembly, as provided for
under Article 13 of the Charter. The way the Charter
should be interpreted - as the constitutional
framework that defines the activities of the Council
and its obligation to act within the limits imposed upon
it by the Charter - has already been determined by the
International Court of Justice in an advisory opinion of
1996. Mexico believes that - since that is the sole
universal supranational body, and bearing in mind the
far-reaching nature of the responsibilities entrusted to
it by the Charter and the fact that the Council acts on
behalf of all Member States - respecting the limits
imposed by the Charter is more important for the
Council than for any other organ. It is for that reason
that Mexico does not recognize the validity of the
argument about the Security Council's residual,
implicit or subsidiary powers.

Sixthly, the Security Council should instead
encourage the General Assembly to codify and develop
international law whenever it believes that the legal
framework in force is inadequate to cope with threats
to international peace and security. The General
Assembly set for itself the task of negotiating the
Rome Statute, which created the International Criminal
Court, largely in order to put an end to the
establishment of ad hoc tribunals by the Security
Council. At that time, my country expressed serious
objections about the power of the Council to establish
jurisdictional bodies. However, that does not mean that
we should not recognize the extraordinary work done
by those tribunals - quite the contrary. By way of
example, as the representative of France noted this
morning, the responsibility to protect, referred to in the
2005 Summit Outcome, should be the subject of
analysis and debate in the General Assembly - and
eventually codification - instead of simply taking
refuge in the resolutions of the Security Council, as
was the case with resolution 1674 (2006).

Lastly, and more generally, we urge the Council
to more closely involve the General Assembly in its

work. A restrictive interpretation of the competency of
the Security Council on the basis of Article 12 of the
Charter is no longer appropriate. Both organs have
concurrent competencies in all matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Court, in another historic advisory opinion, clearly
established that Article 24 of the Charter confers
primary "but not necessarily exclusive" responsibility
on the Security Council in that regard.

My delegation hopes that its proposals will be
useful to the Security Council as it discharges the very
important functions that we have entrusted to it, and
that they will contribute to strengthening international
law and thereby the rule of law in its broadest sense.

Mexico and Liechtenstein have requested the
inclusion of an agenda item entitled "The rule of law
on the national and international levels" on the agenda
of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly. Our
initiative complements the debate taking place today in
the Council and seeks to strengthen the concept of the
rule of law and promote cooperation and coordination
in applying it.

