Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic):, I would like to
extend to the President and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia the appreciation of the League of
Arab States for their initiative in holding today's open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
This meeting coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
protection of civilian persons in time of war. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the leading
role played by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the International Committee
of the Red Cross as impartial and credible organizations
in applying the provisions of international humanitarian
law and providing maximum protection for defenceless
civilians who are Victims ofarmed conflict. I also thank
this morning's briefers.

Undoubtedly, the Security Council's discussion
today of this important topic, following the meeting held
last month under the German presidency on promoting
and strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security (see S/PV.8499), is a
testament of the fact that the Council is determined to
ensure that States Members of the United Nations uphold
their commitments set forth in international treaties
and legal instruments on international humanitarian
law, which they ratified without politicization or double
standards, in particular with regard to the protection
of civilians.

The ongoing current crises - mostly in Africa,
the Arab world and Asia - have led to a surge in
humanitarian needs. There are about 140 millionpersons
in dire need of humanitarian assistance, mostly owing
to armed conflict, which is three times the number 10
years ago. The problem is aggravated by a new trend
among certain warring parties and their sponsors
to not uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The successive events in Palestine,
Syria, Libya, the Sudan, Iraq, Somalia and other Arab
States are stark examples of this trend, which clearly
reveals double standards and selectivity in dealing with
situations involving refugees, displaced persons and
others affected by waves of armed conflict spreading
across the Arab world, on the one hand, or of terrorism,
on the other, which deeply affects civilians without
regard to their race, creed or religion on the other.

The attack against the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) that we witnessed during yesterday's
Security Council meeting on the Middle East with regard
to the Agency's role in providing relief to Palestinian
refugees (see S/PV.8532) is definitive proof that some
States do not respect humanitarian work. Rather, they
seek to undermine the international solidarity that
supports the exemplary work of UNRWA as it serves
5.3 million Palestinian refugees. The United States of
America has cut its funding for UNRWA and sought
to exclude the refugee issue and the issue of Jerusalem
from any final-status negotiations, while seeking to
undermine the deep-rooted international legitimacy
of the Middle East peace process, whose objective is
to bring about - through direct negotiations between
the State of Palestine and Israel, without interference
or pressure by any partial external parties - the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital and based on the 1967
borders. The League of Arab States will continue to
uphold this legitimacy through the implementation of
its resolutions adopted at the ministerial and summit
levels, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative, which is the
overarching framework of the various Arab positions
on the Palestinian question.

Any discussion on the protection of civilians must
include the protection of the defenceless Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories from
the cruelty of the Israeli occupation and settlers,
who have been shedding the blood of Palestinian
civilians especially since the incidents of Earth Day
on 30 March 2018. That has claimed the lives of more
than 400 Palestinians and injured tens of thousands
more. All of this is happening as the Security Council
has been clearly unable to act; whereas the Group of
Arab States has asked the Council to adopt a draft
resolution on establishing a clear mechanism to protect
the Palestinian people against the attacks of the Israeli
army and settlers. One permanent Council members
has even used its veto to stand against the international
collective will and portrayed Hamas and Islamic Jihad as
those responsible, and not Israel, the occupying Power,
which continues to violate the Geneva Conventions
without deterrence.

The tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly, which reconvened on 13 June 2018, adopted
resolution ES-10/20, which requested the Secretary-
General to submit a report on specific proposals for the
establishment ofa mechanism to protect the Palestinian
people. Although the Secretary-General indeed
submitted his report to both the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the Council neither discussed
it, at even a single meeting, nor sought to agree on a
mechanism for the protection of the Palestinian people
under occupation.

That failure encouraged Israel, the occupying Power,
to proceed with ending the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, which had been ongoing since
1994. That was another flagrant violation by Israel of
all its commitments on the protection of civilians in
accordance with Geneva Conventions, especially given
that the justifications for establishing the International
Presence to protect the defenceless Palestinian people
still exist, as does, moreover, the continued illegal
occupation of Palestinian territories.

The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, has a duty to robustly defend
humanitarian work based on international legal
principles. All Member States must fight against
any exploitation of humanitarian work, as well as
against manipulating or politicizing it. Humanitarian
assistance must therefore not be halted, especially for
those who cannot meet their basic needs. We must
support impartial and fair organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Red Crescent Society, as well as facilitate
their work instead of impeding and restricting it. We
must also increase humanitarian funding, particularly
for UNRWA. States must implement the commitments
they undertook under the Geneva Conventions 70 years
ago, within a framework of transparency and credibility.
Most important, there must be accountability for all
violations of international humanitarian law and the
norms and principles of the Geneva Conventions, and
above all for the international legitimacy represented
by the Council and its ability to oblige whomever dares
violate those provisions to commit to them and be held
accountable. The League of Arab States has confidence
in the ability of the Security Council to do so.

