Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): First of all, I would like to
convey our appreciation for Rwanda's presidency of the
Security Council this month and for having convened
this open debate at such a crucial point in time. At the
same time, let me also thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing.

Ukraine is deeply concerned about the deterioration
ofthe situation in the Middle East and in the Palestinian
territories, in particular. It is our strong conviction
that the solution to the question of Palestine should be
based on the full implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), as well as the Madrid Peace
Conference formula and the Oslo Accords. The lack of
progress achieved in the peace process, including on
the settlement issue, lies at the heart of the Palestinian
people's frustration. In that regard, I should emphasize
that there is no alternative to the quest for peace and to
the political solution of the crisis.

Ukraine rejects any acts of terrorism, by
whomsoever, as a means of reaching any political
goal. In our view, any violent or provocative actions by
radical elements should be halted resolutely since they
lead only to a further escalation of violence.

It is our belief that the momentum exists and that,
under the current circumstances, there is no alternative
for the parties but to overcome their differences and,
for the sake of peace, to come back to the negotiating
table. We strongly appeal to all sides to refrain from
any unilateral actions that could further aggravate the
situation or pre-empt the outcome of the final status
talks.

I would like to reiterate Ukraine's determination
to contribute further to the search for a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. In our view, such a peace
will come about only on the basis of an agreement that
ensures the Palestinian people's legitimate right to self-
determination and statehood, while, at the same time,
respecting Israel's right to peace and security.

Ukraine reaffirms its strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. We believe that the United Nations
should retain its leading role in solving the Syrian
crisis. We strongly support the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi as the Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League ofArab States for Syria.

We are convinced that the parties to the conflict
should do their utmost to bring about a sustained
cessation of armed violence in all its forms, paving the
way for a Syrian-led political transition. It is our belief
that a national dialogue that includes all strata of the
Syrian society, together with the introduction of social
and political reforms, is the only effective mechanism
to resolve the existing internal problems.

Ukraine, which fully supports the universal
principles and norms of international law, joins the calls
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
to avoid the further militarization of the conflict and to
alleviate the suffering of the innocent population. In
that regard, as stipulated by a decree of the President of
Ukraine, my country has, through the United Nations,
provided humanitarian assistance to the Syrian civilian
population, including Syrian refugees in neighbouring
countries.

As to the way forward, we strongly believe that
the Geneva communique creates all the necessary
conditions for the parties to reach a peaceful political
solution and to stop the violence.

