Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, Ijoin other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko and expressing our appreciation for his briefing
and the report (S/2015/300, annex), as well as for the
personal efforts he has tirelessly invested in carrying
out his mandate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and I will add several
remarks in my national capacity.

For Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
only a neighbouring country with which we share a
LOGO-kilometre long border; it is a country with which
we nourish friendly partnership relations and which we
consider our ally. The fact that the Croatian President,
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovie, chose Bosnia's capital
Sarajevo for her first foreign bilateral visit since taking
office in February this year tellingly confirms the
importance Croatia assigns to its relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Croatia strongly supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
stability and prosperity are of paramount importance to
us. We will continue to advocate for sustained attention
from the international community to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with a goal of achieving concrete progress
in the country's process of European integration.

Ensuring genuine equality between its three
constituent peoples is an important and necessary
element for achieving the stability and functionality
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Six months after the
elections, all authorities have finally been established
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note with satisfaction
that Croats - the numerically smallest of the three
constituent peoples in the country - finally have
a legitimate member of the Presidency and are
represented at all levels of the Government in an equal
and legitimate manner.

The last thing Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
is secessionist and inflammatory rhetoric. For that
reason, we condemn recent statements and actions
by the Republika Srpska, such as the adoption of
the declaration on free and independent Republika
Srpska, as well as the controversial interpretation
of what happened in Srebrenica 20 years ago. Such
acts are completely unacceptable. On the other hand,
Mr. Milorad Dodik's visit to Srebrenica in April could
be an encouraging harbinger in the much-needed
reconciliation process.

The twentieth anniversary of the genocide in
Srebrenica this July will be another opportunity for
all of us to honour the memory of the worst atrocity
in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
What happened in Srebrenica constitutes genocide,
as established by the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Attempts to deny it are simply
unacceptable.

We strongly believe that the steady and forward-
looking European integration process is the most
efficient and constructive way to reach the internal
consolidation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia
firmly supports the new European Union (EU) approach
towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has put the country
back on the EU agenda and provided it with a real
opportunity to achieve progress through comprehensive
and feasible reforms. We fully support the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's engagement on this
new EU initiative in the hope that it will continue to
initiate much-needed political and economic reforms.
In order to succeed, these reforms will require, besides
improved administrative capacities and lots of hard
work, consensus from all political parties.

The Croatian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mrs. Vesna Pusie, visited Sarajevo last month and
afterwards organized a ministerial working breakfast
on the margins of the EU Foreign Affairs Council
on 20 April in Luxembourg. It was an excellent
opportunity to exchange views on the preparation of
the initial reform agenda and reaffirm once again the
EU perspective on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Croatia welcomes the entry into force of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina on 1 June. This is its
first contractual relationship with the EU, providing
a structured blueprint for far-reaching political,
economic and social reforms. As far as Bosnia and
Herzegovina's advancement to NATO is concerned,
we urge the newly elected political leaders to intensify
efforts on the implementation ofthe six parties' political
agreement on the issue of military property and to work
constructively to implement the agreement in order to
start the first membership action plan cycle as soon as
possible.

We condemn the recent terrorist attack on the
police station in Zvornik and express condolences
to the family of the police officer who was killed in
the attack. We expect the competent authorities and
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina at all levels to
cooperate closely in order to prevent such incidents
in the future. Bearing this in mind, the EU military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with an executive
mandate, remains of vital importance.

We regret that the additional protocol to the EU
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina has not yet been concluded. It is
long overdue. It is therefore crucial that Bosnia and
Herzegovina re-engage in constructive discussions with
the EU in order to approve the Agreement's technical
adaptation as a matter of urgency. We also expect that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will correct its present conduct
regarding some customs-control related issues on parts
of its border with Croatia.
In conclusion, I echo my opening remarks by
stressing that Croatia fully supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina and extends to it a hand of true friendship
and partnership. Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves a
secure and prosperous future and Croatia will spare no
effort in providing its help along this challenging road.

