Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank the Russian Federation for convening this
debate. Allow me also to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for the presentation of his report (S/2013/133)
and forjoining us today. I also thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin for his important statement, and I welcome the
presence here today of Minister Bob Carr of Australia.

Our debate today offers us an opportunity to carry
out a timely, in-depth assessment in preparation for
post-2014 Afghanistan. We have commenced another
critical and historic year for Afghanistan and for the
United Nations. As we enter this new phase, we believe
that peace and stability will depend upon the ability of
the Afghan people themselves to ensure not only peace
and security, but also democratic governance, national
reconciliation, the rule of law and the protection of
human rights during the political and military transition
of 2014. In that context I would like to make the four
observations.

First, we consider it is a requirement for peace
and stability, as well as for the normalization of the
Afghan political arena, that credible, inclusive and
transparent presidential elections be held in 2014, in
strict accordance with the provisions of the Afghan
Constitution. We therefore believe that all of us should
follow closely the progress in electoral reform and
the results of the work of the Independent Election
Commission, as well as the future designation of its
head. Both the Commission as well as the Electoral
Complaints Commission should take advantage of
the ongoing deliberations with the United Nations to
continue strengthening their capacities.

Secondly, we consider that another important step in
the political process is the necessary continuation of the
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led national reconciliation.
We support the efforts of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani and
the High Peace Council of Afghanistan to pursue the
path of negotiation for a sustainable and lasting peace.
At the same time, it is important to continue sending a
clear message to political dissidents to the effect that
reconciliation dialogue will be held only with those
who renounce violence, have no links with terrorist
organizations and respect the Constitution, including
its provisions on human rights. We welcome the
constructive engagement with Pakistan, including that
conducted in a trilateral format under the auspices of
the United Kingdom, given the fact that Pakistan is an
important partner for Afghanistan and the region.
Thirdly, we commend the steady progress we have
seen in the transfer ofresponsibility for security matters,
already in its fourth stage, with 87 per cent of the
population now under Afghan security. We understand
that, under the transition, the role of the International
Security Assistance Force will evolve from the area of
combat to that of training, advising and support. In the
post-2014 period, the Afghan security forces will have
to demonstrate the degree to which they are ready to
take on alone the fight against such global problems as
terrorism, transnational organized crime and its links
to illegal drug trafficking.

Fourthly, despite gradual progress in some areas,
the human rights situation continues to be a concern
for numerous reasons. We note that while the number
of civilian casualties and injuries fell by 4 per cent over
the past year, attacks on women and girls were up by
20 per cent, coupled with the deplorable situation that
women and girls continue to face in Afghanistan. We
trust that the Afghan Government will take concrete
measures to protect and guarantee their rights, and we
fully support all United Nations efforts in that area. We
commend the thematic reports from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on
violence against women, the situation of detainees and
the issue of the protection of civilians. They have had
an impact on the Government, which is already taking
steps to respond to the findings and recommendations
of the report on the situation of detainees.

Turning now to the development of regional
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours, we
support the Istanbul Process. We are encouraged by the
recent meeting in Baku, which endorsed implementation
plans for confidence-building measures. We also
commend the shared vision of Afghanistan, Pakistan
and Iran aimed at finding strategic solutions for Afghan
refugees.

Concerning UNAMA's mandate, Guatemala
supports its renewal for 12 months. For the transition
to be truly effective and irreversible, Afghanistan's
institutions must be strong and capable. We believe
that the United Nations in general, and UNAMA in
particular, have an important role to play in the civilian
aspects of the transition. There is reason to maintain a
strong, decentralized presence throughout the country
beyond 2014. We agree with the priorities identified
in paragraph 66 of the Secretary-General's report. At
the same time, we are responsible for ensuring that
UNAMA has the resources necessary for providing the
required support.

In conclusion, we believe that the United Nations
has the multilateral experience, the capacity for
coordination and the impartiality needed to meet the
challenges and requirements of the transformation
decade beyond 2014. We encourage everyone to pursue
their Tokyo commitments and not to abandon the goals
of the existing partnership between the international
community and Afghanistan. We cannot lose sight of
the broader picture when we know how much there is
still to do. In the Security Council, Guatemala will act
not only on the basis of its support for Afghanistan's
leadership and ownership of the transition process, but
also on the Council's primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.

