Mr. Berger (Germany): Germany offers its
condolences to the people of Turkey on the loss of
lives resulting from the massive earthquake on Sunday,
and to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the passing of
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

Let me mention also that Germany obviously
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the European Union.

After a long period of standstill in the Middle
East peace process, there is reason to hope that the
stalemate might be broken by preparatory meetings of
the Quartet with the parties on 26 October. As specified
by the Quartet, a first step would be to agree on an
agenda and method of proceeding in the negotiations.
After that, the parties will have to take the next step, to
come forward with comprehensive proposals on
territory and security.

As the Quartet also said in its statement, meetings
in themselves will establish the trust needed for
successful negotiations. And trust is key in order to
return to negotiations.

In this respect, we are extremely worried about
the recent Israeli steps to expand settlement activity.
The decision to advance the planning process on
thousands of additional housing units in the settlement
of Gilo and Givat Hamatos and plans to legalize illegal
outposts within Israeli law undermine the trust that is
needed for negotiations. They are not compatible with
Road Map obligations and run counter to current
Quartet efforts.

We have called on the Government of Israel to
dispel any doubts about its interest in serious
negotiations. The imperative of trust should also be
taken into consideration when looking at the
Palestinian application for United Nations membership.
We are mindful of the responsibility entrusted to us in
the Committee on the Admission of New Members.

Let me very clear on this: Germany supports the
establishment of a Palestinian State. As a matter of
course, such a State will become a Member of the
United Nations. But it is also our responsibility in the
Council to give the Quartet's current efforts and
actions the chance to bear fruit. There is no viable
alternative to the resumption of negotiations. The two-
State solution can be achieved only through a peace
agreement between the parties. We want to see the
State of Israel and a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.

Germany acknowledges the remarkable progress
made by the Palestinian Authority in building the
institutions of the future State of Palestine. In their
reports, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the United Nations have clearly stated that
the Palestinian Authority has crossed the threshold
towards being a functioning State in key sectors. We
commend the Palestinian Authority for demonstrating
this capability. Now the political process must catch up
with the progress made in State-building on the
ground.

Germany is relieved at the release of Staff
Sergeant Gilad Shalit. We hope that his release and the
related exchange of prisoners will give new momentum
to the Middle East peace process. In that regard, we
believe that now is the time to fully implement
resolution 1860 (2009), which calls for the
unconditional opening of crossings for goods and
people to and from Gaza, thereby preventing the illicit
trafficking of arms and ammunition.

Let me now turn briefly to the issue of Lebanon.
It is with great sadness that we heard that Judge
Antonio Cassese, the first President of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, passed away last Friday. The
loss of that eminent scholar will undoubtedly affect all
those who seek accountability and justice. In that
context, we would like to recall the statement made by

His Excellency Najib Mikati, Prime Minister of
Lebanon, before the Council, when he reiterated
Lebanon's commitment to all its international
obligations, including those relating to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon.

In early 2011, Tunisians courageously stood up
against an autocratic regime that had repressed them
for decades. Nine months later, free elections are
taking place in Tunisia, for the first time since it gained
independence. Ninety per cent of those who registered
for elections have cast their ballot. That is an
impressive number. Peaceful, free and fair elections
provide an important role model for countries where
the Arab Spring has already made inroads and offer
tremendous encouragement where people take to the
streets seeking to live a better life in freedom and
dignity. Germany will continue to actively support
Tunisia through its transformation partnership.

Let me turn now to the question of Syria. On
40ctober, two permanent members of the Council
vetoed a draft resolution on the situation in Syria that
condemned human rights violations, demanded an end
to the violence and called for an inclusive, Syrian-led
political process. The days that have passed since that
vote have shown that the strategy advocated by some
to give the Syrian regime more time has failed. Those
who delayed Council action with reference to their
bilateral efforts have not delivered. On the contrary:
the situation has further deteriorated. In a statement
made on 14 October, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, voiced
her disappointment at the inaction of the Council. She
reminded the members of the international community
to take protective action in a collective and decisive
manner before the continual ruthless repression and
killings drove the country into a full-blown civil war.

Indifferent spectatorship is not an option. We still
think that the Council should send a strong message in
the form of a resolution. However, we are not going to
accept any equidistant approach that suggests that the
opposition could be as responsible for the violence as
is the Government. Only the Syrian people can decide
on the future of their country, and we therefore
welcome the various efforts undertaken by the Syrian
opposition to peacefully build a political platform. In
that respect, we note the creation of the Syrian
National Council as a positive step forward.

We also welcome the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States to convince Damascus to enter
into a meaningful dialogue with the opposition. The
Arab League has set a clear timeline for such a
dialogue. But it is clear that dialogue has to include all
of the opposition and that there can be no meaningful
dialogue as long as repression and killings of
demonstrators continue.

