Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General;
His Excellency Mr. Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States; and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
member of The Elders, for their detailed briefings.

The fiftieth anniversary of Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory on the West Bank of the Jordan
River and the Gaza Strip occurs at a time of turbulent
transformation of the Middle East and North Africa.
Russia condemns terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations. We are outraged and express our
condolences to all who have fallen victim to such
heinous crimes.

With the rise of international terrorism to the
centre stage of global affairs as the main threat, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been unfairly pushed
into the background. In that adverse context, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues to deepen. The
two-State prospect is waning. Rather than addressing
it, destabilizing factors fraught with risk of escalation
have only worsened. They now loom large over Gaza.
The absence of a political horizon is due to a chronic
stalemate in the peace process. It has reinforced a sense
of despair for the average person, first and foremost in
Palestine. As a consequence, radicals have been given
additional room for manoeuvre.

Russia's position on the Middle East conflict has
remained guided by principle and consistency. We
firmly believe that a just solution to the Palestinian
problem is of key importance for improving the
situation in the entire region. If not solved, the ongoing
conflict between Israel and Palestine will continue
to taint international affairs, frustrate efforts to
settle other regional crises and fuel terrorism. In that
regard, we advocate a comprehensive, fair and lasting
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on the basis
of international law. That includes Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which was
just affirmed by His Excellency Mr. Aboul-Gheit.

We are sure that a lasting solution to the conflict
can be found through direct talks between sides,
without preconditions. Such talks should lead to an end
to Israel's occupation of Arab land that began in 1967.
They should lead to the creation of an independent,
viable Palestinian State with contiguous borders,
existing side by side in peace with Israel, within safe
and recognized borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital and West Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.
We see no alternative to the two-State solution. We
believe that it is the only realistic manner in which to
halt the face-off between Israel and Palestine and the
claims they levy against each another. We call upon
Palestinians and Israelis to refrain from using violence
and unilateral actions that might skew the outcome
of the peace process. That pertains to the building of
Israeli settlements on occupied Palnestinian territory.
We are sure that, more than ever today, there is a need
to take practical steps to break the dangerous deadlock
in the peace process.

To that end, we continue to make efforts to bring
about the resumption of direct political dialogue
between Palestinians and Israelis, bilaterally and in
other formats. Our initiative to convene a meeting
between President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu in Moscow remains on the table. We would
like to see a speedy resumption of activity from the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators. Let us
not forget about the issue of inter-Palestinian divisions.
Regrettably, such divisions are also at their lO-year
mark. Effectively overcoming divisions on the basis
of the political platform of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative is in line
with the national interests of all Palestinians and will
serve to improve the situation in Gaza and create a
sound basis for the success ofa future political process.

Russia is making its contribution to reinstating
Palestinian unity and notes the efforts of other States,
in particular the Arab Republic of Egypt.

We would like to call the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the destabilization of the
situation in the Middle East and North Africa has a
most serious impact on the Christians living there and
on other religious and ethnic minorities. Extremists
draw upon ethnic and religious factors to incite hatred
and fill their own ranks. Russia continues its efforts
to curb attacks on Christians and other minorities, as
well as to prevent the fragmentation of civilizations
and religions. That is the very lens through which we
should consider the joint statement of February last
year issued by Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and all Rus'
and Pope Francis in Havana. It was an appeal to take
swift steps to halt the mass exodus of Christians from
Middle Eastern countries. That was also the goal of the
7 April Tashkent joint statement issued by the Foreign
Ministers of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
with regard to the inadmissibility of discrimination and

intolerance against Christians, Muslims and membersof
other religions.

History has many nuances but one thing remains
clear. We established the Security Council to bring
Member States together, not divide them. Today's
review of the situation in the Middle East underscores an
indisputable fact - resolving the numerous problems,
new and old, in this long-suffering region is possible
only through political and diplomatic means and
collective efforts. A choice must be made for dialogue
and engagement, rather than isolation and animosity.
We think that pooling cooperation between the Security
Council and the League of Arab States would serve this
cause. The joint meeting between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States in Cairo in May 2016
created a necessary foundation for these endeavours.
However, we must realize that the situation in the
Middle East can be improved only with the formation of
a broad front of States working to suppress the terrorist
threat. Today the relevant initiative - presented by the
President of Russia, Mr. Vladimir Putin, to the General
Assembly in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.13) - is
gaining even more relevance. Russia stands ready to
engage in collective work, and it is in constant contact
with all States of the region.

