Mr. Menkerios: The day before yesterday, on
7 February, the final results of the Southern Sudan self-
determination referendum were officially announced
by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. Out
of almost 4 million Southern Sudanese registered,
97.58 per cent voted in a process that has been

unanimously described by all observers - national,
regional and international, and the Panel of the
Secretary-General included - as free, fair and

credible. An overwhelming majority of voters - that,
is 98.83 per cent - voted for secession.

On the day of the announcement of these results
by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission,
2

President Omar Al-Bashir signed a decree confirming
his Government's acceptance of these results as the
legitimate expression of the will of the people of
Southern Sudan, this confirming the Government of the
Sudan's readiness to recognize the formation of an
independent South Sudan at the end of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) period on
9 July 2011. In my most recent briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.6468), I reiterated the role played by
President Al-Bashir, who, one week before the
referendum, made a historic visit to Juba, which
completely changed the atmosphere and contributed to
making the referendum process very peaceful and
orderly.

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the historical significance of these events. Against the
odds, not only did the national Government of the
Sudan contribute to the successful holding of the
Southern Sudan self-determination referendum, but
President Al-Bashir and the National Congress Party
have now formally recognized the validity and
legitimacy of its outcome. In doing so, they have most
likely ended, once and for all, one of Africa's most
protracted and deadliest conflicts. Indeed, 7 February
2011 will have to be remembered and celebrated in the
Sudan's and Africa's history as a day when the longest
running civil war in the continent's recent history came
to a definitive end, when the spirit of peace and
cooperation prevailed over the spirit of war.

This same spirit has also helped the CPA parties
to make significant progress, in negotiations facilitated
by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
(AUHIP) chaired by President Mbeki, on a wide range
of post-referendum arrangements between their two
States. I applaud the leadership shown by Presidents
Mbeki, Buyoya and Abu-Bakr for their stewardship of
this important process.

Much of the groundwork has already been
completed. Both parties are engaging seriously and
making progress. A number of principles have been
agreed with respect to open borders, good-neighbourly
relations, non-interference in the affairs of the other
and recognition of economic interdependence. In the
area of security, the two parties have now defined a
broad framework for non-aggression and military
cooperation, and have decided to establish joint
mechanisms to manage their security relations,
including at their common border.
11-22913

The parties have also agreed on the broad outline
of citizenship arrangements, including rights of travel,
residency, property ownership and employment, as
well as protection against forced deportation or
relocation for each other's citizens. In the economic
and oil cluster, the parties are working towards
mutually beneficial arrangements on oil revenue-
sharing and a range of bilateral economic relations. I
hope that the good will generated by the referendum
will translate into increased momentum and the
finalization soon of an agreement between the two CPA
partners on all these and other post-referendum
arrangements.

I would also like to commend the parties for their
efforts to prevent and contain violence in Abyei,
including the agreements reached in Kadugli on 1 and
17 January, and their recent commitment to resolving
Abyei's status by the end of March. Both President
Bashir and First Vice-President Kiir have reiterated
their intent to address the local communities' concerns
and facilitate a peaceful migration, while opposing any
unilateral action in Abyei. At the parties' request, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
facilitated the transport of nearly 1,280 additional joint
integrated unit troops to an assembly point within the
Abyei Area, and the Joint Defense Board has agreed on
locations for their final deployment. I was told this
morning, shortly before I came to the Security Council,
that the deployment of those troops to their various
locations started yesterday.

As soon as the joint integrated units are fully
deployed to their designated posts in the Area, the
Abyei Administration has agreed to withdraw the
controversial Abyei police units from the field into
Abyei town, thus allowing the seasonal Misseriya
migration to commence, and the Misseriya have agreed
to remove roadblocks currently preventing traffic from
entering southern Abyei from the North.

Serious challenges remain, however. For the
moment, those roadblocks continue to choke off the
flow of food and other supplies into Abyei town.
Despite the tireless efforts of UNMIS to support
improved inter-tribal relations, tensions in the area
continue. Given the delicacy of the current
environment, I urge the parties to redouble their efforts
to keep the peace on the ground, while taking
advantage of the political momentum they have built in
other areas to conclusively address the deeper issues
driving the conflict in Abyei.
11-22913

While incidents that took place in Abyei and
Unity and Western Equatoria states cannot be
downplayed, the security environment in the UNMIS
area of operation was generally good during the
referendum period. In Southern Sudan, progress is
continuing on the integration of the forces which had
rebelled against the Government of Southern Sudan
following the April 2010 elections, and which had
subsequently been granted amnesty. The fighting that
occurred between members of the Sudanese Armed
Forces joint integrated units between 3 and 5 February
in Malakal and its vicinity, which caused up to 50
casualties among those units and civilians, was a
reminder, however, of how fragile the security situation
in Southern Sudan remains. It was easily destabilized
by the attempt for a rushed dissolution of the joint
integrated units, and I would like to urge the parties to
remain cautious, to continue working together and,
where appropriate, to utilize UNMIS in implementing
decisions related to the termination of joint CPA
institutions, such as the dissolution of the joint
integrated units.

I would also like to welcome the conclusion of
the popular consultation hearings in Blue Nile state.
Issues such as power- and wealth-sharing, the future of
Sudan People's Liberation Army members from the
North, land allocation and cultural identity have been
raised during the consultations and will need to be on
the agenda of the discussions with the national
Government. Popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan are now expected to commence after the
elections scheduled for May. Voter registration in
Southern Kordofan started on 24 January and is
expected to last three weeks.

I mentioned in my last briefing that the impact of
the popular consultation process will be limited unless
it is matched by an accommodating national
dispensation. It is significant to note that since that
time, the National Congress Party has promised not
only to widen the base of the national Government, but
also to start broad consultations over the future
constitution of Northern Sudan. While the Northern
opposition is asking to discuss the basis on which this
broadening would unfold, such a political opening is
definitely welcome, and UNMIS stands ready to
support, in collusion with partners - particularly the
AUHIP, which has the mandate to facilitate such a
process - any political process that would permit the
consolidation of the democratic gains made during the
3
CPA, which are essential to the continued stability of
Northern Sudan.

The process for considering the United Nations
future presence and possible role in Northern and
Southern Sudan, and between the North and the South,
has now started. For the South, the Government of
Southern Sudan has indicated that it would welcome
United Nations engagement in support of peace
consolidation, capacity-building of the new State's
institutions, and border management. A technical
assessment of those needs will start very shortly this
month. For the North, we are currently discussing with
the authorities the areas in which they seek future
United Nations cooperation. Possible United Nations
or other third-party engagement in the implementation
of post-referendum arrangements that the two States may
agree upon - such as Abyei, the border, et cetera -
are on the agenda of the current ongoing talks between
the two parties. We shall keep the Council regularly
informed of the decisions made by the parties on those
issues.

The Sudan has given us an example of how the
spirit of peace can overcome decades of war. The
National Congress Party and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement and their leaders - President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir and Salva Kiir Mayardit -
deserve to be commended for that achievement, which
will need to be built upon. Both North and South must
now strive to consolidate peace and deliver on their
promises to their people - promises to ensure
effective and accountable democratic governance, to
drive economic development and provide social
services, to nurture their social and cultural diversity,
to protect sustainably democratic rights and freedoms
and to cooperate closely as neighbours in the pursuit of
all those goals. In a sense, their work has only just
begun, as has the work to effectively support them.

I encourage both Northern and Southern
Sudanese leaders to maintain the spirit generated by
the successful conclusion of the referendum in tackling
the tasks ahead. This is a new and historic moment for
the Sudan, a new dawn that, if built upon, can lead to
sustainable peace and progress in the Sudan and
contribute to the same in the immediate region and
throughout the continent.

