Ms. Coelho Da Cruz (Angola): Allow me first of all
to express our profound appreciation to Namibia, a friendly
neighbouring country, for having chosen to hold a second
debate on the situation of children in armed conflict. We
are sure, Sir, that under your leadership today's debate will
have a successful outcome.

Although the topic under discussion is a sad one, it
is with great pleasure that Angola is participating in this
debate. We hope that with our modest input we can shed
some light on the issue of children and armed conflict and
help find a solution that will bring about sustainable relief
of the situation, something which the international
community has been expecting for a long time.

We praise the efforts made so far by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in monitoring the
implementation of the recommendations of Ms. Graca
Machel's report. The Republic of Angola reiterates its
willingness to cooperate with Mr. Olara Otunnu in every
way that is necessary.

As members certainly know, Angola is one of the
many countries that has been facing this kind of problem
for several years. Efforts made by the Government to
protect the children caught in this vicious circle and to
alleviate their suffering have been consistently hindered
by the actions of armed bandits who continue to pursue
the war as a means of reaching their goals.

As Ms. Machel pointed out in her report, armed
conflicts without any doubt affect major developmental
factors in children, particularly physical, mental and
emotional factors. Aware of this reality, the Angolan
Government, in spite of the other challenges it faces, has
spared no effort to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the institutions that provide assistance to
children as well as to war victims in general. Every year
the Government allocates a special budget for social
development and reintegration services and for the
Children's National Institute to support specific projects
related to the placement of war orphans with members of
their own families; building shelters and temporary
lodging facilities to shelter those children whose families
may take longer to find; building schools and health
centres in areas created for the temporary accommodation
of displaced people; providing food safety; providing
funds for the national non- governmental organizations that
care for those child victims of the war who suffer from
trauma and other psychological problems; manufacturing
prosthetic limbs; and sending child Victims of anti-
personnel landmines and other explosives to other
countries for treatment, in cooperation with international
non-govemmental organizations.
The National Children's Institute was established in
1994 specifically to address the problems of the
protection of children and their integration into Angolan
society. This institution has headquarters in Luanda and

 

offices throughout the country. With the support of various
United Nations agencies, including the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations
Development Programme, the Institute, together with a
number of national and international non-governmental
organizations, has carried out an effective, sustained effort
to collect data and identify and resettle Angolan child
victims of the war, specifically war orphans and street
children. To date, approximately 30,000 children have been
received in appropriate centres; more than half of them
have been sent back to live with their relatives.

Unfortunately, owing to the lack of appropriate
resources, this Government effort is far from meeting the
projected needs. We recognize the valuable support given
by the United Nations agencies I have mentioned and by
the international community, but the difficult new situation
that our country is facing has had an impact on its
priorities, and some projects that had already seen
considerable progress have suffered setbacks returning them
to the level of the earliest stages.

We refer, for instance, to the area of landmine
clearance. Mines have caused so many victims among
defenceless women and children. In 1997, the national
agency in charge of the removal of anti-personnel
landmines and other explosives reported that about 20 per
cent of all landmines estimated to exist throughout the
country had been cleared. Today, we would not be in error
to say that the same number of mines have been laid again.

These and other national issues, plus the
recommendations of the Machel report, make our
Government think, and make it reiterate its determination,
whenever possible, not to wait for peace to come to resume
its development efforts. The ongoing implementation of the
programme of stabilization and economic recovery for the
three-year period 1998 to 2000, endorsed by the
International Monetary Fund, is an example of this.

The Government of Angola fully subscribes to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols, as
well as to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child, which set out principles and standards for the
protection and empowerment of children. Nevertheless, as
some delegations have already stated, the situation of
children affected by armed conflicts has many important
aspects and it would be too ambitious to try to address all
of them extensively in today's debate.

Currently, the problem of children and armed
conflict is deteriorating as the increasingly serious
humanitarian crisis reaches tragic proportions. In this
context, we would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the multifaceted aid we have received
so far from the United Nations agencies and from a
number of friendly countries which, although insufficient,
has helped meet the needs of those communities that have
fallen victim to the war.

We hope that, in view of the latest appeals made by
our Government and by the United Nations system,
contributions to the 1999 United Nations Consolidated
Appeal for Angola can be increased as quickly as
possible, financially and in kind, in order to enable the
agencies to address effectively the plight of internally
displaced persons, children in particular.

Let me conclude by expressing the support of my
delegation for the draft resolution to be adopted at the end
of this meeting as a commitment of the international
community to assisting the cause of the children around
the world affected by armed conflict.

