We endorse the statement submitted by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) (annex 19). A global epidemic has dramatically changed daily life. The impact of the coronavirus disease requires from us a dynamic, coordinated and effective response based on complementarity, cooperation and solidarity. The long-desired right of humankind to live in peace and security, with justice and freedom, which is the basis of coexistence among nations, is constantly threatened. We reiterate our deep concern about its impact on the countries of the Middle East, and we call for the avoidance of any action that could lead to the further deterioration of stability and security in that region, in particular for the Palestinian people, whose situation is increasingly worsening. Israel continues its occupation of the Palestinian territory, its policies of annexation, the increase in illegal settlement practices and measures, including the construction and expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, punitive demolitions, the seizure of property from Palestinian institutions, the forced displacement of hundreds of civilians and the blockade on the Gaza Strip. We call for a just solution to the conflict in the Middle East, which requires the genuine exercise of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to establish their own State within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. That entails responsible action by the United States and an end to impunity for Israel's crimes and its policy of annexation. We condemn Israel's attempts to annex new territories in the West Bank, which constitutes a threat to the future of the Palestinian State after many years of negotiation, in clear violation of international law and human rights. We once again call on the Security Council to shoulder the responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations and to demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all its settlement policies and practices. It is worrying that recently no measures have been taken to put an end to the Israeli military aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016) adopted by the Council, which remains silent while Israel consolidates its policy of expansion of illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and threatens to annex the Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We deplore the precarious situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East as a result of the withdrawal of United States financial support. We express our continued solidarity with the Government and the people of Palestine and support for the State of Palestine to be admitted as a full Member of the United Nations. The aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions of the United States in the Middle East severely violate the legitimate interests of the Arab and Islamic nations and result in a dangerous escalation in the region. We reiterate our opposition to the so-called deal of the century drawn up by the current United States Administration, ignoring the two-State solution, which has the historic backing of the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other international actors. The unilateral action of the United States Government in recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establishing its diplomatic representation in that city, disregarding its historical status, and the decision to recognize Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan constitute flagrant violations of the United Nations Charter, international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We once again call for Israel's total and unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and all occupied Arab territories. We reaffirm our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran and our rejection of the United States withdrawal from the agreement, its attempts to disregard the validity of resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed the Plan, the reimposition of unilateral sanctions and the military threat against the Islamic Republic of Iran. We support the pursuit of a peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation inflicted on Syria without external interference and with full respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the United States sanctions and the implementation of the Caesar Act, which are obstacles to the reconstruction of that country after nine years of war - an undertaking that is made even more difficult given the complex situation of the coronavirus disease. Such measures constitute a serious and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the human rights of the Syrian people. It is unacceptable that some countries suffer from the application of arbitrary unilateral coercive measures, in violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. We call for an immediate end, without political constraints, to the illegal unilateral measures imposed against sovereign States, which, in addition to their ongoing impact on the affected countries, make it difficult to deal with the pandemic. In that complex context, the United States is pursuing a foreign policy aimed at undermining multilateralism and fuelling and promoting conflicts, divisions, chauvinism and supremacist and racist positions, ignoring the call to join forces in combating the pandemic and withdrawing from the World Health Organization. We support the urgent call of the Secretary-General to end armed conflict, hostilities and the scourge of war and instead create opportunities for diplomacy and cooperation. All wars, including unconventional warfare and low-impact claims, must cease. For Cuba, the promotion of the right to peace remains a key priority. It is the duty of all States, in particular the members of the Security Council, to uphold multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and their political independence, unity and territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in international relations.
