Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. Geir Pedersen for their briefings. Today we are once again discussing the situation in Syria in the Security Council. We discussed it twicein one day alone, on 29 January (see S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708), we discussed it yesterday and there are two more meetings scheduled for 19 and 27 February. There are regular meetings, as well as unplanned meetings such as today. The unplanned meetings now have a common pattern. By some strange coincidence, they are organized when the terrorists in the Syrian Arab Republic are under threat, and the Syrian Government is regaining control over its national territory. Those terrorists, I recall, are recognized as such by the Security Council. We are talking about the sovereign territory of Syria and about terrorist fighters, and fighting them is the right and duty of the Government of any country to combat terrorists. From December 2019 to January 2020, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists seized the Idlib de-escalation zone and intensified their raids. At the end of last year, more than 1,400 attacks were recorded, in which those fighters used tanks, machine guns, mortars and artillery fire. Over the past 24 hours, there have been 31 incidents of open fire in Latakia, Idlib and Hama governorates. All that data is available on the website of the Russian Ministry of Defence. We regularly disseminate relevant bulletins, but some colleagues do not seem to be interested. After all, we are talking about Syrians who are in Damascus-controlled territory. Some of our colleagues think that those are not the right Syrians. The information provided by the Permanent Mission of Syria to the United Nations, which regularly reports about civilian victims, is also not of interest. However, I would like to take this opportunity to bridge the gaps in my colleagues' remarks, as well as in the United Nations reports. In December 2019 and early January 2020, 42 civilians were killed, among them were five children, and 92 people were injured, including 30 children. That mainly occurred in the Aleppo governorate. More than 1,000 attacks were reported in the first two weeks of January. The number of civilians and Syrian military personnel killed or injured has already climbed into the hundreds. No attention is paid to recent instances of terrorist destruction of civilian infrastructure in the vicinity of Homs. Material damage was caused to Syria's oil and gas complex. Instead of bragging about the politicization of the post-conflict reconstruction of a country, it would be better to lift sanctions and return control of the oilfields to Syrians, not plunder the Syrian national treasure under the pretext of protecting it. That would make a real contribution to improving the humanitarian situation of Syrians. The United States Secretary of State, Mr. Pompeo, in his press statement of 4 February said: (spoke in English) "The United States once again condemns the continued, unjustifiable and ruthless assaults on the people of Idlib by the Assad regime, Russia, Iran and Hizbullah." (spoke in Russian) He does not say "people in Idlib", but "people of Idlib". Idlib is not a country, but rather a Syrian governorate, which does not have citizens of Idlib but rather Syrian citizens who have been taken hostage by the terrorists running rampant. The Secretary of State also referred to barbaric attacks in Idlib, which is something we will return to later. In the course of the counter-terrorist operation by the Syrian army, more than 4,000 fighters were killed, and 17 tanks, mortars and technicals were destroyed. In that regard, it is bewildering that some Western countries want to present terrorist groups in Idlib as the moderate opposition. Observations that perhaps Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is not so bad, or does not really pose a threat, are something that we have been recently hearing with greater frequency, and these observations are made by official representatives of certain countries that called for today's meeting. We also have questions about calls for a national ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), even though paragraph 8 of the resolution directly states that there is a need to combat terrorism, a point to which we will also return. Unfortunately, there has been a tragic recent loss of Russian and Turkish military personnel. Armed drone attacks on the Russian air base at Khmeimim continue. That once again speaks to the unacceptable rise of the fighters in the Idlib area, who enjoy complete impunity. Given the escalation of the situation, we are continuing to cooperate with Turkey to achieve de-confliction and an easing of tensions. There are relevant exchanges between the Presidents, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and political and military agencies. We will continue such interaction and we will not allow anyone to sow discord. The same is true of cooperation within the Astana format, in which we areworking together with Turkey and Iran to promote the political process. We would like to make it clear that that the Russian Federation is firmly committed to the norms of international humanitarian law. All the targets of the Russian military are selected after careful analysis, with airborne surveillance tools and available ground information. Military actions are proportional and discriminate in nature, which is clear given the small number of targets affected out of the total number of ground targets in the area of operation. I would also like to notify the Council that terrorists deliberately turn to civilian objects, including hospitals and schools, using the guise of their protected status, into their combat positions, thereby violating the Geneva Conventions. The latest such example is the terrorist seizure of the Idlib central hospital on 29 January, which was announced by the press release issued by the non-governmental agency serving that hospital. I would remind those who speak of barbarity about the results of their operations in Raqqa, Mosul, Hajin and Al-Baghuz Fawqani. Thankfully, relevant information has been published by the United Nations. As a reminder, before the operation, there were more than half a million people in Mosul, which was captured by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Between 7,000 and 10,000 of them were killed in air strikes. Dozens of thousands were injured. According to the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements Programme, which assessed the housing conditions immediately after the operation, air strikes and artillery fire destroyed over 90 per cent of all residential buildings in eastern Mosul - 90 per cent. That is an example of the selectivity that is being preached to us today, or will colleagues try to prove that all of Mosul's hospitals, clinics and educational facilities were in the remaining 10 per cent - and therefore untouched? How many public Council meetings on this topic or press conferences have been held on that, by the way? Do not bother to check - there were none, and there were no United Nations commissions of inquiry into that either. Perhaps the operation in Raqqa was conducted differently, but the mortars were used only to target the "bad guys", so the civilian infrastructure was left untouched? No, the city was razed to the ground. Let us ask the humanitarians who entered Raqqa immediately after the coalition forces how many working clinics remained in the city once the operation was over? The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs answered that question in its reports - there were no such clinics. Medical facilities would have to be rebuilt from scratch. How many civilians died there or were left under the rubble? We were told back then that it had been necessary to combat terrorists. We do not recall any calls for a nationwide ceasefire or cessation of hostilities or truce. On the topic of geography, I should like to teach the Council a geography lesson. Before the beginning of the operation in 2016, the population of Raqqa was 229,000, approximately half the population of Edinburgh. Following the conclusion of the operation, in October 2017, the population was 3,000 people, and, at the end of 2018, it was 165,000. Where did 55,000 inhabitants of Raqqa go? Does anyone believe they all ran away? I think they are wrong. We could also take a closer look at the activities of the coalition forces in Afghanistan or in Somalia. In general, there would seem to be an unlimited number of opportunities for the Security Council to hold its meetings and for the humanitarian penholders to direct their energy. However, so long as no action is taken with respect to those numerous instances, and those who allowed them to occur live by the Orwellian precept that all are all equal under the law but some are more equal than others, any criticism directed against Syria and Russia is a mere farce. Moreover, this farce is based on nothing but dubious posts on social media, reports of unidentified observers on the ground and - the best in this category - some mysterious radio buffs who intercept encoded radio exchanges between pilots and air bases, apparently by means of kitchen radio receivers. This article has been refuted by the Russian Defence Ministry. We read it and we could not help being surprised by the ignorance of such reports. There is, however, one more thing that grieves us the most. While pursuing the goal of stopping the offensive of the Government forces against the terrorists, the initiators of this cynical campaign forgot the most important thing - international humanitarian law was created by humankind as a means of peace, rather than a tool of war and military propaganda.
