Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and in particular its
President Hugo Chavez Frias, has been a major player
in the quest for peace in Colombia. Through his
activities in the area of peace, he has been responsible
for the only release of prisoners held by armed groups,
for which he has been widely recognized by the
international community. The Government of President
Hugo Chavez Frias has worked for peace in Colombia,
a country that has suffered from a terrible internal war
for more than 60 years. That internal war has affected
not just Venezuela, but also various other neighbours of
Colombia.

In the specific case of Venezuela, thousands and
thousands of Colombians have come to our country. It
is estimated that approximately 4 million have left
Colombia for Venezuela and received help and
protection from the Government of Venezuela, and
benefit fully from our social programmes. Thus, the
Government of Venezuela has a major interest in
seeing the conflict in Colombia come to an end.

However, the Government of Colombia, far from
seeking mechanisms for political dialogue in order to
put an end to the terrible massacres and political
violence, only foments further war and violence. That
is clear from the fact that, far from seeking political
dialogue as called for by the international community,
it is instead fomenting and expanding war to other
countries of the continent. That was clearly
demonstrated by its invasion of the brotherly nation of
Ecuador, which was condemned by the Rio Group at its
meeting in Santo Domingo, leading President Uribe
Velez to ask forgiveness of the heads of State gathered
at that meeting.

However, the Colombian Government, far from
seeking peaceful relations with the other countries on
the continent, insists on having recourse to violence
and broadening the conflict, which has gone on for so
long. Thus, he has concluded a political and military
agreement with the Government of the United States
that virtually converts Colombia into a mechanism for
extending war into the whole continent and
subordinates Colombia to the United States policy of
aggression against the countries of the continent.

That is why the countries of South America,
meeting in Bariloche, Argentina, declared their deep
concern at the establishment of seven United States
military bases in Colombia. The warlike intentions of
President Uribe's Government have been confirmed by
documentation available to all, issued by the United
States Departments of State and Defense, and by
numerous official reports of the United States
Government. These clearly establish that the United
States military bases in Colombia will be used to
monitor and control not just Colombia but the entire
South American continent.

I would also like to refer to the unfounded
statements made by the representative of Colombia at
this meeting. Drug trafficking in Colombia is an
endemic evil, and I would like to state here in a
responsible manner that drug trafficking and its effects
on Colombia and the world have not decreased but
have actually increased significantly. The policy of
democratic security has totally failed; it has instead
intensified the war and prevented Colombia from
working with other countries of the continent to fight
both terrorism and drug trafficking.

The best demonstration that military bases are not
being established in Colombia to fight terrorism or
drug trafficking is the statement made by former
President Ernesto Samper of Colombia, who has said
that this rationale is false and that, on the contrary, the
purpose is to convert the Colombian army into a
military tool for bellicose expansion throughout the
continent.

In the matter of the arms found in the possession
of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, those
were seized as a result of a military action that was
carried out against the armed forces of Venezuela,
when armed groups from Colombia seized arms that
had been fully deactivated. Those weapons are now
being presented as if they had come form Venezuela,
which is a terrible falsehood and manipulation of
historical fact. The Government of Venezuela would
like to assert that we are in favour of peace, and calls
on the Government of Colombia to cease its
expansionist warlike policies and its transformation
into a tool for spreading violence and war into
neighbouring countries.

Venezuela loves peace. Venezuela and its
Government are always interested in contributing to a
peaceful solution to regional conflicts. Venezuela and
its Government have the highest interest in the
achievement of peace in Colombia, because peace in
Colombia means peace in Venezuela, and because
Venezuela is the country that has suffered most from
the effects of the terrible war that the Government of
Colombia is perpetuating and which the Government of
Venezuela would like to help resolve peacefully. That
is why, on the occasions when President Chavez has
acted as facilitator in seeking alternative means to
peace, he has done so at the special request of the
Government of Colombia.

