Mr. Prosor (Israel): One year ago, last July,
we witnessed the horrific scene of a civilian aircraft
blown out of the skies over Ukraine. The lives of 283
passengers and 15 crew members were shattered in an
instant, but the pain of their families continues to this
day. Among those killed were 80 children, 80 precious
girls and boys who lost their lives in one tragic moment.

As a representative of one of the grieving nations,
I join with my colleagues to remember those we
lost on Flight MH-17, to declare our support for the
investigation and to insist that those responsible be
held to account. The downing of this civilian aircraft
was not simply a tragedy, it was a deliberate attack. The
attack was an attempt to disrupt the law and order of the
skies and to instil fear in those who use air travel.

Tragically, we in Israel are all too familiar with
attempts to use violence to paralyse our lives and our
routines. We have learned from this painful experience
that if we do not take steps to deter future attacks, the
consequences can be dreadful.

On that difficult day one year ago, 298 people were
killed as they made their way through the skies. The
passengers on the fated flight spoke different languages,
had different destinations and different plans, but they
all shared one thing in common: they were all innocent
people going about their daily lives.

One of the passengers on board was Itamar Avnon,
a 27-year-old Israeli citizen. Itamar was on his way
back to Australia, where he was a second-year business
student at Swinburne University in Melbourne. Itamar
had returned to Israel for the wedding ofa friend and to
visit his 96-year-old grandfather in Haifa. He then flew
to visit his family in the Netherlands, tragically, for the
last time. Although his life was short, be filled those
years with life. Whether it was his love of travel, of
football, or, most importantly, his friends, Itamar lived
life to the fullest and brought love and laughter to all
who knew him. May his memory, and the memory of
all those who perished, be a blessing.

We thank and support those carrying out the
investigation into this horrible incident, and we
welcome the progress made so far. We look forward to
the final report.

