The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of China. First of all, I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing. Once again, I would like to express to my good friend, the Permanent Representative of Belgium, and his team my appreciation for their outstanding work during their presidency of the Security Council last month. I also thank all the speakers for their kind words and their confidence in China. I look forward to working closely with all delegations in our joint effort to complete the tasks before us in the month of March by discharging our responsibilities in the best way possible. At present, the peace, stability and reconstruction of the State of Iraq is at a critical stage. Against the looming backdrop of escalating tensions in the Middle East and the Gulf region, it is particularly important to safeguard Iraq's national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. All countries should fully respect the will of the Iraqi people and support the Iraqi Government in properly addressing the internal and external challenges and in achieving economic recovery, peace, stability, national reconstruction and national reconciliation. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the following points. First, a good atmosphere should be created for political dialogue and national reconciliation in Iraq, as the internal political process in the country is at an important juncture. The international community should support Iraq in independently managing its own internal affairs and responding to the challenges it faces by playing a constructive role, creating an enabling environment and firmly opposing interference in Iraq's internal affairs. Any military action on Iraq's territory must be subject to the consent of the Government of the country so that Iraq may avoid becoming a victim of geopolitics. Engaging in peaceful and meaningful dialogue towards inclusive reconciliation and harmonious coexistence is in the fundamental interest of the Iraqi people. We welcome the further improvement of relations between the central Government of Iraq and the Kurdish Regional Government, as well as the continuation of their communication and dialogue on oil, revenue-sharing and security arrangements. Secondly, we should support Iraq in consolidating the achievements in counter-terrorism and safeguarding national security. Iraq has made great sacrifices for the international cause of counter-terrorism. Yet the threat of remnant forces of terrorism still exists, and the efforts to address the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and their families are in urgent need of support from all parties. The international community should fully respect Iraq's sovereignty and jurisdiction and support the country in bringing terrorists to justice, in accordance with relevant domestic laws, and in preventing the return and spread of terrorist forces and activities. We should support the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in actively working under its mandate and in close consultation with the Government of the country concerned. Thirdly, we should actively promote Iraq's economic recovery and accelerated reconstruction. Development is the fundamental guarantee for peace. Speeding up economic reconstruction, augmenting public-service capacity, improving democracy and responding to people's aspirations are important tasks for Iraq in its current state of development. The international community should firmly support Iraq in exploring a development path that fits its own national conditions and fulfil in earnest its commitments to continued support and assistance for Iraq, help the country with its economic recovery, alleviate the humanitarian situation and effectively protect the rights of vulnerable groups, including women and children. China supports the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in actively continuing its work and hopes that it will, in accordance with its mandate, support the Iraqi Government's efforts aimed at achieving stability and development, and respect Iraq's ownership of its own affairs. China supports any effort that is conducive to maintaining stability and development in Iraq. We will continue to work under the Belt and Road Initiative framework by actively participating in the reconstruction of Iraq's energy and infrastructure sectors, inter alia, helping the country strengthen its capacity-building, training more professional and technical people, and enhancing its capacity for self-development. China will also continue to provide humanitarian items and economic aid to Iraq and help the Iraqi people cope with various difficulties and challenges, improve the humanitarian situation and achieve lasting peace, stability and development. I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council. I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
