Mr. Tladi (South Africa): My delegation wishes
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
participate in this very important debate on the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2006/507. We also wish to thank you not only for
your work as President of the Council, but also in
connection with your work on the working methods of
the Council.

South Africa strongly supports the continued
evaluation of the Security Council's working methods,
in cooperation with the broader membership, as an
essential element of the broader reform of the Security
Council in order to make it more transparent and
accountable, and thus to enhance the legitimacy of its
mandate. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
modest improvements made in the working methods of
the Council since the last open debate on the
implementation of note S/2006/507, in 2008. We
particularly welcome the improvements aimed at
enhancing the Council's engagement with the broader
membership of the United Nations.
As the presidency's concept paper (S/2010/165)
reminds us, the Security Council is mandated by the
Charter to act on behalf of the United Nations
membership to ensure prompt and effective action on
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. That means that the
Council represents the broader membership of the

United Nations in the execution of its mandate, which
places particular responsibility on the Council to
ensure that its work is transparent, predictable and
consistent. In essence, it requires the Council to act in
an accountable manner. It is therefore obligated to
regularly engage with the broader membership in the
execution of its mandate.

It is becoming increasingly self-evident that the
Security Council cannot act alone in implementing its
mandate. It needs credible partners, as envisaged in
Chapter VII of the Charter. South Africa is proud to
have been given the opportunity to contribute to
building and enhancing cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union during its most
recent tenure in the Council. Annual meetings between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council are now a regular feature of the
Security Council's programme of work. We will
continue to advocate for a strong and deeper
relationship and cooperation between those two
important organs in the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa. It is our hope that those
engagements will allow the Security Council to address
more effectively the various conflicts on the African
continent, which form such a large part of its agenda.
South Africa is of the firm View that both Councils can
benefit from that interaction and collectively improve
the response of the international community to conflict
situations, or even potential conflict situations.

It is critical that the Security Council quickly
redeem itself vis-a-vis the view held by some that its
mandate is only to approve peacekeeping operations.
Peacemaking is not always merely equal to the
deployment of troops to conflict situations. It is a
continuum from mediation to conflict prevention to
peacekeeping, where required, and to peacebuilding,
peace consolidation and sustainable development. The
United Nations must avail itself of different tools to
deal with different situations. For example, there is
growing consensus that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must not be seen as sequential, but
rather should be seen and implemented in an integrated
way. To what extent, therefore, is the Security Council
prepared to allow sufficient space for the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in the
development of Security Council mandates?

Further improvements are needed in the Council's
engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries. It is our view that the Security Council's

early engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries is a step in the right direction and should
become entrenched. These engagements should be
structured in a manner that will afford those countries
the opportunity to directly contribute to the discussion
in the Council relating to the renewal of mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping is after all a
partnership between the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

In addition to the aforementioned improvements,
my delegation has also taken note with interest of the
recent innovations in the Council on increasing its
interactions with parties concerned with a conflict,
such as engagements in 2009 with Sri Lanka, Chad, the
African Union and the League of Arab States. South
Africa reiterates its view that all parties involved in
conflicts should be engaged in the process of the
Council's deliberations and decision-making on issues
on its agenda and when responding to crises. The
Council can only benefit from such interactions. In our
View, they will allow the Council to respond
appropriately in the execution of its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.

Having acknowledged the improvements, I now
turn to remaining questions relating to the working
methods of the Council. The question my delegation
wants to ask is whether the Council has significantly
improved its transparency. Even though some
improvements have been recorded, it is our opinion
that these are not sufficient. It is true that today more
Council meetings are held in pubic than a few years
ago. It is also true that recent innovations have
increased engagement with relevant parties, including
with troop- and police-contributing countries. We also
acknowledge that the Council has improved the flow
of information on its programme of work through
regular monthly meeting to the membership by the
presidency - a convention my delegation actively
promoted during its tenure in the Council.

However, when we reflect on this body's
decision-making process we have to conclude that
there is need for improvement. The Council's
deliberations on draft resolutions, for example, should
be open for genuine deliberations amongst all of its
members, including the elected 10, and should not be
the exclusive domain of a few.

Like many other delegations, South Africa
acknowledges the value of consultations of the whole
for the efficiency of the Council. However, it is
incumbent on the members of the Security Council to
be accountable in this process. South Africa wishes to
encourage Council members to continue the practice of
providing information to non-members on the outcome
of consultations. I remind the Council that the Charter
states that it acts on behalf of the United Nations
membership. This necessarily implies that that
membership has the right to remain informed of
developments in the Council. Transparency in its work
contributes to the credibility of the Council.

When the United Nations was established in
1945, South Africa fulfilled a central role in drafting
the Charter and designing its institutions. We believe
that the international community needs a Security
Council. This body was established to maintain
international peace and to provide the international
community with an effective mechanism to prevent the
outbreak of war. It has often failed but, fortunately, its
successes outweigh its failures.

It is our view that for it to be more effective, the
Council, first and foremost, needs to become more
representative and requires expansion in both
categories of its membership. Equally, it needs to
address the problems in its working methods, of which
we have named but a few, in an honest, transparent and
effective manner. Maintaining the status quo will only
contribute to the further erosion of its credibility and
legitimacy as the premier organ mandated to ensure
there is peace, security and stability in the world.

