Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Four years into the conflict
in Syria, the international community remains unable
to stop the collapse into bloodshed and chaos of a
country with one of the most ancient societies and
rich civilizations on our planet. That tragic cycle of
violence has left more than 200,000 people dead, many
more wounded, 6.5 million- if not more - internally
displaced persons and over 3 million refugees in
neighbouring countries, not to mention the magnitude
of physical destruction.

For four years, the Council, which is the organ
entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations with
maintaining international peace and security, has failed
to facilitate the realization of a political solution that
would put an end to the protracted conflict. By failing
to assume its role, the Security Council has not only
failed in its mission and indeed failed Syria, but it has
also failed its neighbours and allowed for a dangerous
increase in regional instability, a situation well
illustrated by the fact that the conflict has produced a
massive humanitarian crisis and one of biggest waves of
human displacement since the Second World War. That
has pushed the societies, economies and infrastructure
ofneighbouring counties to the brink, not to mention the
negative impact it has had on the security environment
throughout the region and beyond. As members know,
terrorism, fanaticism and sectarianism are on the rise,
threatening the stability of neighbouring countries and
international peace and security.

Lebanon today is home to more than 1.1 million
registered Syrian refugees and 350,000 Palestinian
refugees, including 45,000 Palestinian refugees from
Syria. That is about a third of my country's total
population. Lebanon is the smallest country of the
region in terms of both geographic size and population,
but it hosts the largest number of refugees. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Lebanon is the country hosting the
highest number of refugees per capita. It ranks second
in the total number of refugees, behind only Pakistan,
whose geographical size and population are respectively
approximately 80 and 50 times that of my country.

The economic impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon
has been detrimental. The World Bank estimated the
total losses to Lebanon's economy as a result of the
crisis at about $7.5 billion, and that was in the summer
of 2013. The total economic loss today is almost double
that amount. Eighty-six per cent of Syrian refugees live
in local communities, in regions that are home to 68 per
cent of the poorest Lebanese. Poverty in the country
has risen by 61 per cent, Lebanese unemployment
levels have doubled, economic growth stumbled,
and the national infrastructure for education, health,
energy and water is stretched beyond its capacity. In
response to the growing challenge of the refugee crisis,
my Government, in coordination with the relevant
United Nations agencies and other partners, adopted
in December 2014 the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
2015-2016, with an estimated cost of $2.1 billion.

Allow me to reiterate today what we have stressed
on several previous occasions. Lebanon cannot cope by
itself with the humanitarian rights and needs of Syrian
refugees on its soil and continues therefore to call
for real burden-sharing and greater assistance to host
communities through official delivery channels.

Under the able leadership of Mr. Guterres, Ms. Amos
and Ms. Kang, the United Nations agencies have done
an excellent job of seeking to alleviate the suffering of
the refugees. Once again, I would like to commend their
work and that of all the members of their respective
teams. The international community has also shown
tremendous generosity in response to the humanitarian
crisis. In particular, Kuwait ought to be commended for
continuing to host the donors conferences. However,
more - and in reality, much more - still needs to
be done. In fact, only 52 per cent of the $1.7 billion
estimated as needed under the regional response plan
for Lebanon in 2014 was met.

It is of utmost urgency that the international
community increase its humanitarian support to the
Syrian refugees and to their host communities in
neighbouring countries. But more importantly, there
remains a need for the Council to live up to its duties in
helping to bring about a political solution to the Syrian
conflict. The reality is that, beyond the responsibilities
of the Security Council as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, what is at stake today in Syria is
our humanity.

