Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2368 (2017), which extends the United
Nations sanctions against Da'esh and Al-Qaida.
This adoption comes at an important moment in the
international community's battle against Da'esh. The
liberation of Mosul after a long-fought campaign
represents a vital milestone in the battle against Da'esh
in Iraq. I want to pay tribute to the bravery and sacrifice
of the Iraqi forces that made this possible. In Syria,
operations against Raqqa have begun, and it is only a
matter of time before Da'esh see its so-called caliphate
crumble. But as we heard from Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Feltman in his briefing to
the Council last month (see S/PV.7962), now is not the
time for complacency. Instead, we must remain vigilant
and resolute.

The fight against Da'esh will not end in Iraq and
Syria. Even as we defeat them there, we must actively
confront the threat that Da'esh, Al-Qaida and their
affiliates pose in other parts of the world. And that
is why United Nations sanctions remain an important
tool, and why the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of this resolution. It tightens our stranglehold
on those groups and ensures that our measures are
fit for purpose. In particular, we welcome the eight
new designations adopted today. These designations
include terrorist outfits, money-laundering companies,
terrorist leaders and foreign terrorist fighters. The
diversity of those fighters - from Syria, Iraq, Russia
and Indonesia - really underscores that this is a global
threat that requires a global response.

The United Kingdom continues to work with its
partners, not just on sanctions, but in all our efforts to
counter the terrorist threat. That means bringing Da'esh
to justice, shutting down terrorist financing, managing
the risk posed by foreign terrorist fighters and tackling
extremism on line. This is a fight for the long haul, but
together we will defeat the scourge of terrorism and our
collective values will prevail, and the resolution that we
have adopted today is a vital part of that effort.

