I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Jean-Yves Le Drian, for convening this meeting. Its scheduling is timely as the Security Council prepares to renew the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) later this month. I also wish to extend my thanks to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, His Excellency former President Pierre Buyoya, for their informative briefings. We are meeting today as the global community continues to mitigate the devastating impact of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This pandemic has affected all of us in numerous ways, including the efforts of the various stakeholders responsible for promoting international peace and security. We were saddened to learn about the recent demise of two MINUSMA peacekeepers to this pandemic. Peacekeepers are on the front lines of our efforts to maintain peace and security, and our condolences go to their families during these trying times. There have been a number of developments in Mali and the wider Sahel region in recent months. South Africa therefore wishes to share some observations on the security, political and humanitarian situations in Mali, as well as on the Joint Force the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and on MINUSMA. First, South Africa remains deeply concerned about the security situation in Mali and the Sahel due to the increased terrorist attacks and intercommunal violence, particularly in central Mali. It is also disturbing that terrorist groups have taken advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to expand their reach and intensify their activities. We regret that this continued violence has claimed far too many human lives, including those of peacekeepers, the Malian Defence and Security Forces and civilians. These developments surely compel the Council to continue to provide support to the people of Mali so as to achieve peace and stability. Secondly, the prevailing humanitarian situation is cause for concern. Increased efforts must be made to mitigate the deteriorating humanitarian situation as a result of the persistent violence, particularly during this COVID-19 pandemic. We recognize that the pandemic has had adverse effects on the most vulnerable, the internally displaced and refugees, in particular women and girls. We call upon the international community to continue to provide humanitarian aid to the people in need and contribute to the Mali humanitarian response plan, which remains underfunded. It is also important that access to people in need of humanitarian aid be unhindered. Thirdly, progress towards the restoration of State authority and sustained peace depends on progress in the political processes guided by the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In that context, we welcome the inclusive Major National Dialogue that concluded in December 2019, which laid the foundation for the recently held national legislative elections. We hope that the installation of the newly elected National Assembly will pave the way for the envisaged institutional and political reforms. Most reforms require the collective commitment of all the relevant parties. We are encouraged by the progress made in the deployment of the reconstituted and reformed Malian forces as an essential step towards the restoration of State authority in northern Mali. This is indicative that Malians are capable of rebuilding their own State. As is said, where there is a will, there 1s a way. We therefore encourage the Malian parties to ensure the full operationalization of those deployed forces and to redouble their efforts towards further deployments in other parts of the country. This will enhance the preservation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mali and serve as a measure to build trust and confidence among the signatory parties. We commend MINUSMA for providing the necessary assistance for that process. Throughout the process, it remains imperative that the signatory parties refrain from reneging on their commitments, in particular with regard to the recruitment and use of children in the conflict, as well as other international human rights and humanitarian law violations. As a country and as part of a continent that firmly support women's empowerment and gender equality, South Africa commends the significant strides that the Malian authorities have made in advancing the participation and representation of women in political and peace processes, as evidenced by an increase in women's representation in the National Assembly and their inclusion in the Agreement Monitoring Committee. This is indeed a positive development that should be cultivated in order to strengthen inclusive, meaningful participation in, and national ownership of, the peace processes in Mali. We also agree that to eliminate the challenges of instability and insecurity, their drivers and root causes must be identified and adequately addressed. A comprehensive and holistic approach based on political, economic and security interventions is necessary to address the challenges facing Mali. In that regard, the Northern Development Zone is an important initiative, which must be supported and fully operationalized to aid development in the northern regions. Equally, we urge the support and implementation of the 2019 Bamako declaration on access to natural resources and conflicts between communities. Fourthly, South Africa would like to address the vital role played by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and MINUSMA. The efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries and the region require international support in order to succeed. In that regard, we are grateful for the generous contributions made thus far, and we urge the Security Council and the international community to provide the necessary support to the G-5 Sahel countries. We are of the view that predictable and sustainable logistical and operational support coordinated by the United Nations is urgent and necessary. The roles of the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in support of the Joint Force are also important. In that regard, the initiative taken by the African Union to deploy 3,000 forces to support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in addition to ECOWAS adopting an action plan and making financial resources available to combat terrorism in West Africa, complements the collective efforts needed not only by Mali but by the region. MINUSMA has made a valuable contribution towards the stabilization of Mali. We therefore support the extension of the MINUSMA mandate in order to continue to provide assistance to Mali, particularly for the protection of civilians, the implementation of the peace agreement and the restoration of State authority in northern and central Mali. In conclusion, we would like to take this moment to pay tribute to the fallen peacekeepers, and we wish a speedy recovery to the injured and those battling COVID-19. We also express our solidarity with the women and men who form part of United Nations peacekeeping and continue to forge ahead despite working in a complex and dangerous environment.
