Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing.

On 22 January, the Security Council held an
emergency meeting on the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
All of the relevant parties expressed their deep
concern. But over the past week, the situation did not
change fundamentally for the better. China is deeply
concerned with the situation and expresses its regret.
The current difficult living conditions of civilians in
Gaza are unacceptable.
We have noted that Prime Minister Olmert, in his
meeting with President Abbas on 27 January,
committed not to again cut off its food, medical and
necessary energy supplies to Gaza and to make further
efforts to avoid any outbreak of new humanitarian
crises. It is our hope that the Israeli Government will
effectively carry out its commitments and open all
crossings to Gaza at an early date in order to ensure the
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid.

The international community should also provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to Palestine. In this
regard, we express our appreciation for the efforts and
contributions by relevant countries, especially those of
Egypt. The humanitarian crisis in Gaza is the most
pressing issue at present in the Middle East, and it
requires emergency measures to resolve it. Any delay
will result in more human suffering.

The Palestinian National Authority made a
proposal for controlling the crossings in Gaza. This
plan is worthy of a positive response.

The crisis in Gaza has an extensive background
and deep root causes. The only way to respond to the
various challenges in the Middle East and to realize a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace is for all parties
involved conduct political negotiations, with the
support of the international community. We welcome
the negotiations process initiated at the Annapolis
Conference, and we welcome the work done by the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders, as well as their
respective negotiation teams.

In order to ensure that the negotiations yield
progress, Israel and Palestine should do away with
various interferences and be more resolute in their
resolve to push for negotiations, build up a broader
consensus between them and make necessary
compromises and concessions in negotiations. The
international community should encourage and
commend the negotiations conducted by the two parties
and offer helpful support. To ensure that the
negotiations are conducted smoothly, all the parties
should make concerted efforts and create favourable
conditions for them.

The international community should assist the
Palestinian Authority in building a security forces
mechanism and in accelerating its economic
development. Efforts are also needed to push for a
comprehensive ceasefire between Palestine and Israel
08-22132

so as to avoid any actions that may lead to the
deterioration of the situation. Israel should also take
bold measures in lifting its closure of Palestine and
should dismantle the separation wall and settlements.

The Lebanese situation is at a crucial point. The
presidential election has been delayed again and again,
and the security situation is showing signs of
deterioration. We hope that the Lebanese factions will
proceed in the interests of national stability and
solidarity and resolve their differences peacefully in
seeking a common understanding. Not long ago, the
League of Arab States put forward a proposal to settle
the Lebanese political crisis. This proposal is worthy of
the attention of all Lebanese parties and factions.

The year 2008 is crucial for achieving Middle
East peace. New opportunities are accompanied by
complex challenges. In order to ensure that 2008 will
be a year of hope for the Middle East, all relevant
parties must make concerted efforts, including the
early realization of peace between Lebanon and Israel
and between Syria and Israel. The negotiations
between Lebanon and Israel and between Syria and
Israel are an important component of the Middle East
peace process. The early resumption of relevant
negotiations and progress in this regard will help
achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

We believe that the peace process will not be
smooth sailing, but as long as we stick to negotiations
rather than resorting to force, and dialogue rather than
confrontation, we will surely be able to open the gate
to peace. We hope that all the relevant parties in the
Middle East will make unremitting efforts in this
regard.

