Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina Inzko for
his briefing and for his forty-seventh report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2015/300, annex). We have carefully
studied the report and taken due note of the main issues
contained therein.
Nigeria is pleased to see that, following the
elections of October 2014 and the certification of the
election results in November 2014, Governments and
legislatures have been formed at the State, entity and
cantonal levels. We encourage the political leaders
in cantons where Governments are yet to be formed
to work together to resolve their differences over the
distribution of ministerial positions. We are concerned
about reports of continued challenges to the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. The divisive rhetoric
and actions of political leaders that threaten the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State are
contrary to the spirit of the Dayton Peace Accords.
Public figures must refrain from making inflammatory
statements promoting secession, which are indeed
capable of undermining the stability of the country and
the entire region.

It must be understood by all concerned that the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not
envisage secession by any of the entities. We believe
that the interests of the entities can and should be
accommodated within the framework of a united Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The rejection of the authority of the
Constitutional Court at the entity level is also a matter
of grave concern. It is a direct challenge to the rule of
law and the independence of the judiciary, which are
two critical elements of democratic governance. We
urge all entities to respect the decisions of the Court as
final and binding, in accordance with their obligations
under a democratic system of Government. Boycotts
and walkouts are impeding the work of the House of
Representatives and the House of Peoples. While we
recognize the rights of parliamentarians to protest,
we urge them to do so in a manner that allows the
legislature to continue to function unimpeded.

Despite these impediments, the two legislative
houses have appointed their leaders and elected their
working bodies. That is a welcome development and a
strong step towards development. We also take note of
the fact that joint parliamentary working committees
have been appointed. We call on all concerned to work
diligently to resolve their disputes over the membership
of the joint committee for oversight of the Intelligence
and Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We note that the Parliament has adopted an
amendment to the Criminal Code of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are concerned, however, that
the amendment is considered to be inadequate to
meet international standards on countering money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism. In View of
the importance of closing gaps in the law that could
be exploited to finance terrorism, we would urge
parliamentary leaders to take action to strengthen
the Criminal Code. In terms of public security and
law enforcement, we note with concern that policing
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is confronted by the
challenge of political interference, which is causing
delays in the formation of the independent boards
that select police directors. We commend the Office
of the High Representative for its collaboration with
various stakeholders to update police legislation. It is
our expectation that those reforms would enhance the
independence and operational efficiency of the police.

We want to pay tribute to the High Representative
for his unflinching efforts to fulfil his mandate. We
support without reservation his call for the adequate
staffing and funding of his Office. We believe this
would greatly enhance his efforts.

