Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank our Belgian colleague
Ambassador Verbeke for the manner in which he led
our mission, during which he once again displayed the
great diplomatic skill for which he is well known.
I believe that the Security Council mission
achieved the objectives we had set for it. We sought to
gather direct and precise information about the
situation on the ground and about the positions of the
various protagonists. I believe it was also important to
demonstrate to the people concerned the importance
that the Security Council attaches to the issue of
Kosovo.

I would first like to refer to the regrettable fact
that the positions of the parties are irreconcilable. That
was clear during the entire mission. Unfortunately, that
inescapable fact will not change with time.

During the visit we were also able to take note of
the progress made since 1999, in terms of security, the
establishment of institutions and the protection of
minorities. That progress must necessarily be followed
up. Our goal is to promote Kosovo's development
towards a fully multi-ethnic community. That requires
a long-term commitment on the part of both the
Kosovo authorities and the international community. It
also requires further efforts to encourage the return of
refugees and displaced persons.

We are more convinced than ever that the only
way to achieve that is by leaving behind the transition
period that Kosovo has lived through since 1999 and
by giving Kosovo a new status. That was in fact the
conclusion reached by the Council in its presidential
statement (S/PRST/2005/51) of 24 October 2005.
Maintaining the status quo would be a destabilizing
factor.

The process of negotiations on future status is
now entering its final phase. I believe that the Security
Council now has at its disposal detailed and realistic
proposals, which have the support of the Secretary-
General, to ensure the future of Kosovo while
maintaining regional stability and protecting
minorities. We believe that it is now up to the Security
Council to take up its responsibility to guarantee the
success of a process that it itself began.

