Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Council for having convened this
morning's important meeting. Similar thanks go
to France and to Italy for having raised this very
important subject at the level of the Security Council.
We also wish to thank all of our briefers this morning
for their interventions. In particular, we deeply thank
Ms. Bokova for all that she has done and her ongoing
efforts in her role as Director-General of UNESCO.
UNESCO is the world's conscience, particularly
regarding the preservation of the cultural heritage of
all States.

The safeguarding and protection of cultural
heritage from all destructive acts, including trafficking
and exploitation for terrorist purposes, is an extremely
sensitive subject, because it involves sites, monuments,
museums and other tangible goods that are directly
linked to the history and very identity of peoples and
nations. Cultural heritage is therefore no less important
in terms of value than land or even honour - as an

intangible concept - for the peoples and States that
own such heritage, or other custodians thereof.

Egypt enjoys a precious and rich cultural heritage
that is appreciated, known and respected by all. We
are therefore highly familiar with the importance and
sensitivity of the issue. We need to safeguard our cultural
heritage from destruction and trafficking, whether
on the part of terrorist groups or in circumstances of
armed conflict. As I have said, our cultural heritage is
precious, respected, known and appreciated by all, and
we are particularly sensitive to the importance of this
issue, given our geographical positon on a continent and
in a region where the majority of global and cultural
heritage is to be found.

Against that backdrop and in the light of the
importance and sensitivity of the issue of protecting
cultural heritage, the Egyptian delegation reiterated
in the negotiations of resolution 2347 (2017), which
was adopted today, the importance of including in
the resolution a number of principles and restrictions,
without which our delegation would not have been able
to vote in its favour. I would like to draw attention
to the key principles and restrictions to which I have
just referred.

First, we reaffirm that the key role is to be played
by each individual State in the protection of its own
cultural heritage. Efforts to protect cultural heritage
during armed conflict must respect the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and be pursued
strictly in line with international law. The importance
of respecting a State's sovereignty is also key, as is
respect for the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States.

We also reiterate that the protection of cultural
heritage, including through the establishment of a
network of safe havens, can be undertaken only with
the support of the State custodian of that cultural
heritage. Safe havens should be established only on
its territory. Egypt rejects any interference, present or
future, in the internal affairs of a State on the pretext
of protecting cultural heritage. We reject the transfer of
a State's cultural heritage out of its territory under the
pretext of conserving it in safe havens. We have only
to look at our own cultural heritage and that of other
countries. That heritage is exhibited in the museums
of third countries, which had seized that heritage and
refuse to date to restore them to their States.

Secondly, it is crucial that UNESCO, as an agency
that specializes in the topic of cultural heritage,
continue to provide assistance to countries, at their
request, so that they may be in a position to protect
their cultural heritage. Furthermore, it is essential that
the Security Council only deal with cultural heritage in
situations where there is a threat to international peace
and security, international counter-terrorism activities
or an international conflict that figures on the agenda
of the Council.

Thirdly, it is important States take the necessary
measures to forestall and prevent illicit trafficking in
cultural goods, particularly in areas of conflict, and
specifically that committed by terrorist groups.

Fourthly, it is essential that States draft lists of
cultural goods that have been transferred illegally
during armed conflict and that, in that regard, they
coordinate with United Nations bodies and relevant
international entities in order to ensure the safe
restitution of those goods.

Fifthly, we must affirm the possibility ofincluding
among the tasks of peacekeeping organizations the
provision of support to concerned States, at their
request, for the protection of their cultural heritage
from destruction, looting or other similar crimes.

Moreover, the Egyptian delegation worked for
the inclusion in the resolution a reference to the need
to protect cultural goods and heritage in areas under
foreign occupation. Unfortunately, objections of a
political nature to our proposal meant that we were
unable to include that key idea in the resolution.

Lastly, Egypt welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2347 (2017), in particular because the
protection of cultural heritage is a noble objective.
However, we wish to underscore, as we have done
in past meetings, that it remains crucial for States to
implement Security Council resolutions, including that
just adopted. As such, we expect States to implement
their commitments, in compliance with that resolution,
and particularly in compliance with the principles and
restrictions contained therein. We will not allow such
provisions to be flouted.

