Mr. Somda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March and on
the admirable way in which you are carrying out your
heavy responsibilities, especially during this period of
difficult deliberations in which the future of the world
is at stake. To those congratulations, the delegation of
Burkina Faso would like to add its thanks for your
excellent initiative to organize this workshop on a
subject of great urgency for Africa and, more
particularly, for our subregion.

Over the past few years, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has provoked and exacerbated
a number of armed conflicts throughout the world. That
situation has caused human insecurity that is
unprecedented in our history, with particularly grave
consequences for women and children, the most
vulnerable members of society.

By holding the largest conference ever on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in New
York in July 2001, the United Nations expressed a
universal concern over the threat that this scourge
poses to international peace and security. The outcome
of that conference certainly did not fully meet the
expectations of countries affected by the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, but it did enable the
participating countries to establish an action plan. We
must follow up those efforts with other initiatives
aimed at ensuring the effective implementation of the
action plan.

In that connection, Burkina Faso welcomes the
forthcoming first biannual meeting to follow up the
conference of July 2001, which will enable us to
measure the progress achieved. As we await the
recommendations that will result, the current debate
should provide here and now an opportunity for the
Security Council to renew its support for the
worldwide process of combating the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Moreover, our subregion
expects that the Council will support the initiatives
already under way in West Africa for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants.

A new phenomenon has just appeared in West
Africa: mercenarism. In fact, the recent crises that have
arisen in the subregion have exposed this phenomenon
and have shown that even Governments use them to
deal with internal rebellions or to neutralize crisis
situations. Mercenaries are a source of insecurity. They
are not strangers to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons; quite to the contrary, they facilitate it
and are naturally active in creating a favourable
environment for it.

By devoting today's debate to this issue, the
Security Council is once again reminding all of us of
our responsibilities and of the paramount need to
observe the spirit and the letter of the United Nations
Convention against mercenarism. It would be
appropriate to send a strong signal to those who recruit
and train mercenaries that they must put an end to that
practice without delay and must refrain from engaging
in it in the future.

Burkina Faso has always affirmed its wish for
freedom and peace within its borders and in all other
countries. But we must emphasize here that the armed
conflicts and rebellions that have erupted in certain
countries bordering Burkina Faso have naturally
promoted the circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons from those zones into our country,
spawning a certain kind of cross-border criminality and
deepening insecurity for our country and for the entire
subregion.

Our country's geographical position makes
controlling our borders difficult, which requires
effective cooperation with neighbouring countries to
try to eliminate that insecurity.

To curb this situation, which we are facing on a
daily basis and which is creating a certain insecurity
both nationally and subregionally, Burkina Faso has
taken an active part in the process that led to the
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Light Arms in West Africa. That
process was held on 1 November 1998 in Abuja
alongside the twenty-first session of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It is
within this framework of searching for solutions to the
problems of insecurity that Burkina Faso has given a
lot of attention nationally, subregionally and
internationally to all of the ongoing actions and
meetings that might effectively contribute to combating
the proliferation and illicit trade in small arms.

At the national level, a number of actions to
implement the multilateral agreements have been
implemented by the Government. First, in 1994, we
received a United Nations mission to assess the state of
trafficking of small arms in the Sahelo-Saharan zone.
This mission, subregional in nature, also went to Niger,
Cote d'Ivoire and Mali. Secondly, in 2001 our re-
reading of legislation on weapons and civilian
munitions in Burkina Faso was necessary as the best
means for combating all illegal actions in this area. It
meant a hardening up of all measures and sanctions
initially scheduled in prior texts. Thirdly, in April
2001, we established a national commission to combat
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. And
fourthly, on 24 January 2001, we created a high
authority to oversee importation of weapons and their
use, which backstops the national commission's action
to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons with information that can be provided as to
the physical and geographical situation of those
weapons that are imported. To show its commitment to
fight against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, Burkina Faso, in spite of its difficult
financial situation, accepted the headquarters of the
observation zone and follow-up group number two, the
region which takes in Mali, Niger, Cote d'Ivoire and
Burkina Faso. The chief of zone in Burkina Faso has
been there since 2001. The zone was formally set up in
October 2002.

At the subregional level, Burkina Faso has
actively participated in all meetings regarding the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons held in
the subregion, of which the most important meetings
were a conference on conflict prevention, disarmament
and development in West Africa, held at Bamako from
25 to 29 November 1996; a meeting of experts, held
from 8 to 13 March 1998 in Yamoussoukro on the
ECOWAS Mechanism and on transferred crime; a
workshop organized in Accra from 19 to 21 November
1999 on the establishment of a register and a data base
on small arms for ECOWAS member States; an Abuja
workshop, held from 24 to 30 September 2000 on
elaborating a programme to train the trainers of armed
forces and security in combating the proliferation of
small arms; a ministerial conference held in Bamako
from 25 November to 2 December 2000 to prepare the
international conference on the illicit trade in small
arms in all its aspects; and training courses having to
do with border control and weapons control, which was
organized by the United States Customs Service from
11 to 24 February 2001.

At the regional level, our country participated in a
meeting of the African Group and experts on the illicit
trafficking of firearms in Africa, held in Kampala from
10 to 12 January 2000, and a meeting of experts on
small arms, organized in Addis Ababa from 14 to 21
May 2000.

At the international level, Burkina Faso actively
participated in the development of three additional
protocols to the Vienna Convention by the special
United Nations committee in Vienna from 1999 to
2001, particularly the protocol on the illicit trafficking
of small arms, their elements and munitions. Burkina
Faso was also the first African country to ratify this
protocol.

We participated in the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms in all Its Aspects,
held in New York from 9 to 21 July 2001.

In conclusion, I would like in particular to
emphasize that in all of these actions undertaken at the
national level, the financial effort was made to
participate in all meetings where the critical problem of
combating the proliferation, exportation, importation
and the illegal manufacture of small arms and light
weapons was debated. It proves that, if need be,
Burkina Faso has made a resolute commitment for 15
years now to combat this scourge by all possible
means.

My country remains convinced that the fight
against the proliferation of small arms cannot be
conducted only at the regional or subregional level, or
even only at the national level. The chances for success
reside solely in the cooperation and synergy of action
on the part of the entire international community. The
ECOWAS Moratorium shows the strong will of a
subregion to pool its potential to combat this scourge
that claims many victims each day in its civilian
populations. But we cannot succeed without the
logistic and financial support from our development
partners.

And so the Security Council, in a unique way, has
a critical role to play and should become involved in
helping to eradicate this phenomenon that undermines
the foundation of development - the basis of peace
and security.

