Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of Security Council
for this month. We are fully confident in your ability
to conduct the work of the Council successfully and
skilfully. Let me thank the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand for his successful presidency of
the Council last month. Allow me also to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its valuable
efforts to achieve agreement on resolution 2312 (2016),
which was just adopted.

The phenomenon of immigration is an old one.
Throughout history, it has been characteristic of the
development of humankind as people have sought
better lives of dignity and security. However, the world
today is experiencing an unprecedented phenomenon
as waves of people are migrating, and the issue has
become a priority of our contemporary world.

The Mediterranean region is no exception when it
comes to this phenomenon - for a number of reasons,
including instability, strife, conflict, the spread of
terrorism, deteriorating economic and development
prospects, increasing poverty and worsening climactic
conditions. My country is at the very centre of that wave.
Our geographic location has made Libya a crossing
point from which thousands of people from the African
continent, and elsewhere, traverse the Mediterrranean
Sea to reach Europe. They risk their lives in the hope
of escaping the insecurity and extreme poverty in their
countries, only to drown in the Mediterranean.

This is an unprecedented human tragedy, one in
which migrants have fallen victim repeatedly. They
are either victims of the conditions that force them to
emigrate and risk their lives, or of the gangs that traffic
and exploit people and take advantage of the weakness
of Libya's security institutions that is the result of
political division. We therefore stress the importance
of cooperating with Libya's security institutions,
especially our coast guard, which has been able to save
hundreds of migrants despite its limited means.

We greatly appreciate the readiness the European
Union has demonstrated to lessen the dangers to
migrants on the Mediterranean and save thousands of
lives, including the important role played by its military
operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean.
However, as we stated here in the Council when
resolution 2240 (2015) was adopted (see S/PV.7531),
we continue to believe that the phenomenon of illegal
migration cannot be dealt with by security means alone,
including the proposal made by a senior official from
a European Union member State to build a migrant
city in Libya, which would be a violation of Libya's
sovereignty. Other proposals, such as abrogating laws
on residency and migration, cannot resolve the issue
either, as they would only evade the root causes.

A comprehensive approach to address the issue must
focus on the situation in source countries by providing
assistance with a view to promoting and strengthening
conflict resolution mechanisms and improving their
ability to fight terrorism. Furthermore, such an approach
must establish an agreement between the United
Nations and source, transit and destination countries for
developed countries to support development projects
in source countries, within the framework of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

While we truly appreciate the efforts of the
European Union to save the lives of thousands of illegal
migrants as they cross the Mediterranean, national and
regional efforts have yet to lead to any improvement in
the situation, as stated in the report of the Secretary-
General. Therefore, we require a long-term strategy
in which the European Union would have a major role
in addressing the root causes of illegal migration. In
tandem, it is imperative that we develop short-term
actions to save the lives ofthousands of illegal migrants,
including through ongoing consultation with the States
concerned, in particular Libya, as well as the African
Union and the League of Arab States.

In conclusion, I do not think that anyone would their internal affairs - aimed at avoiding the loss of
object to any international effortsfinkeeping with the more lives in the Mediterranean and putting an end to
principles of international law, particularly respecting "115 humanitarian "15's:

the sovereignty of all States and non-interference in The meeting rose at 3.35p.m.
