Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank Mr. Colak, Minister of Security of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his statement. I should
also like to thank the High Representative, Lord Paddy
Ashdown, for his report and for his efforts to follow up
the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

It is indisputable that Bosnia and Herzegovina -
which has been carrying out its task of stabilization
and normalization for more than a decade, thanks to
the mobilization of the international community - will
soon see the end of one of the saddest chapters in the
history of the Balkan region. The report that we have
just heard attests to the notable progress made in
strengthening the institutional and administrative
framework and in promoting the rule of law and
economic reforms.

The profound changes that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities have brought about in various
areas of public life undoubtedly represent significant
progress in the building of a stable and peaceful State
and bring Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to the
standards set for the commencement of negotiations
with the European Union to conclude a stabilization
and association agreement and to participate in the
Partnership for Peace programme of the Atlantic
Alliance. In that regard, we believe that the
strengthening of the legal framework by creating new
competent bodies and the improvements in the
functioning and effectiveness of the judicial system are
positive results that help strengthen the rule of law and
the fight against the threats of lawbreaking, organized
crime and terrorism.

Moreover, my delegation welcomes the
appreciable progress made in the process of reunifying
the city of Mostar, which symbolizes in many respects
the values of tolerance and peaceful coexistence, which
must be firmly established in the region.

We also welcome the success of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in the implementation of
annex 7 of the Peace Agreement and, in that regard, the
return of 1 million refugees and displaced persons.
However, that significant progress cannot hide
insufficiencies with regard to cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the arrest of those indicted for
war crimes. In our view, placing the perpetrators of war
crimes before the Tribunal will help promote
reconciliation and understanding among all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the creation of a tolerant
and multi-ethnic society.

Finally, I would not like to end my statement
without paying tribute to the work done by the
Stabilization Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose
mission ended last December, and welcoming its
replacement by the European Union peacekeeping
mission.

