Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month and to thank
and congratulate the delegation of the Russian
Federation for a very eventful presidency last month.

The Great Lakes region of Central Africa is a
geographical expression with shared history and
culture among the people, but without formal
institutional links among the countries of the region. In
the past decade, the region has been afflicted by
internal and inter-State conflicts with regional
destabilizing consequences that have threatened
international peace and security and accordingly drawn
the concern of the Security Council.

The conflicts in the region have now turned a
critical corner towards resolution through the
combined initiatives of the countries of the region, the
African Union and the United Nations. The sixth
consecutive visit of the Security Council to the region
confirmed the positive developments in the region.
However, as is the case in such protracted conflicts,
there are still major challenges which the Security
Council and the countries of the region, individually
and collectively, must continue to address.

The major achievement this year has been the
successful democratic transition and installation of an
elected Government in Burundi. The United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB) ushered in the final
stage of the transition after 10 years of difficult
negotiations and instability in the country. The main
mission of ONUB has been accomplished, but the
Government of Burundi and ONUB have agreed to
continue working together as the Government
consolidates its authority and ONUB gradually
withdraws.

The Government of Burundi is on the path of
national reconciliation through dialogue, power-
sharing, judicial initiatives, reconstruction and
development. There is scope for ONUB to assist the
Government in building administrative and judicial
capacity in those areas. In the security sector, ONUB
should continue to assist the Government in
completing the programme for disarmament and
demobilization and the integration of the new armed
forces and the establishment of a new police force.

While the security situation has improved
considerably in most of the country, the civilian
population in Bujumbura Rural and in some of the
western provinces is experiencing intermittent threats
from elements of the PALIPEHUTU-Forces nationales
de liberation (FNL), which are not yet part of the new
democratic dispensation. ONUB's presence in those
areas is still required to assist the Government in
protecting its citizens. Refugees are returning in large
numbers from neighbouring countries; therefore, their
safe return and reintegration should remain priorities.
Tanzania is ready to work with the Government of
Burundi and the United Nations in facilitating yet
another attempt to bring the Palipehutu-FNL into the
mainstream of Government and politics in Burundi.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations has undertaken one of the largest and
most complex transitional and stabilization operations
in its history. The electoral process and timetable are
on course, with a deadline of 30 June 2006. At the
same time, the United Nations and the international
community are helping the Transitional Government to
build administrative and governance institutions,
including institutions for promoting human rights and
the rule of law. In a vast country like the Congo, with a
long history of civil strife and the virtual breakdown of
the institutions of governance, the protection of
civilians ought to be given equal attention and priority
as the country heads towards democratic elections for
the first time in over 40 years.

The reform of the security sector in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is crucial to the
unity of the country and the stability of the Congo
itself and the Great Lakes region as a whole.
Commendable progress has been made in disarmament,
demobilization and the creation of an integrated new
national army with the support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and bilateral international
assistance. Six integrated brigades have been formed,
with three more to be added soon and a target of 18
brigades before the end of the electoral timetable.

The formation and administration of the new
army have still to be streamlined to ensure
professionalism and morale and to reinforce the
national character of the army. The speedy formation
of the high council and the implementation of the
recommendations of the European Union Mission of
Assistance for Security Sector Reform are necessary to
create a well-equipped modern army and police force.

The new national army should be in the vanguard
in addressing the problem posed by the presence of
foreign armed groups in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Forces
democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
represent a growing threat to the Congolese civilian
population, a persistent challenge to the authority of
the Transitional Government in Kinshasa and a chronic
threat to neighbouring Rwanda and the stability of the
region. Reports of the continuing presence of
PALIPEHUTU-FNL armed groups in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with a
possible link to the FDLR, point to a further
destabilizing factor for Burundi and the region. There
are also still some armed foreign groups and local
militias in the Ituri region and the Kivus which should
be contained and neutralized. The armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, supported by
MONUC, have demonstrated a remarkable ability to
engage those forces, as in the recent operation in Ituri
and the Kivus. The recent request from the Tripartite
Plus One countries - that is, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi - for
more robust support from MONUC to enable the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to meet this challenge should be urgently
evaluated and responded to by the Council.

The other major challenge is the neglected
humanitarian situation in the region. It is reported that
over 1,000 people die from conflict-related causes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo every day. Over
the last six years, more than 3.8 million people have
died in the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
malnutrition and diseases resulting from the war.
Remnants of the Lord's Resistance Army in northern
Uganda have, over the years, caused large-scale
displacement and continue to threaten the security of
the civilian population and humanitarian workers.

The dire humanitarian situation compounds the
graphic history of the genocide that claimed nearly
1 million lives in Rwanda in three months during 1994,
and of the hundreds of thousands of refugees that have
been in such countries as Tanzania for several decades.
The Security Council should promptly provide the
needed leadership to the international community in
addressing this humanitarian challenge. As refugees
have started returning in large numbers to Burundi and
to some parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, adequate assistance should be given for safe
return and integration in their respective areas of
origin.

In retrospect, the Security Council has gone
through difficult and trying times when its response
contained mistakes and shortcomings. But it did not
hesitate to learn from those experiences and has
improved its response and the implementation of its
mandate in the region. The Council has the confidence
of the Governments of the region and a willing civil
society ready to work in partnership with the United
Nations.

The findings, conclusions and recommendations
of the recent mission to the Great Lakes region, led by
Ambassador de La Sabliere, reflect the hopes and
aspirations of the peoples and the Governments of the
region. The Council should encourage an intensified
United Nations system-wide sustained response and
catalyse the support of the international community for
the countries of the region in their defined areas of
concern and priority. Preventing new conflicts,
consolidating the peace process and stabilizing the
region through peacebuilding should be the shared
agenda of the United Nations and the countries of the
region. Tanzania would like to carry forward this
agenda during its presidency of the Council next
month.

