Mr. Ghebreyesus (Ethiopia): Mr. President,
let me start by thanking you for this opportunity to
address the Security Council. As the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs of my country, I am delighted - really
pleased - to make my maiden statement to the
Security Council under the presidency of Rwanda, a
country which not long ago came out of a horrendous
tragedy, quickly stood on its feet and got to where it is
now - a beacon of hope for our Africa. Let me also
express appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/239, annex).

I would also like to thank the Security Council for
having begun a process of very fruitful cooperation
with the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which we hope will continue to be strengthened; there
is, undoubtedly, ample room for doing so. I also wish
to thank the Security Council for having adopted
resolution 2093 (2013), which, among other things,
requested the Secretary-General to urgently field a
technical assessment mission to Somalia with a view
to ensuring the effective implementation of the new
approach to United Nations support for Somalia set
forth in that resolution.

I also wish to thank the members of the technical
assessment mission for what is, in our judgment, a
very useful report. The report has addressed all the
relevant issues the mission was called upon to look at.
The mission's assessment of the overall political and
security environment and of the humanitarian situation
in Somalia is both comprehensive and valid. The
report could not have put it better when, in describing
the political environment, it says that it is "extremely
complex, but there are also impressive capacities for
peace and dialogue" (S/2013/239, annex, para. 5).
We fully agree that the "strong political will of the
leadership of the Federal Government of Somalia
to rebuild their war-torn society bodes well for the
peacebuilding and State-building process" (ibia'). The
assessment also highlights a critical achievement that
had eluded Somalia for more than 20 years when it states
quite correctly that the "Government has considerable
legitimacy and inspires hope and optimism" (ibid).
Indeed, the Government's legitimacy can only be
enhanced when it is in a position to provide services to
society, thereby strengthening its credibility.

The report also underlines the challenges the
Federal Government of Somalia is facing, which consist
mostly of security issues. In that regard, the assessment
manages to reflect the situation on the ground as
objectively as possible, for example, when it says that

"Somalia is a country in which the international
community is seeking to make and build peace
in the context of ongoing war and active counter-
insurgency operations" (ibid., para. 6).

The report also underlines - correctly, in our
view - that, although the "struggle against
Al-Shabaab has turned a corner... it is far from over"
(ibid). We are also very convinced that the principles
underlined by the technical assessment mission
as a guide for its work - namely, Somali national
ownership, and collaboration and partnership with
various actors, particularly the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
inter alia - are indeed critical, and that is also what
common sense would counsel.

Obviously, in the light of the foregoing, and taking
into account both the opportunities, which are immense,
and the challenges, it appears that a more serious and
stronger effort must be made in order to ensure that the
momentum gained in Somalia is not only maintained,
but accelerated. That is particularly necessary in the
security area. It cannot be denied that the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) needs greater
support, particularly in terms of "additional enablers
and force multipliers" (ibid., para. 46). In fact, as
the technical assessment mission says in the report,
AMISOM, whose support is critical to ensuring the
security of the new assistance mission in Somalia, will
not, in many instances, be in a position to provide such
services within the existing troop ceiling.

The Secretary-General reminds the Council in his
report of his earlier recommendation with respect to the
option of deploying a United Nations or joint African
Union-United Nations peacekeeping operation. But
he has introduced a caveat by saying that the matter
should be taken up "as conventional combat operations
against Al-Shabaab end" (ibid). We feel that more can
be done in that regard, and in our judgment, there is
no reason why the two proposed options should not be
examined immediately, with a view to speeding up the
implementation of one of them.

But even more critical is ensuring that everything
necessary is done to support the Somali National
Security Forces so that they can achieve the capacity
to play their proper role in maintaining peace and
security throughout the country. In our opinion, that
is doable if support is provided by Member States on
the basis of an integrated approach and not, as pointed
out by the technical assessment mission and reiterated
in the report of the Secretary-General, in a fragmented
manner.

In that regard, I wish to highlight paragraph 22 of
resolution 2093 (2013), on supporting the Government's
efforts to manage and coordinate international
assistance, particularly in the security sector. It appears
to us that the way to proceed is to do whatever is
necessary to ensure that the Somali National Security
Forces are up and running, including in terms of
providing security for a new United Nations mission
and avoiding resort to the use of international private
security companies.
The proposal by the assessment mission in that
regard might need to be examined carefully. All this is
an argument for doing more to ensure that the Somali
National Security Forces are given all the necessary
support to handle security throughout the country. That
is also what we ourselves have been trying to contribute
in practice.

Let me before closing refer to one issue that is
related to the role of the Ethiopian National Defence
Forces and to what the technical assessment mission
has referred to as their announced withdrawal from
Hudur and their anticipated withdrawal from Baidoa.
There has been some misperception concerning this
matter which requires explanation. The question of lack
of consultation or absence of prior notification on the
part of Ethiopia is absolutely groundless. Those who
need to know were informed many months prior to the
withdrawal. There is no misunderstanding here. What
happened does not in any way signify any shirking of
responsibility on Ethiopia's part, though the question
of burden-sharing is something that has always been a
source of concern for us.

But more important was whether Ethiopian forces
were deployed in a way that added value in terms
of addressing the major threat to the encouraging
momentum that has been created in Somalia. Our
conclusion was that they were not, but that is in no way
related to any diminished commitment on Ethiopia's
part to continue being a factor for peace and stability
in Somalia. But again, as I said earlier, the question
of burden-sharing and the issue related to the effective
use of available forces is something to which we attach
great importance. These are issues that we would be
ready to discuss with stakeholders.

We feel that we have come a long way in Somalia.
Not keeping up the momentum is not an option. It is
our earnest hope that the new approach and the new
mission in Somalia will help to further strengthen the
foundation for sustainable peace in Somalia, which
no doubt will require, first of all, ensuring that the
security environment continues to improve. Both
IGAD and the African Union are ready to continue their
full cooperation with the Security Council to ensure
that that happens. It is our hope that there will be a
similar commitment on the part of both the Security
Council and the Secretariat to deepen cooperation
with the African Union. When everything is said and
done, what is critical in the end is that no support will
produce results unless it is based on the priorities set by
the Government and unless ownership by the Somali
Government is respected.
