Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I am
addressing the Security Council under your presidency, Sir,
let me congratulate you on the assumption of your high
office. I am confident that, under your talented and able
guidance, the Council will be able to fulfil its
responsibilities successfully. I would also like to express
my admiration for your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council.

We welcome the Peace Agreement signed between
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. On this
occasion, we pay tribute to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who have remained steadfast in the face of
untold miseries and horrors inflicted on them. We hope
that this Agreement will bring stability to all the States
concerned. We also hope that it will guarantee once and
for all the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the State
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
Agreement should facilitate a process for the return of
millions of refugees and displaced persons to their homes
in dignity and honour. We hope that the broader
consideration of peace will not eclipse the effective
prosecution of the war criminals. We hope that the
international community will contribute generously to the
reconstruction of the war-devastated economy of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Finally, we hope that this Agreement
will bring smiles to the faces of millions of Bosnian men,
women and children who have been victimized and
traumatized by an unjust war.
The tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina unfolded
before our eyes. After the Second World War and the
establishment of the United Nations, we deluded ourselves
into believing that we had seen the last of the crimes of
genocide and "ethnic cleansing". We thought, perhaps too
complacently, that the forces of racism and xenophobia
would never strike with the same ferocity as they had
during the Second World War. Yet, in the full glare of
the media and despite constant monitoring by the
international community, the Serbian aggressors chose to
exterminate a whole nation through "ethnic cleansing",
aggression, massive killings and the most egregious
crimes against humanity.

The holocaust in Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
object lesson for international politics and diplomacy. It
has demonstrated that the international community has to
be constantly vigilant in stemming and actively opposing
aggression. It has demonstrated that procrastination and
prevarication in the face of aggression can encourage
aggressors and pose an even greater threat to peace and
security. It has also demonstrated that the United Nations,
despite its evolution over the past five decades, does not
quite have the capacity to handle such crises with the
necessary speed, efficiency and effectiveness.

There is no doubt that the humanitarian interventions
by the United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina were

 

prompted by very noble intentions. Our actual performance,
however, was marred by delay, infighting and indecision.
While this was happening, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina were being killed by the score every day. We
know that the United Nations was not apathetic to the
plight of the trapped Bosnians. The fact was that it was
given neither a strong mandate nor adequate resources to
enforce collective security in the former Yugoslavia, in
pursuance of the United Nations Charter.

The crisis in the former Yugoslavia has also
demonstrated that, despite our experimentation with a
democratic version of multilateral diplomacy, the major
global Powers played the most crucial and decisive part in
a meaningful progression towards the resolution of the
conflict. The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was
literally hamstrung by a plethora of United Nations
resolutions denying the Bosnians their right to collective
self-defence and imposing a weak sanctions regime against
Serbia-Montenegro. Only when the major Powers and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization decided to resolve the
conflict through all means did we witness the first concrete
steps towards a mitigation of the suffering of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Pakistan, along with many other countries, repeatedly
urged that such robust military action should have been
undertaken right at the outset. Had that been done, and had
the unjust arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina
been lifted then, perhaps the Agreement of today would
have seen the light of day earlier and much pain, suffering
and shame would have been averted.

The conflict in the former Yugoslavia has driven home
another grim reality: that global Powers cannot subcontract
their responsibilities to regional actors. Countries with a
global outreach cannot afford to adopt an apolitical
approach towards conflicts threatening regional or global
peace and security. The erroneous belief that global security
can be subcontracted to regional or subregional
organizations is intrinsically flawed, as it implicitly
presupposes that members of a particular region are roughly
equal to each other in size as well as economically and
militarily. In reality this is not so. The doctrine would
benefit regional Powers, while smaller countries would be
placed at a disadvantage. Some recent events would
vindicate this view.

We feel that the United Nations will have to undertake
a massive exercise in introspection and self-criticism to
adjust to the new realities. The United Nations must find
ways and means to activate its roles of mediation and
arbitration for conflict prevention. Once a conflict has
erupted, the United Nations should make strong
interventions through the full use of peace-keeping and
the enforcement of collective security.

Pakistan has always taken a principled position on
the situation in the former Yugoslavia. The hearts of the
people of Pakistan went out to a small nation in Europe
battling against a frenzied aggression launched by the
Serbs. It was a question of morality, of international law
and of the very concept of peaceful coexistence. Outraged
at the unbridled aggression, Pakistan extended unqualified
moral and political support to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Pakistan consistently demanded the lifting
of the arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina to
enable it to exercise collective self-defence in accordance
with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. When the
time came for facilitating peace, we offered our troops for
peace-keeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe
that no nation should be victimized because of its small
size. We feel that no peoples should be brutalized because
of their ethnic origin. We believe that no nation should be
denied its right to self-determination and its right to wage
a legitimate struggle for its liberation.

This is a time for reconciliation now. This is a time
for healing deep scars. This is a time for forgetting
differences, and building peace for all people involved in
the conflict. Some wounds, however, can never be healed.
Some heinous crimes must not go unpunished. The
principle of international prosecution, established and
reaffirmed during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
should not be scuttled. Those responsible for inflicting
grievous harm to hundreds of thousands of people must
face the consequences of their crimes.

We, the people of Pakistan, will continue to stand by
our Bosnian brothers and sisters, as we have consistently
done in the past. We shall continue to contribute to the
success of peace-keeping efforts in Bosnia. We shall
stand in support of the international community as the
firm guarantor of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The crisis in
Bosnia and Herzegovina was a test for our civilization.
Our reaction was perfunctory and dilatory. Now that our
hopes have been raised, we shall all be closely watching
the actual process of implementation of the accords in
order to sustain the momentum for peace. Let us also
hope that we and our civilization will not be put to such
tests again in future.

 

