Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank my fellow Chairmen for the briefings on the
work of their Committees. In my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica, I would like
to make some brief comments on the work of the three
Committees.

With respect to the 1267 Committee, Costa Rica
believes that the effective use of selective sanctions is
a useful tool of the Security Council to tackle the threat
of terrorism. For that reason, it has been a priority for
our country, as a member of the Council, to strengthen
the legitimacy, the credibility and the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime established in accordance with
resolution 1267 (1999) through measures that help the
sanctions regime to be more consistent with the
international standards of due process, international
law and the respect for human rights.

Last year, an important step was taken through
the adoption of resolution 1822 (2008), which includes
various innovative elements enabling progress in the
area of transparency and clearer and fairer procedures,
including the publication of narrative summaries and a
review of all the names on the consolidated list. In that
regard, we endorse and commend the commitment of
the Chairman of the 1267 Committee, Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, in implementing that review, and we
recognize his particular interest in that process in
producing a more dynamic and realistic list.

The increasing number of trials around the world
seems to confirm the need to provide the regime with
an independent apolitical review mechanism that
would come from within this Council, not from
judicial, regional or international bodies outside it.
With that in mind, Costa Rica has worked with
Germany, Denmark, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Sweden, Switzerland, Belgium, Finland and Norway to
produce a working document with a number of options
to improve the due process within the sanctions
regime. We urge the Security Council and the
membership of the Organization, in general, to
consider those options, in particular with a view to the
resolution that we are due to negotiate next month to
renew the sanctions regime.

With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate are
important elements of the efforts of the United Nations
to combat terrorism. We would like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Ranko Vilovie and Mr. Mike
Smith for their leadership of the Committee and the
Executive Directorate, respectively. In our view, it is
especially important to guide the efforts of the
Committee in the direction of strengthening its work
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as the practice of holding
informal meetings with representatives of Member
States in order to identify whether any technical
assistance is necessary, and of promoting national
capacity-building.
We also welcome the fact that visits by the
Executive Directorate are carried out with a flexible
approach, adapted to each State, and that during each
visit it is emphasized that all measures adopted by
Member States to combat terrorism should comply
with human rights standards, international
humanitarian law and the law on refugees. Costa Rica
would like to see that a human rights expert is involved
during every visit, and that more resources are
allocated to this area.

I have just a brief comment on the 1540
Committee, which I have had the honour to chair for
the past two years. I would like to emphasize how
important Costa Rica felt it was to conduct the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). During the review,
international, regional and subregional bodies of
Member States, as well as academic and industrial
organizations, non-governmental and private-sector
organizations, had the opportunity to present their
comments, make suggestions and assess progress in
implementing the resolution. During this exercise, six
meetings, open to Member States, were held, three of
them in an interactive format. The change in perception
of the work of the Committee was confirmed, and we
hope these meetings contributed to that. What initially
was seen as something imposed by the Council and
exceeding the powers granted it by the Charter is now
seen as part of a broad process of international
cooperation aimed at achieving a common goal.

The conduct of the comprehensive review,
particularly the open meetings, is an example of the
importance of greater transparency and inclusiveness in
the working methods of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies. We were honoured to coordinate the Committee
and its expert group during this unprecedented
exercise. However, the real value of innovations in the
working methods of the Council and its subsidiaries, as
has been shown throughout its history, is that they
should become standard practice, and we hope that the
Security Council will repeat this kind of exercise in the
future.

