Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to begin by thanking Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary- General of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their informative and factual yet chilling briefings on the situation between Israel and Palestine. Ms. Mueller's report on the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territory was sobering, especially with regard to unaccompanied Palestinian children seeking medical aid in foreign lands. We also note the compelling testimony of the Ambassador of the State of Palestine. We would like to address four issues this morning, namely, the political process, the security concerns, the continuous land grabbing of Palestinian lands, and trust between Israel and Palestine. Turning first to the political situation, the dark clouds hanging over the Middle East, tensions between the United States and Israel and Iran, tensions in Lebanon and ongoing difficulties in Syria, Iraq and Yemen are diverting attention away from the core problem in the region: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. South Africa calls on the Security Council and all other players to refocus on that core problem. The lack of progress in the Middle East peace process is of great concern to South Africa. As we have heard before, and as many Council members have said here today, the only viable and sustainable solution to the crisis in the Middle East is a two-State solution that allows for a sovereign, independent Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, alongside a safe and secure State ofIsrael. Any attempts to divert from those fundamental concepts and the premature closure of final-status issues are but a distraction from the internationally accepted framework for resolving the crisis. In that regard, we reaffirm that the only way to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East is through reaching a lasting peace between Palestine and Israel - there is no other alternative - and restoring all the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance with the two-State solution and the relevant resolutions and international terms of reference. With regard to the announcement of Palestinian elections, we thank Ms. DiCarlo for the update on the United Nations efforts to ensure the holding of inclusive Palestinian elections. We call on all parties to make a concerted effort to ensure that safe and inclusive elections are held throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The Council has always emphasized, including Secretary- General Antonio Guterres, that a surge in diplomacy is a critical tool for the mediation of seemingly intractable conflicts. Where is that surge in diplomacy on this more than 60-year-old conflict? On the security situation, South Africa is deeply concerned by the tension around the Gaza Strip, which has led to further killing and a perpetuation of the conflict. In that regard, we call for a cessation of violent attacks by both sides and for a return to negotiations. South Africa believes that the current crises in Gaza will lead only to parties moving further and further apart from each other and undermine any hope for the resumption of negotiations. South Africa thanks Egypt and the Secretary-General for brokering the latest ceasefire between Israel and Gaza. The current security situation and the continued blockade imposed on Gaza negatively affect the humanitarian situation, as we heard from Ms. Mueller today. In that regard, we commend the staff and officials of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for continuing to provide essential aid, including health and education services, to the people of Gaza. With respect to the continued land-grabbing in Palestine, in these uncertain times, additional instability will only heighten tension. Threats and pronouncements of annexation, including large parts of the occupied West Bank, further undermine prospects for peace and hinder any chance of finding a sustainable settlement to the crisis. Ms. DiCarlo gave details on the ongoing Israeli land-grab of Palestinian territories, carried out in defiance of the Council's resolutions and overwhelming global condemnation. South Africa reiterates that the continued expansion of settlements violates international law, undermines the prospects for peace and contravenes the decisions of the Council, effectively damaging its credibility as the organ mandated to maintain international peace and security. We therefore continue to insist on the full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We must highlight that overt violations of Security Council resolutions would usually elicit harsher measures imposed on the party responsible for such infractions. We also call for the continuation of written reports by the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 2334 (2016). With regard to trust between the parties, the Council must work towards restoring trust in the legitimate peace process that has been pursued for decades in order to prevent the further development of antagonism between the parties. We therefore call on the Council to be united and unified in encouraging gestures of hope and the building of trust between the parties in an effort to defuse tension and towards creating an environment conducive to the resumption of dialogue. The Council should decisively address the hopelessness of both Israeli and Palestinian children, who see no end to the conflict that their grandparents and parents started. In conclusion, we reiterate our call for the Council to reconsider a visit to the region, which would be a clear indication - and not an infringement on the internal affairs of any parties - that the international community continues to support the resolution of the core and oldest conflict in the Middle East. As with other Council field visits, it would also provide an opportunity to meet all relevant actors in both Israel and Palestine and encourage them to move towards lasting peace for the sake of their own people. Israel and Palestine need help. The Council can provide that help. South Africa is ready to do its part to contribute to peacemaking efforts to assist both parties to move towards peace.
