Ms. Sison (United states of America): Today
is an especially momentous occasion as we reflect
upon the most recent report (see S/2017/662) and,
more importantly, the closing of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at the end
of the month. The United States thanks Judge Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; President Judge Agius, President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Mr. Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and indeed
all those who have served at the ICTY, or supported it
through their work in Government, non-governmental
organizations or United Nations institutions over
the past 23 years. In addition, we express our special
gratitude and respect for the many victims who
participated in proceedings and kept faith in the
international community's commitment to justice.

The ICTY was the first international tribunal since
those established in Nuremberg and Tokyo to investigate
and prosecute allegations of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. As the vanguard of modern
international justice, it established key precedents in
international criminal law, thereby setting the stage
for and guiding the work of subsequent tribunals
established to investigate and prosecute atrocities
in Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Cambodia and elsewhere.
Through its work, the ICTY has created a legacy of the
greatest importance. It has established a factual and
depoliticized record of the crimes committed during
the war. We applaud the ICTY's record, which includes
indicting 161 individuals and holding accountable
senior political and military leaders for their roles in
crimes committed during the war in the Balkans.

We especially highlight the recent verdict in the
case of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic' as an important
step towards holding accountable those individuals
responsible for the tremendous suffering of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among other crimes,
Mladie was found guilty of genocide in Srebrenica in
1995, crimes against humanity and persecution across
the country, terrorizing the population of Sarajevo, and
taking United Nations peacekeepers hostage. We hope
that that decision can provide some sense ofjustice and
closure to Victims and their families.

The United States has been a steadfast supporter
of the ICTY, and we encourage all States to respect its
rulings. Countries cannot pick and choose on matters
of justice. Our commitment to supporting justice and
reconciliation in the Balkans continues as the Tribunal's
remaining functions shift to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. The primary focus
of attention now moves to national jurisdictions, and
we call on all countries in the region to reinvigorate
cooperation to resolve remaining cases. However,
concerning the specific issue of the two surviving
individuals charged with contempt of court in relation
to witness intimidation in the case of Prosecutor v.
Vojislav Seselj, the United States applauds the order
of President Agius, transferring that case to the
Residual Mechanism. We call on the Government of
Serbia to cooperate with the Residual Mechanism,
execute the relevant arrest warrants and underscore the
Government's obligation to do so.

The United States commends the Residual
Mechanism for its progress during the reporting
period. We appreciate the continued focus on the
expeditious completion of trials and appeals. We also
note with satisfaction that, following the issuance of
three audit reports during the reporting period, the
Residual Mechanism has either implemented or is in
the process of implementing all recommendations.
We are encouraged by the priorities identified by the
President and the Prosecutor, and applaud the progress
made in restructuring and refocusing the fugitives
and investigations unit so as to apprehend the eight
remaining fugitives of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The United States is
firmly committed to the continuing efforts to locate
and arrest the eight remaining ICTR fugitives. Three of
the fugitives will be tried by the Residual Mechanism,
and five other will be transferred to Rwanda.
We continue to offer a reward of up to $5 million
each for information leading to the arrest or transfer
of those eight men, and stand ready to engage with
the new task forces. We likewise call on all States
and relevant law enforcement agencies in Europe
and Africa to cooperate with efforts to apprehend
those fugitives. They have escaped justice for too
long. With a refocused tracking unit and the renewed
cooperation of the international community and law
enforcement agencies, their arrest is possible. The
Residual Mechanism's efforts to increase public access
to judicial records and translate international criminal
trial judgments of the ICTR into Kinyarwanda, as
well as the responsiveness of the Prosecutor to request
assistance from national judicial authorities, are
important initiatives that will ensure that the ICTR has
an enduring and broad impact. Similarly, training for
domestic prosecutors from East Africa conducted by
the Prosecutor will contribute to building the capacity
of national jurisdictions to investigate and prosecute
atrocity crimes.

Although the ICTY may be closing its doors,
it leaves behind a legacy of justice, a robust body of
international case law and hope among victims of
atrocities that perpetrators - even the most senior
military and political leaders of a country - can be
held accountable. It also established a truthful historical
record that can both assist with regional reconciliation
efforts and ensure that crimes cannot be legitimately
denied. The same can be said of the Rwanda Tribunal.
The pursuit of justice for conflict-related atrocities is
not over. In the Balkans, there are hundreds of cases
currently in the hands of national authorities in the
region. In Rwanda and surrounding countries, fugitives
remain at large. We call on those Governments to
credibly investigate and prosecute those cases as
appropriate, while cooperating with one another and
the Residual Mechanism to that end.

The United States will continue its support, and
congratulates the forward-looking efforts of the
Residual Mechanism to play a role in those processes,
including through capacity-building support. As the
ICTY has shown, when we work together, we can
achieve a measure of justice and accountability for the
world's most horrific atrocities.
