Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to congratulate Special Representative Steiner on
his continued progress in implementing the mandate
that we have set forth in resolution 1244 (1999) and
also to say that I appreciate very much the presence of
the Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covie, and
his presentation this morning.

We heard two very informative and interesting
presentations at the beginning of this discussion, and
whether one considers the glass as half-full or half-
empty - or, perhaps, a quarter full and three-quarters
empty, in this case - it is clear, I think, from the
presentations that there is quite a bit of common
ground as to the objectives of what we are seeking
here, and I think that is positive. It is also clear that
there is encouraging progress on a number of fronts, in
particular with regard to the benchmarks for good
governance that were presented here only three months
ago.

That initial progress and good prospects for the
future bear out the wisdom of an approach that puts
standards of good governance before any premature
discussion of political status issues.

As both Mr. Steiner and the Deputy Prime
Minister noted in their comments, albeit in different
ways, for us to succeed in Kosovo, the people of
Kosovo must overcome their difficult and emotional
history. That process seems to be beginning.

The United States has long maintained that one
key to this success will be building confidence among
all parts of the population that the institutions of
government will govern democratically and that all will
respect fully the rule of law, and that also now seems to
be beginning.

We are encouraged by the continuing progress
that has been made in strengthening the courts and in
ensuring that all who have committed crimes are
brought to justice. We applaud the additional
international judges and the agreement that has been
worked out for increasing the number of Serb judges
and prosecutors.

The high-profile arrest and prosecution of those
who have committed ethnically motivated crimes are
another positive development, and the Kosovo Police
Service has been a success far beyond what anyone
might have expected. Its numbers include an
impressive number of women and minorities, and, with
the agreement of the force in Mitrovica, it may now
play an appropriate role in providing freedom of
movement and civil security for the population on both
sides of the river.

Still, much more remains to be done in Mitrovica,
and we fully support the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to make progress there.

We are encouraged by progress on the political
side as well. It is appropriate, I think, that the first
piece of legislation approved by the Assembly
pertained to pensions, a fundamental social and
economic issue. Upcoming municipal elections in the
fall offer an opportunity for all Kosovars to participate
in Kosovo's self-government, and, although progress is
uneven across Kosovo, we see new political parties
emerging across the political spectrum and increased
tolerance for building bridges between communities.

Finally, a word about returns. My Government
has been a strong proponent of sustainable returns. We
continue to believe that success on this difficult issue
will require careful planning and significant resources,
and we appreciate the work that UNMIK has done in
producing the documents that Mr. Steiner circulated
this morning. We applaud the progress that is
beginning to be made.

The United States has provided almost $8 million
to non-governmental organizations and to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on this issue, and we encourage all donors to
consider ways in which they can support the process.
Funding shortages have led certain United Nations
agencies to consider leaving Kosovo, which, on the
issue of returns, would seriously undermine what
UNMIK is trying to do.

My Government has committed significant
resources on a wide range of issues and initiatives,
including the Kosovo Police Service, the Kosovo
Protection Corps, the Kosovo courts and sustainable
returns. There are significant challenges remaining in
Kosovo, but donors must be prepared to address all
problems, no matter how difficult they might be.

I want to close simply by saying that we strongly
support the efforts of Mr. Steiner and UNMIK, and we
look to continued progress in the months ahead in the

implementation of UNMIK's mandate.
