The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Republic of the Congo, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abibi (Republic of the Congo) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned about
the grave situation in the Republic of the Congo and
calls for an immediate end to all hostilities. It deplores
the loss of life and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation and calls upon all parties to ensure the safety
of the civilian population and the safe and unrestricted
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council calls upon all States in
the region to support a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and to avoid any actions which could
exacerbate the situation. It condemns all external
interference in the Republic of the Congo, including
the intervention of foreign forces, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, and calls for the
immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces,
including mercenaries.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
of a political settlement and national reconciliation
and calls upon the parties to cooperate with the
International Mediation Committee chaired by the
President of Gabon and with the Joint United
Nations/Organization of African Unity Special
Envoy in reaching rapid agreement on peaceful
transitional arrangements leading to the holding of
democratic and free and fair elections with the
participation of all parties.

"The Security Council remains ready to
consider how the United Nations can further
contribute to a political settlement, including the
possibility of a United Nations presence, on the
basis of recommendations to be provided by the
Secretary-General as soon as possible."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.05 pm.

