The Niger congratulates your delegation, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. The participation of many ministers in today's open debate is a testimony to the timeliness of its choice of theme - the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on international peace and security. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Maurer for their briefings. We have witnessed how, in a short period of time, the COVID-19 pandemic has overwhelmed the capacities of countries - some with the most advanced health- care systems. To date, 10 million people have been infected and half a million, unfortunately, have passed away. We would like to extend our deep gratitude to all front-line workers in the fight against this scourge and convey our condolences to all those who have lost loved ones. As COVID-19 has spread, one of its inevitable consequences has been its impact on the international conflict resolution mechanism and the humanitarian aid sector. The privilege bestowed upon the Council as the most important crisis- management entity in the world, with the power to pass enforceable decisions binding on all Member States, has also suffered greatly. However, despite the three-month delay, we align ourselves with, and welcome yesterday's adoption of, resolution 2532 (2020) in support of the Secretary-General call for a global humanitarian ceasefire as part of the fight against the pandemic. We thank France and Tunisia for bringing us there. Unfortunately, the Secretary-General's ceasefire appeal has gone mostly unheeded by belligerent parties on the ground, as is the case in the Sahel, where terrorist groups are trying to take advantage of the pandemic to destabilize Governments by ramping up their attacks on civilian and military targets alike. Those actions have resulted in the loss of innocent lives and major disruptions to the delivery of basic social services to the population. In the meantime, it is impossible for mediators, Special Envoys and Special Representatives to travel and meet with the parties among whom they are trying to find common ground with regard to various conflicts areas. The delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance is slowed by border closures and the many restrictions taken by Member States in their efforts to contain the spread of the pandemic. Peace operations are being heavily impacted by the freeze in rotations and the risk of spread of the disease among the troops and the population they are protecting. We commend the United Nations for putting in place strict and effective measures aimed at minimizing and mitigating the impact of the pandemic in the various peace operations. As we all know, even in the best of times, persons in conflict zones face vulnerabilities that render their livelihoods challenging. In the Sahel, an area where climate change, armed conflict and fragile health-care systems intersect, the pandemic has added another layer to an already existing dire situation, and has made the populations particularly vulnerable to the outbreak of diseases and hunger. In all, 3.5 million people are projected to face acute to severe food insecurity, of which 3.1 million are internally displaced, returnees or people at risk of statelessness. In addition to its heavy human and health toll, the pandemic is seriously affecting the already fragile economies of the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), with the risk of a serious contraction in gross domestic product that could reach 7 to 8 per cent in 2020 for some countries, as mentioned in the final outcome of the G-5 Sahel Summit, held in Nouakchott on 30 June. The global health crisis has become an economic and social crisis that generates sociopolitical and security crises, which could deepen if a second wave were to materialize. We still believe that overcoming the current crisis requires a compassionate approach that includes the easing or suspension of economic sanctions to allow countries to sustain their medical and economic responses to the outbreak. A crisis of this sort calls on our collective conscience to draw inspiration from recent experience and from all places to arrive at solutions. As harmful as the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic was for Africa, lessons learned from it might have taught us how to better weather the current pandemic. The watchword seems to be "invest in preparedness", as we have seen with Ebola, because viral diseases move faster than emergency and funding mechanisms. The African Union and the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention worked early on with Governments across the continent to scale up a comprehensive and evidence-based intervention to reduce and slow down the virus transmission, help health systems better manage the surge of patients and communities to better adapt to the disruption of social, cultural and economic activities. At the national level, the Niger continues to enforce and promote the protocols approved by the African Union and the World Health Organization. Despite the drop in cases, we remain vigilant and have ramped up surveillance, risk communication, community engagement and coordination among the member States of the Economic Community of West African States, currently chaired by the Niger. Furthermore, the use of social media to spread false information and propaganda on the pandemic is a major source of concern. This fake news is impeding Government responses to COVID-19 by spreading conspiracy theories about the disease, stigmatizing groups of populations and inciting hatred. We welcome the United Nations launch of the Verified campaign, which is aimed at countering that misinformation with facts and scientific data. As was the case during the Ebola outbreak in Africa, Governments must therefore build trust, be truthful with the population and ensure that the public receives accurate, timely and appropriate information in order not to repeat mistakes that were costly, in terms of allowing the disease to spread. In both crises, making sure that most of the information is locally contextualized and health experts are sharing it, in accordance with local customs and practices, was a priority. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda, I cannot conclude my remarks without paying tribute to and stressing the important role women play in all viable response efforts. Not only do they make up the majority of health-care workers, thus putting them on the front lines of the infection, but they are also victims in crises like these. The current COVID-19 crisis has also laid the groundwork for another shadow pandemic, namely, domestic violence against women and children. In that regard, we can and must do better.
