Ms. Bustamante (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting and David Shearer and Angelina Jial for their
important briefings.

A few months from the end of the transition period,
we are gratified to know that the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan remains in force and that political violence
in that country has decreased.

We recognize the expressions of mutual trust
between the Government and the different opposition
parties. The various meetings held in the territory of
South Sudan are undoubtedly an important step in the
peace process. We regret, however, that there has only
been modest progress in its implementation. Concrete
progress on substantive issues is needed to achieve
sustainable peace in South Sudan.

A few months ago, the Secretary-General
called on the leaders of South Sudan to achieve two
objectives - the establishment of transitional security
arrangements and the formation of a revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity - as
priorities in the period leading up to the transition. We
express our deep concern that neither of those basic
objectives have been met.

We urge the parties to implement those
commitments in a timely manner. There are still some
key outstanding issues, such as the establishment of
the Independent Boundary Commission, the adoption
of a draft law on constitutional reform that would
incorporate the Agreement into the Transitional
Constitution and the adoption of the governance system
for the transitional Government.

Meanwhile, tensions continue in various parts of
the country. We regret that intercommunal violence
and clashes between Government forces and factions
that did not sign the Agreement continue to affect the
civilian population. We reiterate that true peace in
South Sudan will be possible only through political will
and dialogue among all parties.

We express our deep concern over the grave
humanitarian situation. The 1.87 million internally
displaced persons and 2.27 million displaced persons
in neighbouring countries are proof of the magnitude
of the situation. Added to that are the obstacles
impeding the work of humanitarian workers and the
Violence perpetrated against them and their property,
which prevents aid from reaching the most vulnerable.
We hope that the parties will be able to guarantee a
safer environment.

We must also strongly condemn the continuing
violations of human rights, in particular the rampant
sexual violence in South Sudan and especially against
women and girls. We call on the Government and all
parties to fulfil their commitments to punish those
responsible for crimes of atrocity. The incidents
documented in Bentiu a few months ago are a warning
of the urgency of implementing transitional security
arrangements as soon as possible.

In that regard, we welcome the training provided
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to senior
commanders of the South Sudanese forces to raise
awareness of conflict-related sexual violence, which
we hope will be repeated on a regular basis. We believe
that more effective and preventive support could be
provided by the Mission through a close relationship
with women-led non-governmental organizations
working on the ground with communities.

Today, on International Women's Day, we reiterate
our desire that women, rather becoming victims,
become strong leaders in the process of implementing
the peace Agreement. The United Nations, together
with the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the guarantors
of the Agreement, must ensure the fulfilment of all the
commitments of the Agreement, including the 35 per
cent quota allocated to the representation of women at
all levels and in all Government institutions in which
political decisions are made.

Moreover, we welcome the positive impact that the
peace Agreement has had on the return of displaced
persons. We stress, however, the importance of ensuring
that such return and resettlement takes place gradually,
in a voluntary, dignified and safe manner and on the
basis of informed decisions, while also taking into
account the dynamics of each civilian protection centre
and complying with international human rights norms
and standards.

I will conclude by highlighting the work and
efforts of IGAD and the African Union. We reiterate
the importance of maintaining the unity of the Council
in the political support and follow-up required to make
further progress in the South Sudan peace process, as
well as the importance ofworking in close coordination
with the African Union and IGAD.
