Mr. O'Brien: We meet today in the shadow of
Jo Cox's murder last Thursday. She was a brilliant
British Member of Parliament killed in the line of
public duty just days before her forty-second birthday,
leaving a husband and two very young children - a
loss to all of us and particularly to the innocent people
of Syria, who never met her but for whom she worked
relentlessly, courageously and effectively. She was
a humanitarian to her core and, working with the
brave local non-governmental organization the
White Helmets, Jo was one of the greatest advocates
for this long, destructive, senseless war to stop, and
stop immediately.

That is what Afin said to me in the Reyhanli
hospital near Hatay, Turkey, on the Syrian border
near the Bab Al-Hawa crossing, when I was there the
other day. He is a White Helmet working in Syria who
had just lost his leg below the knee in an improved-
explosive-device explosion and was trying to get used
to his prosthesis. Jo took his message to the House of
Commons and to the Security Council chamber. She
joined politics to speak truth to power, fearlessly, to the
Security Council; I dedicate this statement to Jo, to her
values, to her inspiration, and above all, her call for
peace in Syria now.

There is something fundamentally wrong in a world
where attacks on hospitals and schools, on mosques and
public markets, on ethnic, religious and confessional
groups have become so commonplace that they cease
to incite any reaction. Month after month, indeed, year
after year, we have each spoken about the ending of
the carnage and about the importance of justice and the
need for accountability in Syria. Syrians have begged
for action - Syrians such as Dr. Mazin, who, as I
reported to the Council last month (see S/PV.7701), had
been helping people, trying to save lives at the Al-Quds
hospital, before he himself sustained grievous injuries
to both his brain and abdomen; all he said from his
hospital bed, after mustering the energy to speak, was,
"Please, peace".

And yet the world continues to watch Syria
disintegrate into bloodshed. In many parts of the
country, violence continues unbridled as the parties
seemingly fail to grasp that there can be no military
solution to the conflict. Civilian neighbourhoods are
pummelled. Medical and other health-care facilities are
destroyed. Education is disrupted, and livelihoods are
devastated. Would each and every one of those present
here not try to flee as well?

The latest report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
issued on 16 June, notes that in the east, the terrorist
organization the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has committed genocide as well as multiple
crimes against humanity and war crimes against the
Yazidis. The report describes the thousands of Yazidis
held captive in Syria, where they are subjected to
unimaginable horrors. Yazidi women continue to be
sexually enslaved, and Yazidi boys are indoctrinated,
trained and used in hostilities. Thousands of Yazidi
men and boys are missing.

In the north-west, in Aleppo governorate, an
ISIL offensive on Azaz and the surrounding area led
to numerous civilian casualties, threatening up to
200,000 civilians. In addition, since the beginning of
the anti-ISIL offensive in Menbij, 45,000 people have
been displaced, and 65,000 others are now encircled
by the Syrian Democratic Forces. Moreover, airstrikes
and shelling increased on the Castello road, the only
remaining access route for areas of Aleppo held by
non-State armed groups, and the adjacent villages of
Anadan, Hritan, Kafr Hamra and Khan Al-Assal,
risking again the complete encirclement of the area and
the entrapment of more than 300,000 civilians.

Imprecise weaponry, notably the unrelenting use
of barrel bombs by Government forces, has resulted in
hideous loss oflife. For example, in Daraya, now dubbed
"Syria's capital of barrel bombs", dozens of barrel
bombs have reportedly been dropped during the last few
weeks alone. Much has been said about the use of these
weapons, but let me repeat: their use in this manner
constitutes indiscriminate attacks. Their sole purpose
is to terrorize and punish the civilian population. All
attacks against civilians and civilian objects, as well
as the indiscriminate use of weapons in populated
areas, including shelling and aerial bombardments,
must end. They must end now. And before anyone
tries to suggest that this is not the truth, these barrel
bombs are documented facts, indisputable facts, for
which, however long it takes, the decision-makers and
perpetrators will be held to account one day.

This cruel conflict continues to tear families apart
and inflict brutal suffering on the innocent. Just last
week, at least six children were killed and tens of others
injured in heinous attacks near the Sayidda Zeinab
shrine, south of Damascus, as well as on a public
market in Idlib. Millions more are in the line of fire,
facing crushing poverty and alarming physical danger.
Children have been forcibly detained; they have been
tortured, subjected to sexual violence and in some
cases executed. Childhoods have been lost as ISIL and
some non-State armed groups have targeted children
for recruitment into their forces.

How much longer will the children of Syria have
to suffer like this? How much longer will we tolerate
the utter disregard for the most basic precepts of
humanity, the complete disrespect of international law
and, indeed, the Council's resolutions? On 3 May, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of the wounded and the sick, medical
personnel and humanitarian personnel in armed
conflict. And yet, since then, the United Nations and
its partners have received reports of dozens of new
attacks. Documentation from Physicians for Human
Rights received in late April identified 365 attacks
on 259 medical facilities, as well as the deaths of 738
medical personnel. The Syrian Government forces
were reportedly responsible for at least of these 289
attacks - more than 76 per cent - resulting in an
estimated 667 medical personnel killed.
Moreover, since 1 May, the United Nations and its
partners have received reports of many more attacks on
medical and other health-care facilities. This includes
the destruction on 23 May of a hospital in Tartous, as
well as the attacks on 8 June on three medical facilities
in Aleppo: the Al-Bayan and the Al-Hakeem hospitals,
within a distance of 300 metres, and the Abdulhadi
Fares clinic, all in the eastern part of the city. Again,
these are facts, all facts, undeniable facts.

The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right
to health, Dainius Piiras, recently warned that

"medical units are being damaged and destroyed
in large numbers throughout Syria, revealing what
has become a repugnant hallmark of this horrific
conflict. The sheer number of such facilities being
hit, as well as information relating to some of the
incidents, suggests that some hospitals and other
medical facilities may have been directly targeted".

I am also gravely concerned about the situation
at the berm along the Jordanian border, where the
number of asylum seekers has increased exponentially
in recent months, tripling to a current estimate of over
70,000 people. The population at the berm includes
high numbers of extremely vulnerable people. Over
half are children. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimates that the
population will top 100,000 by the end of the year.
Moreover, the security situation at the berm has
deteriorated considerably, as was painfully illustrated
on Tuesday when at least six Jordanian soldiers were
killed during an attack on a nearby border guard post.
This attack took place close to a waiting area for Syrians
hoping to gain entry into Jordan.

Surely all of this should shake the moral conscience
of the world. Surely the international community
must question its humanity, when religious, ethnic
and confessional communities risk eradication, when
internally displaced person settlements are no longer
safe from bombardment, when refugees and migrants
drown in the Mediterranean by the thousands, and,
to quote UNICEF, when "babies have to be taken out
of incubators because of attacks on hospitals". This is
obscene. This is not a world we should nor can accept.

United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organization partners continue their tireless efforts
to meet the urgent humanitarian needs of the Syrian
population. The June plan for humanitarian access was
submitted on 19 May and sought access to 1.1 million
people in 34 locations. On 2 June, an initial response was
received from Syrian authorities. Of the 34 locations
to which access was sought, 16 locations were granted
full access, 13 were granted partial access, meaning
that items such as food were not authorized or that the
number of people we were authorized to deliver to was
below our estimate of actual people in need, and 5 were
not granted any access. Following a second round of
consultations, on 6 June the previously excluded town
of Al-Waer was granted partial access, and partial
approvals for Darayya and Douma were expanded to
include food for some beneficiaries.

With respect to besieged areas in particular,
following intense negotiations at various levels for
access to besieged areas requested under the June plan,
the United Nations received approvals to reach 15 by
land, either in full or to part of the population in need. I
should also note that during the month the total number
of besieged areas was revised downward, as Zabdin
was retaken by the Syrian Government. This leaves
a total of 18 locations besieged. The only besieged
location requested but not approved under the June
Plan is Al-Zabadani in Rural Damascus. Al-Zabadani
is included in what is known as the Four Towns
agreement and, as I stated earlier, any delivery to those
towns continues to be planned and implemented under
that framework. Requests for the other two besieged
areas - Yarmouk and Deir ez-Zor - are not under
the convoy plan but are covered by separate airdrops
led by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme, respectively, both of which continue.

As I speak, inter-agency convoys are delivering
much needed multisectoral assistance to Jirud, in Rural
Damascus and Sheikh Maqsoud, a neighbourhood
in the city of Aleppo, which has been the subject of
constant shelling in the past months. This is the first
of a multiphase delivery to bring food, nutritional
items, health, hygiene and other humanitarian supplies
for some 22,500 beneficiaries. On 19 June, a United
Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) convoy
proceeded to Kafr Batna sub-district, providing food
and health assistance for 25,000 beneficiaries in two
besieged locations, Ein Terma and Hamouria, as well
as three hard-to-reach communities, namely Hazeh,
Beit Sawa and Eftreis. On 16 June, a United Nations-
SARC convoy delivered food, health, nutrition,
non-food items (NFI), water, sanitation and hygiene
(WASH) materials, and agricultural assistance for
50,000 beneficiaries in Afrin and neighbouring towns
in Aleppo Governorate. That same day, an inter-agency
convoy delivered humanitarian assistance to 37,500
residents in the besieged neighbourhood of Al Waer in
Homs. A follow-up convoy is planned in the coming
days, pending Government approval. Together, these
convoys to A1 Waer will provide food, medicine,
health, nutrition, WASH and emergency supplies for
75,000 people.

Earlier this month, a United Nations-SARC convoy
delivered food, health, nutrition, WASH and NFI
materials for 33,500 beneficiaries in Al-Dar Alkabirah,
Tier Mallah and Al-Ghanto in northern Rural Homs.
In addition, on 10 June, the United Nations and its
partners completed the first of a multiphase delivery
to bring food for 24,000 people, as well as nutrition
items, health, hygiene and other humanitarian supplies
for some 40,000 people in Douma. The day before, on
9 June, the United Nations and its partners delivered
food, nutrition, health and medical, WASH and
education assistance to Darayya as a follow-up to the
1 June convey that delivered health supplies, including
vaccines and certain nutritional supplies for children.
This was the first time that the United Nations and
SARC were able to deliver supplies to Darayya in four
years. Moreover, on 1 and 3 June, inter-agency convoys
were deployed to Moadamiya to deliver food, health,
nutritional supplies for 45,000 people.

Despite the continued best efforts of the United
Nations and our humanitarian partners on the ground
to reach all those in need in communities across Syria,
the realities of the ongoing conflict and the continued
interference and intransigence of the parties to the
conflict present serious challenges to our ability to do
so. The limitations by the Syrian authorities placed
upon access in terms of where, who and how much
aid can be delivered continues to make assistance to
some communities quite simply a non-starter and is
compounded by those same authorities then making
every effort to delay, distract and dismantle convoys as
we are attempting to undertake our work. Organizing
the delivery of aid must remain the responsibility of the
United Nations and its partners based on need; it must
not be subject to political or other considerations.
We must understand that the delivery of aid is not a
simple matter of pointing a truck in the right direction
in the morning and hoping for the best. Security issues
are a minute-by-minute concern for those on the ground
organizing humanitarian convoys, trying to calculate
the safest, most efficient way through a nightmarish
conflict situation. This requires exceptional and brave
people. In the most optimal conditions, it is a complex
undertaking. In Syria, when presented with the reality
of the conditions I have described today - and indeed
I describe every month - during an active and volatile
conflict, it is a Herculean challenge fraught with danger,
conducted by these very extraordinary and brave
people, whose work we must make safer, not even more
dangerous, by allowing them the space to negotiate
and, as I urged before, without the glare of publicity
attending their every move. It is not one, however, at
which, frankly, we can afford to fail. I call yet again
on all with influence to continue to pressure the
authorities to allow unrestricted, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access, free from interference.

Since January this year, some 844,325 people have
been reached by the United Nations and its partners
through inter-agency cross-line convoys. This includes
334,150 of the some 590,200 people living in besieged
areas as designated by the United Nations, some more
than once. While this certainly represents progress and
is welcomed, it is but a trickle compared to the level
of protection concerns, needs and suffering in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. Moreover, following careful
review, we now estimate that some 5 million people are
living in hard-to-reach areas, which is an increase of
over 900,000 people from the previous estimate. This
large increase is based on several factors, but primarily
the inclusion of areas in parts of Aleppo, Al-Raqqa and
Al-Hasakeh Governorates as a result of insecurity as
well as constrained access for humanitarian actors both
from within Syria and via cross-border operations.

It is therefore vital that the stuttering momentum
sustained on humanitarian access over the past few
months continue and improve, and be significantly
expanded into the second half of this year. The key
now is to turn these requests and approvals to besieged
and hard-to-reach locations into full and sustained
humanitarian deliveries to all Syrians in need. The
team on the ground is working day and night to make
this a reality, including by negotiating with the Syrian
authorities to turn partial approvals into full approvals
and to put an end to the removal of medical supplies,
which, abominably, continues.
By the end ofthis month, we hope, we will have been
able to reach all besieged locations. Council members
may rest assured that, if given the full approvals to all
areas, the United Nations and its partners do have the
capacity to step up and fulfil those needs so long as the
funding is flowing as cash and not just as the words of
pledges. We have now also submitted the July access
plan to the Syrian authorities; we did that on 19 June,
requesting access to reach 1,220,750 beneficiaries
in 35 besieged, hard-to-reach and crossline priority
locations. This must be approved in full and without
any conditions.

We also need the parties to the so-called Four
Towns agreement to end the tit-for-tat so as to ensure
that approved convoys can proceed and that civilians
in need of medical treatment can get timely access
for their health care. In order for that to happen and
to ensure sustained access in the weeks and months
to come, we will require the continued support of
the Security Council, the International Syria Support
Group and Member States. We also need to continue
to support our brave non-governmental organization
partners working tirelessly in besieged and hard-
to-reach locations, whose ongoing programmes are
absolutely vital to complement the important efforts of
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
in reaching people in need.

As I have said numerous times before, we remain
committed and ready to deliver aid through any possible
modality, including airdrops for civilians in desperate
need, whoever and wherever they are. The bottom line,
however, is that the real extent of the progress cannot
only be measured by ad hoc deliveries to besieged
communities. The fact that dozens of barrel bombs
were reportedly dropped on 10 June in Daraya - the
day after the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent delivered the first food aid to the town since
November 2012 - shows that the situation for people
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas will not be resolved
by humanitarian aid delivery alone.

The real measure will be when these medieval
sieges are no more; when boys do not risk sniper fire
when bringing medicine to their mothers; when doctors
can administer life-saving treatments without the fear
of imminent attacks; when Yazidi girls do not have
to scratch their faces out of fear of being bought and
sexually enslaved. That is the disgusting reality oflife The President (spake in French): I thank
in Syria today. While the ultimate responsibility lies MT- O'Brien for his briefing.

with the Syrian parties, future generations will judge 1 now invite Council members to informal
us harshly if we have an inability of the international consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

community to save and protect civilians in Syria. The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
