Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The State of Kuwait attaches great importance to
everything that could promote security and stability
throughout the world and establish international peace
and security. Today's subject is a very important one and
has a direct impact on international peace and security.

It is unfortunate to see such an extremely
important historic treaty, the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which was signed at
a very critical time - at the peak of the Cold War
between the United States of America and the Soviet
Union 4 end in collapse. This is undoubtedly of great
concern. Looking back, we can see that the Treaty had
a very important positive impact. By committing to its
provisions, the two parties were able to destroy and
remove approximately 2,700 missile systems in 1991.
The Treaty also helped to considerably reduce tensions
at that time and to tangibly maintain international
peace and stability, especially in Europe. The world
was looking forward to the reduction in short-range
and intermediate-range nuclear missiles. However,
following certain recent events, that hope has begun to
fade away, in particular in the light of the threats and
challenges we are facing everywhere. Our world today
cannot afford further chaos, instability and disruption
of international security.

The collapse of the INF Treaty and the potential
repercussions could undermine other arms limitation
treaties and accelerate the collapse of the global system
which aims to achieving non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. It could also undermine global security and
knock down a basic pillar of arms limitation, especially
since some have taken advantage of the opportunity to
avoid compliance with international conventions and
instruments on limiting nuclear weapons.

It is unfortunate that the doctrine of nuclear
deterrence is still part of the security policies of all
nuclear-weapon States. Frustration is growing because
of the slow pace of nuclear disarmament and the
resulting disappointment, while fears of tragic and
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use of
nuclear weapons are increasing.

We stress that the only way to end the threat of
nuclear weapons is to completely destroy them. The
ongoing possession of these deadly weapons is itself a
threat to international peace and security. Circumventing
the responsibility to comply with conventions limiting
this danger send the wrong message to other nuclear-
weapon States that did not join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, such as Israel
and other countries on the Council's agenda, namely,
North Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran.

In conclusion, we call on all parties to avoid
escalation and embark upon an effective dialogue
with a view to adopting confidence-building measures
in order to reach a new joint agreement to limit the
proliferation of short- and intermediate-range nuclear
missiles, and perhaps to not cancel the Treaty under
discussion but to strengthen it.

