Mr. Rosenthal (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as President of the Economic and Social
Council, I appreciate the invitation extended to us to
participate in this open meeting of the Security
Council.

I would like to make use of the few minutes
allocated to me to make four points.

In the first place, if we were to identify one single
issue that offers the possibility of a more productive
interaction between our two Councils, it would no
doubt be the attention that the United Nations accords
to countries emerging from conflict. The clearest
example is found in the decision adopted by the
Economic and Social Council in July last year to create
an Ad Hoc Advisory Group On African Countries
emerging from conflict. That decision found concrete
expression in the creation, in October of 2002, of the
first of such groups, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Guinea-Bissau. That Group, mandated to examine the
humanitarian and economic needs of the country and to
promote international cooperation to that end,
expressly includes among its members the Chairperson
of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security Council
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. We
trust that this pioneering action of cooperation between
our two Councils is a harbinger of an even more
fruitful interaction in the future.

Secondly, for several years now various forums
of the United Nations have been insisting on the need
to deepen reciprocal support between themselves and
the Bretton Woods institutions. Among many other
aspects, this is a matter that is not alien to the Security
Council in its peace-building efforts. Our own forum
has achieved important progress in consolidating that
mutual support and in enhancing coherence,
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the World Trade Organization. I believe that
during our recent Economic and Social Council
meeting of 14 April, held in the context of follow-up
activities to the Monterrey Consensus, we took an
important step in that direction.

Thirdly and in more general terms, under the
orientation of the General Assembly, both of our
Councils reflect, institutionally, the two great pillars on
which the United Nations reposes: the maintenance of
peace and constructive coexistence among nations, on
the one hand, and economic and social development,
respect for human rights and humanitarian assistance,
on the other. The Charter itself lays out some
connecting vessels between the three organs
mentioned - as the President of the General Assembly
has just reminded us - and praxis has added additional
links, such as those I have just mentioned. We must
continue to deepen this trend, since, as banal as it may
sound, it is nevertheless a truism that without
development there is no peace and that without peace
there is no development.

Finally, and in the context of the United Nations
system of governance, we would like to believe that the
strengths of each of our organs tend to be transmitted
to the others, but we also recognize that the same holds
true regarding weaknesses. For this reason, we trust
that the recent differences in points of view that have
characterized the Security Council regarding the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq can
be overcome in the next phases that this forum will
have to address on the matter. As the Secretary-General
recalled, should this not be forthcoming, all our organs
and the United Nations in its entirety will suffer the
consequences.

