Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank your
presidency, Sir, for its leadership at the head of the
Council and for having convened this meeting.

I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing today. We believe that meetings such as
today's contribute towards settling a just, comprehensive
and long-lasting conflict that has peristed without
resolution for decades.

Bolivia condemns terrorism and violence,
regardless of the perpetrators or their motives. All our
efforts will be aimed ultimately at achieving peace
for the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples. Bolivia
participated in the Middle East Peace Conference
to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, held on
15 January in Paris, and thanks France, and in particular
President Hollande, for their efforts in that regard. The
Conference confirmed yet again that the only solution
acceptable to the international community is the two-
State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine.

Like my colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Uruguay, I recall that General Assembly resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947 - I repeat, 29 November
1947 - referred to the future Government of Palestine.
Seventy years have gone by since the adoption of
that resolution and fifty since Israel first occupied
Palestinian territory. A number of conventional wars
have been fought and numerous acts of aggression
committed, including the despicable attack in Gaza
perpetrated by Israeli military forces in 2014.

Dozens of resolutions on this tragic situation have
been adopted by the Organization. The the committees
of the General Assembly and the Security Council have
spoken clearly ofthe inalienable rights ofthe Palestinian
people. Bolivia supported the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 67/19, recognizing Palestine as a
non-member observer State of the Organization and
allowing the flag of Palestine to be raised outside the
Hall in permanent recognition of the silence and failure
of the Organization.

We welcome the recent adoption of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016), reaffirming the inadmissability
of the acquisition of territory by force and condemning
all steps taken to change the demographic composition,
nature and status of Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem. We have also
condemned, inter alia, the construction and expansion
of settlements, the transfer of settlers, the confiscation
of land, the demolition of housing and the displacement
of Palestinian civilians, in Violation of international
humanitarian law and relevant resolutions of the
Council.

I should like to share an experience I had a few
years ago, working here at Headquarters. I recall that
in one committee, as we adopted a draft resolution
recognizing the rights of the Palestinian people, an
Israeli representative took the floor to say, more or less,
that we could adopt all the resolutions we wanted to
adopt because they would in any event do nothing but
collect dust here in the archives. I was struck by the
disregard for the decisions that we have taken. But I
was struck even more by the situation on the ground, as
the widespread and systematic violation of the decisions
taken by the organs of the United Nations reflects the
failure of the international community over the past 50
years. There are two parties to the conflict, but we must
never forget that those two parties, which are not on
equal footing, do not View the conflict in the same way.

Neither the Council nor the Organization should
ever forget that one of the parties is the occupying
Power. The Organization should never forget that one
of the parties uses, and has used, force to occupy the
territory of the other party. Let us not forget that one
of the parties has built a wall, which, according to
the 2004 advisory opinion (see A/ES-10/273) of the
International Court of Justice, represents a breach
of international law. Let us not forget that one of the
parties, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016) and others,
has built illegal settlements on the territory of the other.
Let us not forget that one of the parties has forcibly
displaced civilians, built settlements, confiscated land,
demolished homes and imposed a blockade on Gaza,
which has had terrible humanitarian consequences. One
of the parties has taken punitive action against those
countries that voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016)
or have expressed agreement with its provisions. One
of the parties dishonours its international obligations
and systematically violates the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. It does so
because, as long as they are not implemented, as the
representative ofIsrael has stated, those resolutions and
the Charter of the United Nations will simply gather
dust.

We face a choice. Will the Charter of the United
Nations prevail, or will the occupation continue? Will
the Charter prevail, or will colonialism continue?
Will the Charter prevail, or will the illegal activities
continue? Will the Charter prevail, or will the
acquisition of territory by force continue? That is why
the involvement of the international community is so
crucial, as it can enable the victims of the occupation
to experience conditions that are less unequal, as the
international community tries to resolve the protracted
conflict.

We draw attention to the unusual and tragic situation
of Palestinian refugees and the dire situation in Gaza,
where access to basic services such as water, electricity
and other sources of energy is unpredictable. In the
same vein, with regard to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the international community must not
spread the vicious lie that the Sustainable Development
Goals can be achieved in a territory under foreign
occupation. It will not be possible for the Palestinian
people to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda if they remain under Israeli
occupation. We commend the efforts undertaken by
France, the Quartet, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. As the President
of Bolivia, Evo Morales Ayma, stated, we welcome
Pope Francis' assertion that lasting peace could be
achieved in the Middle East through dialogue.

Secretary-General Anto'nio Guterres has injected
new energy and hope into the work of the Organization.
He has declared that 2017 will be the year for peace.
We hope that the work of the Council will be carried
out with that goal in mind. If we wish to meet the
challenge set out by the Secretary-General himself and
the Charter of the United Nations on this very sensitive
issue, and in order to ensure that the Charter does not
continue to gather dust for decades, it is crucial that we
put an end once and for all to the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory, which began in 1967, and ensure
the right of the Palestinian people to independence and
a sovereign, contiguous and stable Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

To that end, we believe, with regard to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), adopted in December 2016, that three
priorities exist for the path that leads to the success
or failure of the Council and of the international
community. The three priorities are implementation,
implementation and implementation.

