Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We congratulate the
United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August and
commend Uganda for having successfully steered the
work of the Council during month of July. We welcome
the opportunity to participate and share our views in
the Council's debate on United Nations peacekeeping.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We also thank the Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and General
Agwai for their briefings to the Council.

This debate highlights once again the urgency of
meaningfully and collectively addressing the
complexities of peacekeeping today. Peacekeeping is
one of the major means at the disposal of the United
Nations to fulfil its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. The Charter of the
United Nations clearly mandates the maintenance of
international peace and security as the primary
responsibility of the Organization, in particular of the
Security Council.

Despite some shortcomings and challenges,
United Nations peacekeeping operations have played
an important role in helping countries emerge from
conflict, consolidate peace, maintain stability and
engage in national reconstruction, especially on our
continent of Africa. We hope this debate will contribute
to enhancing and improving the effectiveness,
efficiency and continued relevance of United Nations
peacekeeping.

We welcome the efforts of the Secretariat to
review peacekeeping operations as outlined in its
non-paper "A New Partnership Agenda: Charting a
New Horizon for United Nations Peacekeeping". We
hope that that non-paper, alongside other existing
literature such as the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and
the 2010 reform agenda, will provide a basis for
engaging in a meaningful discussion on the
multifaceted challenges facing peacekeeping. In that
regard, we would like to limit our focus to five key
issues that we believe could chart a way forward on
United Nations peacekeeping if given meaningful
consideration.

A comprehensive, coordinated and inclusive
approach to improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping during the planning, in-theatre and exit
stages of such operations should be enhanced. In order
to achieve that, all key stakeholders, including the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat, must be thoroughly consulted and engaged.
While the current mechanism for consultation, such as
the Council's meetings with troop-contributing
countries, have provided a forum for engagement,
frequent and substantive interaction could prove useful.
In that regard, South Africa would like to
emphasize the critical contribution made by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the General
Assembly's Fifth Committee and other stakeholders in
enhancing United Nations peacekeeping efforts. We
also recognize the important work conducted by the
Peacebuilding Commission in post-conflict societies.

South Africa is of the View that burden-sharing is
key to dealing with the complex challenges of
peacekeeping. While many of us acknowledge the
importance of our collective responsibility towards
effective peacekeeping, that should be guided by
political will and matched by actual actions on the
ground. For that reason, we encourage the general
membership of the United Nations to continue to
generously contribute to all peacekeeping operations,
with both personnel and equipment.

South Africa supports ongoing United Nations
efforts to strengthen its partnership and dialogue with

relevant regional organizations, such as the African
Union (AU) and the European Union, in the area of
peacekeeping. We believe that those partnerships
should be strengthened as they provide comparative
advantages. In that context, we are encouraged by the
ongoing partnership and cooperation between the AU
and the United Nations, as recently witnessed in the
cases of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia, as well as continued cooperation between the
AU Commission and United Nations Secretariat.

The issue of flexible, predictable and sustainable
resources for peacekeeping operations, especially as it
relates to the African continent, is critical to
peacekeeping. With the evolving complexity of modern
peacekeeping, it is important to recognize the leading
role that the African Union has played over recent
years in the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts on the continent, in line with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. Through various
subregional and regional efforts, including in Burundi,
Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the AU has shown how peacekeeping
operations support the political settlement of disputes.
All of that has happened despite the limited resources
at the Union's disposal.

Clearly, for those AU efforts to work and to
contribute towards robust and successful United
Nations peacekeeping operations, we need to seriously
consider the issue of flexible, predictable and
sustainable resources. In that regard, South Africa is
encouraged by the Prodi report (see S/2008/813) and
its recommendations, in particular its focus on the need
for a strategic relationship and stronger coordination
between the AU and United Nations. We hope that the
report of the Secretary-General to be submitted in
September will go beyond the recommendations
outlined in the Prodi report and provide political space
for advancing options for the financing of AU
peacekeeping missions, including through assessed
contributions.

The Secretariat non-paper makes the important
observation that peacekeeping is not always the right
answer. My delegation concurs with that view and
would agree that mediation and the peaceful settlement
of disputes is far more cost-effective in terms of both
resources and human life and should always be the
first, best option to peacekeeping deployment. That
would require that the United Nations re-energize its

political machinery with full capacity and work hand in
glove with regional and subregional organizations,
focusing especially on enhancing early warning
capacities.

Our experience in the AU is that, with the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council and
the subregional initiatives mandated by the AU, we
have utilized mediation to show that regional efforts
are crucial to address regional conflicts. Subregional
organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community, continue to deploy their
mediation efforts in the resolution of conflicts in
Zimbabwe and Madagascar. In that regard, regional
and subregional organizations have a crucial role to
play and have comparative advantage, mostly due to
proximity. All our efforts have been anchored in the
United Nations Charter, particularly Chapter VI,
Article 33. Thus, mediation has become more
important than ever before.

Recognizing the challenges of multidimensional
integrated peacekeeping,' South Africa supports efforts
to effectively link peacekeeping with broad
peacebuilding strategies. Disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, closely
synchronized with the implementation of security
sector reform (SSR), have become indispensable pillars
of effective peacebuilding and also contribute to
sustainable post-conflict reconstruction. However, we
believe that the need for multidimensional
peacekeeping operations should be viewed against the
need for peacekeeping to focus on its core business.

In that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that peacekeeping operations must be in consonance
with the principles and purposes enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. The principles of the consent
of parties, the non-use of force except in self-defence,
a clear and robust mandate and impartiality must be
faithfully adhered to. The emphasis should also be on
making full use of political processes and integrated
functions, instead of a military function alone. In that
way, a peacekeeping mission can help to maintain
long-term goals in maintaining peace and security in its
task area.

South Africa also feels strongly that a robust
mandate in peacekeeping should at all times ensure the
adequate protection of human' and humanitarian rights,
the protection of women and children in armed conflict
and the protection of civilians, and should act

resolutely against the perpetrators of rape and other
forms of sexual violence against civilians. There must
also be strict adherence to the policy of zero tolerance
vis-a-vis United Nations peacekeepers.

In conclusion, we remain convinced that
peacekeeping is not an easy task and cannot be an end
in itself. It has to be a tool towards the creation of
better conditions for sustainable development and good
governance. We will argue for an integrated approach
that incorporates peacebuilding during the start-up of a
peacekeeping operation. Those arrangements, in our
view, could facilitate a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and might serve as a
stimulus for participation in DDR and SSR in the post-
conflict period.

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
firm support for the cause of peacekeeping. We assure
everyone of our cooperation in that regard. We will
continue to work with others in taking concrete
measures that advance global peace and stability.

