Mr. Rowe (Australia): Australia welcomes the
convening of this meeting of the Security Council to
consider ways of improving consultations between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries. As one
of 34 Member States that jointly forwarded a letter to
you, Sir, as President of the Security Council, we should
like to express our appreciation to you for promptly
scheduling this meeting on the Council's agenda.

Australia has worked closely with a large group of
other Member States to develop common approaches to
the best means by which the consultation process between
the Security Council and troop contributors can be
improved. Australia fully associates itself with the
statement of the Permanent Representative of Argentina
on how this can be achieved. We are pleased to have
worked closely with so many other interested countries in
order to find solutions to some of the current
shortcomings in the consultation process.

In recent years, growing concern has been expressed
about the need to improve the consultation mechanisms
between the Security Council and troop contributors and
more broadly with the overall United Nations
membership. Last year, Argentina and New Zealand,
supported by a large number of countries, including my
own, initiated a much-needed process of reform on this
issue.

Since that time, we have been pleased to see
instances in which the Security Council has listened to
Member States and has itself sought to respond to calls
for change. The consultative process set out in the
presidential statement of 4 November 1994 was a
welcome development. But even at that time, the Council

 

envisaged that the consultative process outlined in the
presidential statement would require review and
reassessment in the light of experience, as would the
arrangements to improve the quality and speed of flow of
information available to support the Council's decision-
making.

It is of the utmost importance to the health of this
Organization that Security Council decisions be fully
implemented and complied with and that the ability and
authority of the Security Council to respond to threats to
international peace and security be strengthened and
incontrovertible. Among others, troop contributors play an
indispensable and integral part in putting into effect the
decisions of the Council and hence are seeking to cooperate
with the Council for a common purpose, namely, the
implementation of effective peace-keeping operations.

To achieve this, a timely and genuine process of
consultations between troop contributors and the Council is
imperative. This has been acknowledged in a number of
forums, including by the Council in the presidential
statement of 3 May 1994, in which it stated:

"The Security Council is conscious of the need for
enhanced consultations and exchange of information
with troop-contributing countries regarding peace-
keeping operations, including their planning,
management and coordination, particularly when
significant extensions in an operation's mandate are in
prospect." (S/PRST/1994/22, p. 3)

We are firmly of the View that improving and
formalizing the consultation mechanism between troop
contributors and the Security Council are among the
measures necessary to improve the coordination,
management and planning of peace-keeping operations.
This is one of the measures that will respond to the lessons
we have learned from recent United Nations peace-keeping
operations. The past few years have given us examples of
peace-keeping operations and mandates that have been
driven by the need to be seen to be doing something, that
have not been achievable in the field or that have lacked
the clarity about the goals and operation which commanders
could reasonably expect. We have seen missions undertaken
without provision of the necessary resources and the
assumption of a role in complex situations where there has
been insufficient coordination between Blue Helmet forces
and other international actors, whether these be regional
organizations, non-governmental aid bodies or United
Nations organs or agencies.

We have also seen the inability to deploy forces
quickly when a crisis is emerging. It took many months
before the Security Council's decision to enlarge the
United Nations Protection Force to protect safe havens in
Bosnia was actually put into effect and even then on a
scale that was inadequate to the task. We also remain
agonizingly conscious of the failure to react in time to
prevent the genocide in Rwanda.

An enhancement of the consultation process between
the Security Council and troop contributors, as well as of
the strategic and operational planning capacity of the
United Nations, will generate confidence in this
Organization's capability and lead to Member States
being more prepared to deliver military units for
operations established by the Council.

Let me be clear: the mechanism outlined by
Argentina should not be construed as a means of limiting
or interfering with the authority or prerogatives of the
Security Council. We envisage that such a consultative
mechanism would be achieved by way of a resolution of
the Security Council, given the importance of the matter
and the need to formalize such a mechanism. To this end,
we endorse the proposal made today by the Permanent
Representative of New Zealand for the holding of
informal consultations between the Security Council and
interested Member States on appropriate measures.

Consideration by the Council of the perspectives of
Member States, particularly those most affected by a
matter on the Council's agenda, is a sine qua non for the
deliberations of the Council. It is important to reflect on
Article 24 of the Charter, under which the Council acts
on behalf of Member States. Article 24 implies the
Council's responsibility to draw on the views of the wider
membership of the United Nations on all aspects of its
work. Its role as an effective representative body demands
at least this.

The consultation mechanism we envisage will be
important in developing the culture and methodology for
identifying and responding to situations that threaten
international peace and security and will also improve the
means by which the Security Council relates to the
general membership of the United Nations.
