Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation thanks Mr. Kamalesh Sharma,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), for his comprehensive and detailed
briefing. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on UNMISET.

My delegation is pleased with the recent political
developments in Timor-Leste, especially regarding the
development of political institutions and Timor-Leste's
relations with other States in the region and all
countries of the world. We are also pleased with the
launching of President Gusmao's initiative for an open
and transparent presidency and his focus on security
matters, as well as the sustained efforts of the
Government to maintain the openness needed for the
people's participation in the political process.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
leadership in Timor-Leste and Indonesia to promote
strong, friendly relations between the two countries.
We support such relations, and call for their
strengthening in all fields, in the interests of both the
Timorese and Indonesian peoples. There is also a need
to address all important issues between them, such as
border delimitation and facilitating the return of those
refugees who wish to go back to Timor-Leste.

My delegation supports promoting justice,
democracy and stability in Timor-Leste by the adoption
of the necessary legal framework and by the enactment
of laws and rules and regulations for institutional work.
Here we must stress the need for continued
international assistance in many vital sectors to ensure
that vital needs in Timor-Leste are addressed
satisfactorily.

My delegation supports the United Nations
system's efforts towards development of economic and
social life in Timor-Leste, despite the immense
challenges that remain to be overcome. We welcome
the cooperation between UNMISET and the
Government of Timor-Leste in the consolidation of
internal and external security, in order to avert any
events that might destabilize the situation in Timor-
Leste.

In closing, my delegation reiterates its thanks to
Mr. Sharma and his team and to all the members of
UNMISET for their immense efforts in achieving
stability and progress in the country.

