Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statements made earlier on behalf of the European
Union, the Group of Friends on Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict and Norway. Austria would like
to thank the Republic of Korea for organizing today's
important debate.

In view ofthe many situations of armed conflict that
urgently require our attention, we regret that the Security
Council, in contrast to its established biannual practice,
held only one debate on the protection of civilians in
2012. In addition to country-specific discussions,
we deem it extremely important for the Council to
regularly take up the protection of civilians in a broader
and more inclusive manner that allows for an exchange
of views on new trends and obstacles, including in
addressing the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General. We therefore welcome the standing
reporting requirement provided for in the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2013/2), which we
hope will contribute to more predictable discussions in
the Council.

We thank the Secretary-General, High
Commissioner Pillay and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their instructive briefings. However,
we believe that the humanitarian aspect is equally
important for our discussions. We therefore encourage
the Secretary-General and the Council to continue the
practice of inviting the United Nations Emergency
Relief Coordinator to brief the Council.

Since the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), more
than three years ago, significant progress has been made
in implementing the provisions of the resolution, which
relates to peacekeeping operations with protection
mandates, and equipping such missions with the tools
necessary to effectively implement their mandates. The
elaboration of protection-of-civilians training modules
is one such important step.

In other areas, however, the assessment is less
positive. In resolution 1894 (2009), the Council not
only affirms its strong opposition to impunity but
also underlines its own role in ending it. As for the
situation in Syria, the Security Council has not lived
up to that commitment. Therefore, in the Swiss letter
of 14 January (S/2013/l9, annex), Austria, together with
more than 50 countries, asks the Council to act upon
its responsibility and to urgently refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.

Austria shares the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that explosive weapons with a wide
area impact should be avoided in densely populated
areas due to the appalling civilian suffering that they
cause. We believe that there must be more systematic
data collection in that respect. On the issue of civilian
casualty recording by parties to armed conflict, Austria
would like to reiterate the suggestion made in the
statement by the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians last year that the next report of the Secretary-
General provide an overview of existing practices (see S/PV.6790).

As announced last year, Austria has developed an
interdisciplinary training course on the protection of
civilians, which is open to national and international
participants. The training course was piloted in
December last year in Stadtschlaining, Austria, with
the participation of senior decision-makers of the armed
forces, police, civilian administration and other civilian
stakeholders and experts. In the light of the successful
accomplishment of the pilot course, Austria has decided
to run the course on an annual basis, with the next one
to be held late this year. Austria will also continue to
cooperate closely with the Secretariat to support the
ongoing shaping of the protection of civilians training
landscape for all operational levels.

In conclusion, Austria wishes to thank Norway for
the initiative "Reclaiming the protection of civilians
under international humanitarian law", which is
aimed at the identification of practical measures and
recommendations to improve the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. We look forward to the fourth
regional workshop of the initiative, organized jointly
by Austria and Norway, which to take place next week
in Vienna.

