Mr. Simonovie: Thank you for this opportunity to
address the Council, Mr. President. A couple of weeks
ago, I returned to South Sudan after a year's absence,
visiting Government-controlled areas and those held
by the opposition. Though the scale and severity of the
conflict has recently declined, the number of displaced
persons and refugees has continued to grow, reaching
2 million, with thousands more civilians dead. Further
violations of humanitarian law and human rights have
been committed by both sides, as described in public
human-rights reports issued by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in December and
January. There are more people, now more than 110,000
and mainly women and children, seeking our protection
in our protection-of-civilian sites. Displaced people
told me they were frightened. They had nowhere to go,
and both sides seem to be re-arming and preparing for
a new military campaign.

In Juba, I met people whose entire families had
been executed, based primarily on their ethnicity,
as well as women and girls taken as sex slaves after
their husbands had been killed. In Malakal, there
was a woman whose disabled husband, a doctor, was
shot dead in a teaching hospital last April, along with
hundreds of others. In Bentiu, I visited a hospital
where in April a group of civilians seeking safety were
herded into a small room and shot dead. Returning
from the hospital, I encountered child soldiers and saw
drunken soldiers at a checkpoint shouting and mocking
a group of female civilians. Women sneak out of the
United Nations protection site during the day to collect
firewood and go to the market, and then return to the
camp in the evening. Some of them, they told me, are
being harassed and raped.

Besides the conflict between the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the SPLA in Opposition,
there are many local conflicts across the country
between tribes and even within clans of the same tribe.
They involve looting and cattle raiding, but also killings
and sexual violence. There is widespread possession of
illegal arms, including AK-47s, which only adds to the
insecurity. Many Government officials told me that
the people of South Sudan fought for decades for their
dignity, independence and human rights. What I saw on
my mission was certainly not what they were fighting
for. After decades of killing and other violations, there
is a need for cultural change based on respect for
human life and human rights. While it may take two
leaders to end a war in South Sudan, it takes many
for peace to become sustainable. The ongoing peace
process and future political arrangements must include
representatives of all ethnic groups, women, elders,
religious leaders, young people and other civil-society
actors.

The conflict has not only affected civilians" civil
and political rights; it has also had severe social and
economic effects. Millions of dollars that could have
been directed towards social development have been
wasted, first on corruption and then on fighting over the
spoils between two groups of army veterans and their
leaders. Owing to the fact that economic trade has been
suspended, millions have also been lost by neighbouring
States, and the international community has been
investing in emergency relief instead of capacity-
building and development. Prior to the conflict, South
Sudan, a country rich in oil, had an annual per-capita
gross domestic product of $1,045. In spite of that, its
levels of illiteracy and child and maternal mortality are
among the highest in the world.

Some positive developments provide hope that
the future may be better. Talking to people, I noticed
an increasing desire for peace, justice, human rights,
social development and political participation.
Representatives of all 65 tribes met last week in
Juba expressing similar demands. They encouraged
the United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
troika of the European Commission, the European
Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund to
impose sanctions not on the country as a whole but on
parties or individuals who refuse to sign agreements
or respect peace. The Government has also undertaken
important human-rights commitments, and I welcome
the ratification of a series of international human-
rights instruments. President Kiir has assured me that
the ratification instruments will be deposited with the
Secretary-General in the next few days.

Let me now turn to the issue of accountability.
There is broad acknowledgement, in and out of South
Sudan, of the need to break the cycle of impunity
with some concrete accountability measures. As a
local civil-society activist told me, peace has always
died when we ignored justice. The African Union
(AU) has undertaken an important initiative with its
establishment of a commission of inquiry into the
human-rights violations committed in South Sudan
following the outbreak ofviolence in December 2013. Its
report has been submitted to the AU Peace and Security
Council, but its consideration has been deferred, as that
Council put it, until the imminent conclusion of the
peace agreement. In his recent report to the Security
Council (S/2015/ 118), the Secretary-General requested
the African Union to urgently consider the report and
its recommendations.

I discussed the issues of command responsibility,
accountability and combating impunitywith President Kiir in
Juba and with Mr. Machar in Addis. President Kiir
assured me that the results of the national investigations
into human rights violations following the outbreak of
violence, presented to him in December 2014, will be
publicly released soon - however, only after a peace
agreement is in place.

I welcome the accountability references in the
recently signed Arusha and Addis agreements that
outline the creation of a hybrid criminal court and the
establishment of transitional justice processes, including
truth and reconciliation measures and a reparations
commission. Indeed, meaningful accountability for
serious human rights violations committed during the
conflict is the only way to prevent their reoccurrence.

But to be able to deliver in this respect, there is
a need to improve the security and justice systems.
The formal justice system, already very weak, has
completely broken down in the conflict-affected areas.
I heard from the Chief Justice that in the whole of the
country, there are fewer than 200 judges. In Eastern
Equatoria State, which is larger than many European
countries, there are only two prosecutors. The National
Chief of Police told me that 70 per cent of his police
officers are illiterate, so he can rely on just 3,000 out
of 10,000 of them to carry out law-and-order functions.

When I was visiting prisoners on death row in Juba
Central Prison, one of them complained to me that he
should be immediately released because he paid the
"blood money." The prison director had promised to
release him if this could be confirmed.

It is of the utmost importance that the Council
remain seized of the question of accountability for past
and present violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law in South Sudan. It is important
to continue to encourage the Government to release the
findings of its own investigations and to encourage the
African Union to release the report of the Commission
of Inquiry. Together, these reports may form the basis
of an accountability process that can contribute to
ending the cycle of violence and impunity and pave the
way to reconciliation and sustainable peace.

In the meantime, for peace to be reached, a
conducive atmosphere is essential. To contribute to
that, the Council may wish to encourage human-rights-
centred confidence-building measures between the
parties. These could include cooperation in tracing
missing persons; help in family reunification; and
access to and the release of all conflict-related detainees
by both sides under the principle of "all for all".

Also, a free and inclusive dialogue is crucial for
reaching sustainable peace and building a democratic
society. Current restrictions on the freedom of
expression against civil society and local media are
in this respect quite disturbing. As Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous mentioned, journalists have been
detained and threatened, and newspapers have been
confiscated and closed. Most recently, threats to close it
down have even been made against the United Nations
own radio station in the country, Radio Miraya.

No effort should be spared for the peace to be
reached sooner rather than later. Those in the camps are
the 110,000 fortunate ones whom we feed and protect;
the remaining almost 2 million are far worse off. There
is, for example, a group of 260 displaced persons
residing in an abandoned building in Malakal, hoping
to find a place in our overcrowded protection-of-
civilians site. After brutal attacks on them, and unable
to reach our protection site there, those displaced
persons, which included elderly people, persons with
disabilities, pregnant women and children, walked 100
kilometres from Jonglei state. They are predominantly
women, because a number of men have been killed. As
their chief, who had been detained and tortured, himself
told me, "Most of them have lost their husbands, have
been raped, or both. But they hope for a better future
for their children".

