Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for the
information he has presented to us this morning.

We would like on this occasion to follow up on a
few matters that were dealt with by the Council a
month ago as a result of the Council's mission to the
field: mainly, the security situation, the preparations
for the elections and the problem of missing persons.

With respect to security, I have to say that a
month ago we had great expectations of the impact that
the implementation of the three legislative initiatives
would have, as well as the establishment by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) of a new police and justice pillar. We know,
of course, that a month is not long enough to
implement these measures. We are grateful for the
valuable information that has been provided us by Mr.
Guehenno on the effectiveness that is being
demonstrated in the area of combating organized crime,
due precisely to the establishment of this new pillar.

As Mr. Haekkerup has said, the question of the
refugees who are entering Kosovo from Macedonia is a
source of serious concern. This is a potential problem
that could affect the internal stability of Kosovo.
Indeed, a greater number of people are coming from
Macedonia than are going to it, thus the number of
refugees in Kosovo is increasing. In addition, they are
coming to regions or cities whose capacity to receive
them has reached its limit. This situation calls for the
attention of the international community, and we must
take due note ofit.

As concerns the elections, the main concern that
we all have is to ensure that participation includes all
of the minority groups, especially the Serb community.
In order to achieve this, UNMIK intends to tackle
various aspects of this issue, inter alia, the
improvement of relations with Belgrade; the
improvement of security conditions for the return of
refugees; and the development of mechanisms for the
registration of the population.

That is why we would like to highlight the
importance of the signing of the memorandum of
understanding between the International Organization
for Migration and the Serbian Commission for
Refugees, as well as the signing next Monday of an
agreement between the International Organization for
Migration and the Montenegrin Commissioner for
Refugees in Montenegro. These agreements raise the
possibility that the more than 200,000 Kosovars who, it
is estimated, live in Serbia and Montenegro, will be
able to take part in the elections that will take place in
November.

I must also stress the new status that has been
given to the Commissioner for Kosovo by the
Government of Belgrade. This would seem to indicate
that positive advances will continue to be made in
these relations, which are essential for stability in the
region.

As concerns the question of missing persons, we
would like to stress the importance of the signing of
the memorandum of understanding between UNMIK
and the International Committee for Missing Persons.
This will make it possible to begin DNA tests, so that
we are able to identify the remains of various people.

When we visited Kosovo, one of the aspects
mentioned by the various communities - with great
sorrow and strong emphasis - was the need to raise
the question of missing persons and detainees on a
priority basis, because it gives rose to other problems
that can be resolved if we begin with the question of
missing persons. We therefore commend the actions
undertaken by UNMIK, and we hope that it will
continue to work with dedication to ensure that this
uncertainty, which affects a large number of families of
missing persons, can be overcome.

Finally, I would like to stress the cooperation that
has existed in recent weeks with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We hope
that this cooperation will continue on the part of all of
the countries.

