Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful today for the presence in the Council of
Presidents Meron and Joensen and of Prosecutors
Jallow and Brammertz, and to thank Judge Meron in
his capacity as President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the expertise of Guatemala and to thank
Ambassador Rosenthal for his leadership of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. Sometimes,
when we talk about the ethics of responsibility and belief
we keep them separate, but I believe that in Ambassador
Rosenthal's leadership the ethics of responsibility and
belief are all perfectly in line.

After two decades of activity, the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), as has been said, are in their final stages,
whereby, according to the completion strategies
laid down by the Council, they are to complete their
judicial work according to the established timetables
and to transfer their cases and archives to the Residual
Mechanism. Argentina would like to recognize the
progress reported by the ICTY and ICTR. We believe
that June was the most recent occasion on which we
considered the reports on the progress achieved by the
Tribunals (see S/PV.6977).

As for the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we
note that, 20 years after its creation, it has completed
136 prosecutions out of the 161 individuals accused
and that the Court has no fugitives under indictment.
The Tribunal has made progress in the completion of
cases, but we must also take into account the significant
challenges that it is facing owing to the loss of skilled
personnel at this stage prior to the final completion of
the Tribunal's duties. The Security Council should,
as part of its responsibility, reconsider the measures
already requested by the Tribunal, and then the General
Assembly should consider them in the Fifth Committee.
For example, the Tribunal requested the creation of a
task force at the United Nations to provide opportunities
for absorbing ICTY staff and the granting of a special

payment to keep staff from pre-emptively abandoning
their duties in the expectation that their posts will be
eliminated.
Argentina supported the establishment by the
Council of an expedited mechanism for the election
of an additional permanent judge, as requested by
President Meron. I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Judge Koffi Kumelio Afande on his
election by the General Assembly to those functions.

I also wish to highlight the fact that Argentina
supports the extension of the mandate of the ICTY judges
requested by President Meron. We believe that, while
resolution 1966 (2010) set ideal dates for the transfer of
functions to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, the judicial function may, like life
itself, present challenges resulting from the complexity
of the cases and the transitional phase that we are in.

We appreciate the report of the ICTR regarding
compliance with the deadlines and projections made
for cases in the trial and appeal stages, and the fact that
the transition to the Residual Mechanism continues in
line with those projections, including the delivery to
the Mechanism of judicial and administrative archives
by the end of 2014.

Other colleagues have mentioned the issue of the
capture of the fugitives, and we agree that that is a
priority. The fact that nine of those indicted by the ICTR
are still fugitives is not good news. The Mechanism
is ready to begin proceedings, once those under its
jurisdiction are arrested, and that is also a priority. But
that requires cooperation on the part of all States, in
accordance with the obligations under resolution 955
(1994).

I would like to highlight the progress achieved
in the area of training and cooperation with States
and the creation of the Umusanzu Information and
Documentation Centre in Kigali, together with other
valuable contributions by the Office of the Prosecutor.
The recent drafting of a manual of best practices for
prosecuting and investigating cases of sexual and
gender-based violence also deserves our commendation.

With respect to the Residual Mechanism, Argentina
recognizes the progress made towards its full operation,
and the fact that both the Arusha and The Hague
branches are fully operational. The Tribunals represent
a substantial contribution to that noble objective of
living a life that is fully human.
I should like to make an unrelated announcement.
We have just received the painful news of the passing
of Nelson Mandela. Nelson Mandela was a man who
gave hope to the entire world in his fight for human
rights. It seems that nothing happens by chance in
the history of humankind. I would like to recall that
today, at this moment, mothers, grandmothers and
daughters of the Plaza de Mayo are marching around
the obelisk for the thirty-third time, with the slogan
"30 years of democracy, 30 years of dictatorship, 33
years of resistance". Entire peoples, good men and
women - men like Mandela - resisted and taught us to
resist fear, to resist impunity and to resist forgetfulness.

