Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Republic of Korea for organizing this open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a theme
that is important for the Security Council and for the
international community. Foreign Minister Kim's
decision to preside over the debate is a reflection of
the Republic of Korea's commitment to addressing the
issue. We congratulate you, Ambassador Kim, and your
able team on presiding over the Council in a skilful and
capable manner, and for circulating the concept note on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2013/75, annex).

Pakistan welcomes the presence of the Secretary-
General, whose latest report (S/2012/376) and incisive
briefings have guided our work on this team. We
have also benefited from the insightful presentations
of Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, as
indeed from the statements of the Foreign Ministers of
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda and Azerbaijan. We also
commend the representative of the United Kingdom and
his able team for steering the negotiations over the draft
presidential statement in a most professional manner.

It is a grim reality today that civilians account
for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts
around the globe. They bear the brunt of wars, conflicts
and strife. Progress has been made on elaborating a
normative framework for the protection of civilians,
but it has yet to be fully translated into tangible
results. Thanks to the initiative of the Republic of
Korea, we will be able to make some progress today
on accountability, humanitarian issues and the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. We endorse
the draft presidential statement that the Council will
issue today. The message going out from the Council
is loud and clear: all parties to a conflict bear the
responsibility to protect civilians. They must take sure
to ensure the protection ofwomen, children,journalists,
refugees and internally displaced persons, who are the
most vulnerable in conflict situations. Protection must
be given to humanitarian actors, including medical
personnel and premises. It is also the responsibility of
occupation forces to ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law.

We strongly condemn attacks on medical personnel
and facilities, as well as on schools and teachers. There
should be no impunity for those involved in serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The Security Council and international
tribunals have addressed these concerns in a number of
situations, through measures targeted against Violators.
Because of the proven value of this approach, the
Council should persevere with it.

More than a decade ago, when the Security
Council first began to address protection issues, there
were apprehensions among the wider United Nations
membership concerning the Security Council's role and
mandate, as well as its ability to deliver. However, the
compelling need to protect civilians in armed conflict
has led to a broad consensus that such an approach,
when pursued objectively and without politicization,
produces salutary results on the ground.

It is an established norm that international
humanitarian law covers only situations of armed
conflict and should not be extended to other situations.
For other situations, other forms of law, such as
international human rights law, are applicable. That
fine distinction must be maintained in order to avoid
the occasional drift into reporting about the situations
that do not fall within the category of armed conflict.

The protection of civilians is part of many United
Nations peacekeeping mandates. Pakistan, as one ofthe
top troop contributors, has worked in many missions
in various parts of the world to ensure the protection
of civilians. Our peacekeepers are doing so right now
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia.

The protection of civilians remains the primary
responsibility of host countries. Peacekeeping missions
should assist host authorities as and where appropriate,
in accordance with their mandates. The peacekeepers'
ability to perform such mandates is directly linked to the
resources available, including intelligence capabilities
and the configuration of the missions. Besides, we need
to pursue the continuous training of peacekeepers so
that operational plans to protect civilians can be refined.

In developing mission strategies and plans,
consultations with the host Government or authorities,
troop-contributing countries and humanitarian actors
must continue. That is simply good practice.

Missions provide physical protection and assist
host countries in creating protective environments. The
metrics developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations provide a good tool for monitoring progress
in that context. Yet there should be no misplaced
expectations as to what missions can ensure. They
cannot provide protection to all civilians all the time.
That is why it is essential to bolster national capacities
with regard to defence and security forces.

New technologies for gathering information and
for surveillance are being used increasingly in armed
conflicts for offensive and non-offensive purposes. In
that regard, we support the Secretary-General's View
that it is extremely important that the use of such
technologies should comply with the principles of
distinction and applicable international humanitarian
law. A clear distinction must also be made, as the
Secretary-General has advised us, between the
protection of civilians and the responsibility to protect.
The conflation of those two concepts has created some
legal confusion.

It is important to ensure the safe and unhindered
provision of humanitarian assistance, in accordance
with the well-established principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality, independence and the guiding
principles set out in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 46/182, which reaffirm full respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of
States.

There is, of course, a need for consistent
engagement on the part of humanitarian agencies with
all parties to armed conflict in order to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
actors must conform to and work strictly within the
framework of the host country agreements.

Irrespective of the normative progress, success
will ultimately depend on how effectively the Council
continues to take action to protect civilians on the
ground in situations of armed conflict. The key element
in that regard is the impartial handling of all situations
by the Council.

I conclude by paying tribute to the peacekeepers
and humanitarian actors in the field, who are trying,
under very difficult circumstances, to protect civilians.

