Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the presence here of Ms. Sylvie
Vale'rie Ba'ipo-Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic.

Cote d'Ivoire congratulates Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga on his excellent briefing on the situation in
the Central African Republic, which will be the last in
his capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). My country takes this opportunity to
pay strong tribute to him for his commitment and the
excellent work that he has done as Head of MINUSCA,
as well as for his exemplary cooperation with the
authorities of the Central African Republic, which has
allowed for significant progress to be made in resolving
the crisis in the country.

My delegation also thanks Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security;
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service; and Ambassador
Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations, in his capacity as the Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their
enlightening briefings.

My delegation sees the signing on 6 February in
Bangui of the comprehensive Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic - also known as the Khartoum
Agreement - between the Government of the Central
African Republic and armed groups in the framework of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and
under the auspices of the African Union, as a genuine
source of hope for a lasting settlement of the conflict in
that country.

In that respect, my delegation welcomes the
leadership of the African Union, the decisive support
of the United Nations and the commitment of the
countries of the region, in particular the Sudan, regional
organizations and civil society, which made it possible
to reach this important agreement. The interest to
which it has given rise among the people of the country
gives us hope that this represents a major stride towards
national reconciliation. That is why Cote d'Ivoire calls
once again on all parties to abide by their commitments
in the effective implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement, with a view to bringing about lasting peace
and stability in the Central African Republic.
My country believes that the spirit of transparency
and inclusivity that characterized the negotiations
on the Agreement must continue throughout its
implementation. In that respect, proper ownership of
the Agreement by all components ofthe Central African
Republic Society is necessary.

My delegation would like to remind parties that
the success of the Khartoum Agreement will require
an effective end to all violence against peacekeepers,
humanitarian personnel and civilians, in particular
women and children. My country calls on the authorities
of the country to speed up the implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation programme, which remains a key element
in the process of ending the crisis. It calls also for the
establishment of the follow-up mechanism for the
implementation of the Agreement, which should make it
possible to support the parties in the process ofmeeting
their commitments. It also hopes that the actions of
the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation, whose establishment is stipulated in the
Agreement, will also promote lasting reconciliation in
the Central African Republic.

Given these favourable trends, my country urges
the international community to continue to support the
process of the complete restoration of State authority
throughout the territory of the Central African Republic
through the implementation of the relevant provisions
of resolutions 2448 (2018) and 2454 (2019).

Finally, my country calls on neighbouring countries
and international partners to support the implementation
of the peace agreement and to coordinate their efforts
to allow for the restoration of lasting peace and stability
in the Central African Republic.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
its support to President Touadera, his Government and
to the people of the Central African Republic in their
efforts to definitively end the crisis.

Finally, we congratulate Minister Mankeur Ndiaye
on his appointment to the post of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSCA and
pledge our full support to him in the discharge of
his mandate.

