Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Madam President, I hope you will be patient
enough, in your capacity as President of the Security
Council for this month, to hear what I have to say. I
listened carefully to each of our colleagues and have
the right and the duty as a founding Member of this
international Organization to inform them of the views
of my Government.

Some 14 years ago, a few weeks before 19 March
2003, the day of the invasion of Iraq, I was sitting
behind the then-Foreign Minister of my country, who
occupied the seat where the representative of Italy is
now sitting today. I was attending the meeting at which
Colin Powell, the former Secretary of State of the
United States, spoke about weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) in Iraq (S/PV.4701). I was there.

Everyone remembers what the Chairmen of the
investigation and inspection commissions said about
so-called weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, Ralph
Ekeus, Richard Butler, Scott Ritter, Hans Blix and
others were among them. They said that there were
no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and that these
allegations were a pretext to justify invading and
occupying Iraq.

Evev more heinous, members of the Council
undoubtedly remember - or at least some of them
do - that in late 2008 the Security Council decided,
after the investigation of the alleged existence of Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction was closed, to bury the
archives of the United Nations Special Commission
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 687
(1991) and the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission, by placing them in vaults,
out of reach to anyone except the Secretary-General.
The vaults were sealed and can be opened only after 60
years had elapsed. Can you imagine, Madam President,
what secrets contained in the archives of those two
commissions?

The United Kingdom's exit from the European
Union seems to have motivated it to seek out a new role
in the world - making and adopting irrational and
extreme statements and positions in the Council. We
recall the criminal role Tony Blair played in encouraging
the invasion of Iraq 14 years ago, fabricating the
lie of the existence of Iraqi WMDs and pushing the
American elephant to smash rich Iraqi lustre pottery
with a brutality that the people of Iraq are still paying
for to this day.

I deliver my statement today after an absence of
more than three months, as I was leading the delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic in shuttle rounds of
intra-Syrian talks in Astana and Geneva with a view
to launching a serious dialogue that would result in a
political solution driven by Syrians themselves without
any external interference and unify counter-terrorism
efforts. A week ago, we thought that we would be
coming to today's meeting to inform the Security
Council of the progress recently achieved in Astana and
Geneva, give the necessary momentum and support to
His Excellency Special Envoy De Mistura and to all
parties that are working seriously to reach a political
settlement of the crisis in my country, Syria, and
coordinate our counter-terrorism efforts.

Despite this optimism, the United States
Administration insisted on repeating the same bloody,
theatrical play that it staged 14 years ago in thd Council
against Iraq. It was a play entitled The Lie ofthe Iraqi
Weapons ofMass Destruction. Once again, the United
States Administration is taking the war on terrorism
imposed on my country, Syria, to unprecedented and
dangerous levels by switching from a proxy aggression
through armed terrorist groups, who have been under
its control for years, to a new, direct aggression through
direct military action against Syria.

The United States has been leading terrorism in
Syria along with its allies and agents in the region. It
has provided all forms of support to terrorist groups
to commit the most heinous crimes against civilians
and Syrian infrastructure. Those crimes include the
practices of the so-called international coalition.
Recent incidents have proven that the coalition has
only destroyed infrastructure, bombarded civilians
and provided air cover to the Al-Nusra Front, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other affiliated
terrorist groups, as when it bombarded the Syrian
Army position on Tharda Mountain, in Deir ez-Zor, on
17 September 2016.

The direct military support and air cover to armed
terrorist groups was not only provided by the so-called
international coalition. Israel was the first to win the
honour of supporting terrorism. Since terrorist groups,
including Al-Nusra Front, started their operations in
the area of separation, Israel has provided all forms of
support to those groups, including medical relief and
care to injured terrorists at the expense of the Qatari
regime, as members know. Israel has provided air cover
by launching airstrikes against positions held by the
Syrian Army every time the Syrian Army has been
able to gain ground against these terrorist groups. Even
worse, Israel has provided direct support to the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant through airstrikes launched
on 17 March against Syrian Army positions in Palmyra
in order to support the operations of the Islamic State
in that city.
Similar theatrics took place on the morning
of Friday, 7 April. At the time, the United States
Administration and its allies felt that the terrorist
groups that had been armed, trained and financed by
these countries had begun to lose ground because of the
heavy blows dealt to them by the Syrian Army and its
allies. They launched their premeditated and flagrant
attack against Shayrat air base with the pretext of the
use of chemical weapons in Khan Shaykhun, a village
primarily under the control of Al-Nusra Front. It did
not stop there. That attack was preceded by political
expediency when the United States decided to exploit
the international mechanisms of the Security Council
to submit provocative draft resolutions that would put
the blame on the Syrian Government for the abhorrent
use of chemical weapons and distance any suspicion
from the real enemy - terrorists and their supporters.

The dangerous attack had been thought through
for many months in the back rooms of intelligence
agencies in Tel Aviv, Riyadh, Doha, Ankara, Amman,
Washington, D.C., London and Paris. Those same
capitals have, over the past years, sought to provide
their terrorist agents inside Syria, notably Al-Nusra
Front, with toxic chemicals for them to use, placing the
blame on the Syrian Government. That was the case in
Khan al-Assal on 19 March 2013, in eastern Ghouta on
21 August 2013, in Talmenes on 21 April 2014, and in
Sarmin and Qamenas on 16 March, 2015.

I will not go into detail on the more than 90 letters
addressed to the Council since the beginning of the
crisis. The letters detail the possession by armed groups
of chemical elements to be used against civilians and
plans to put the blame on the Syrian Government with
a view to demonizing the Government in the eyes of
Council members and of world public opinion, thereby
justifying interference in the internal affairs of Syria.
Some of the letters have even detailed the smuggling
of sarin gas from Libya through Turkey on a civilian
airplane by using a criminal Syrian citizen of the name
of Haithem Al-Qasar. Two liters of sarin gas were
transported from Libya through Turkey to terrorist
groups in Syria. We have given the Council the names,
dates, incidents and events, as well as the itinerary of
the aforementioned trip from Libya to Syria.

I would like to refer the Council to a statement made
by the former French Foreign Minister, Mr. Roland
Dumas, in June 2013. In that statement, he said that
during a visit to London he was told of a conspiracy
against Syria, whose goal was to destroy Syria and
isolate its Government, given its anti-Israeli position.
That was two years before the start of the crisis in
Syria. Mr. Roland Dumas was made privy to a plot to
destroy Syria two years before the crisis even started.

I would also like to refer the Council to a report
in Daily Mail from January, 2013. The report, which
was withdrawn and deleted from online shortly after it
was published, detailed emails between high-ranking
officials in a British corporation , Britam Defence. The
emails talked of a plot agreed upon by Washington,
D.C., whereby Qatar, in cooperation with Turkey, would
finance insurgents in Syria to use chemical weapons.
At the time, President Obama only had to draw a
red line, saying that any use of chemical weapons in
Syria would not be tolerated. That red line was used
to justify military aggression against Syria. However,
he fortunately backtracked at the last minute when his
European allies decided to jump ship, given mounting
pressure from international public opinion that led
them to reject any interference in Syria.

Documents leaked by Wikileaks prove that the
White House had given a green light to a chemical
attack in eastern Ghouta, in the suburbs of Damascus,
in order to put blame on the Syrian Government. It uses
the chemical attack as an incentive for international
military aggression against Syria.

Today, the new United States administration, of
which we were optimistic, claims that counter-terrorism
is one of its priorities, and its allies could not find a
pretext except to regress to the same red-line deception
and fabricate the incident of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhun in order to launch an attack against Syria
and sabotage the Astana and the Geneva talks, save the
armed terrorist groups from their predicament and help
other opposition groups shirk their obligations related
to the political settlement and counter-terrorism.

Why was that? It was because we had added another
element to the talks in Geneva, the basket of counter-
terrorism, something that the enemies of the political
track in Syria did not like. Otherwise, how could a sane
and reasonable person accept the lies, disinformation
and accusations against Syria of using chemical
weapons that Syria does not even possess? We do not
have chemical weapons, as confirmed by the report of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism of June 2014 to the
Council, when Ms. Sigrid Kaag said on that date that
Syria no longer had any chemical weapons. Even worse,
those who destroyed the chemical weapons at the time
were ships of the United States in the Mediterranean.
This comes at a time when the Syrian army and
its allies are achieving crushing victories against
terrorism; national reconciliation is being concluded
across Syrian towns and regions; and significant steps
have been taken in the Astana talks, emphasizing, as
Mr. De Mistura said, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria. That means controlling the borders
with neighbouring States, particularly Turkey and
Jordan, preventing the flow of terrorists, ending the
hostilities, separating armed groups from Jabhat
Al-Nusra and ISIL, and unifying counter-terrorism
efforts. Those are the results of Astana; if they were
implemented, the Syrian crisis could have ended within
24 hours.

As the Geneva talks started to shape a political
vision and a road map for a settlement in Syria, as
my country is witnessing a diplomatic openness and
visits by parliamentary missions, including Western
delegations, which have been briefing the global public
opinion about what is really happening in Syria and
calling for support to the Syrian Government in its war
against terrorism. I put this question to every person
who still resorts to logic, reason and law law in this
Council to explain this blind madness and brutal desire
to burn my country and the region to the ground, as
well as to move the international community into a
new phase of war and conflict, in which there will be
no victors but terrorism, the doctrine of extremism,
hatred, and the logic of military might and the law of
the jungle.

In the face of this falsification and manipulation
to justify the military aggression, my country's
Government has sent to you, Madam President, and to
other members of the Council a letter referring to the
call of the Syrian Government on the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons in The Hague to send a technical mission
to Khan Shaykhun and to Shayrat air base to uncover
the truth about what happened. This means that we,
the Syrian Government, want to know who used the
chemical gas in my country. We should all say no to a
war is being promoted by warmongers and the enemies
of law as a normal option - business as usual as they
sit comfortably in safety, enjoying their privileges,
revenue and arrogance.

During the latest round of talks in Geneva, my
country's Government submitted a number of papers
to Special Envoy De Mistura, starting with a paper on
general principles for a political solution in Syria with
a view to finding a logical and normal common ground
to start discussing all issues that are an essential part
of the debate pertaining to the four baskets. We have
also submitted other papers, including one on counter-
terrorism. Over the nine days of talks, we discussed
all agreed agenda items. Unfortunately, there was
no serious partner actually committed to pursuing
counter-terrorism and to finding a political solution, let
alone the existence of a multitude of oppositions, and
not a Syrian opposition.

My country denounces attempts by the United
States Administration, Britain and France to sabotage
the efforts of the Special Envoy and to block the Geneva
and Astana talks. We have engaged seriously, patiently
and responsibly in these talks because our people hold
us historically responsible for defending the country and
staunching the bloodshed. The American aggression
will not prevent the Syrian Government and its allies
from pursuing counter-terrorism, actively engaging in
the next rounds of Geneva and Astana talk, or discuss
ing the agreed agenda and engaging seriously on all
issues related to governance, the constitution, elections
and counter-terrorism simultaneously. We will also
spare no effort to support any genuine endeavour that
seeks to reach a political solution that will allow Syrians
themselves to decide their own future, whereby only
the Syrians themselves determine their future and their
options in a manner that would preserve the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.

To conclude, I was perplexed by the statement
made by my colleague from France, according to which
he and the other three States or P3 intended to submit
today's draft resolution and to put it to vote in shameful
diplomatic haste. Such a provocative step comes before
a fair international investigation by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Therefore,
submitting a draft resolution was a blatant misuse of
the Security Council's mechanisms, and it reminds us
of similar misuse of by Britain and America against
Iraq 14 years ago exactly, on 9 April 2003.

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.
