Mr. Stareevic' (Serbia): Although I do not belong
to the membership of the Security Council, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, and your country Turkey, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. I know that, under your wise guidance,
the Council will be able to effectively deal with the
problems on its agenda.

At the outset, I would like to express the gratitude
of Serbia to Judge Patrick Robinson, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and to Mr. Serge Brammertz, its
Prosecutor, for the efforts they put into their
comprehensive reports (see S/2009/252). My country is
appreciative of the fact that the substance and thrust of
the reports are in agreement with our own assessment
of the level of cooperation achieved so far. Serbia's
efforts to comply with its legal and moral
obligations - such as witness protection, provision of
documents to the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor and all
other means of technical assistance, along with the
commitment of the Serbian authorities to continue
addressing these issues - are recognized, while joint
efforts to ensure success in that cooperation are
pledged in the reports.

Such recognition is illustrative of the growing
belief in the political will and commitment of Serbia to
fulfil its obligations towards the ICTY and in its
resolve to apprehend the two remaining fugitives. The
growing belief in Serbia's commitment to cooperation
with the ICTY came recently from the United States
Secretary of State in the form of recognition that Serbia
is doing its best in this undertaking. Serbia remains
firm in its intention to fulfil its obligation to apprehend
Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzie, as it remains
dedicated to foster the level of cooperation that has
been achieved in the preceding period.

In the last two weeks, following the publication
of the Prosecutor's report, Serbia circulated a detailed
report on the Government's activities related to its
cooperation with the Tribunal and informed the
diplomatic community about recent developments in
that regard, following Mr. Brammertz's recent visit to
Belgrade.

Serbia continues to support the ICTY's
completion strategy, defined by Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). Proceeding
from that strategy, the ICTY has identified the 12 most
important functions of the residual mechanism to be set
up upon the completion of the Tribunal's activities.

On the issue of the ICTY archives, described as
one of the most important of those functions, Serbia
presented its official position to the ICTY and to the
Security Council on 23 October 2008 and is interested
in participating in the ongoing dialogue on this
important issue. In addition, in relation to the ICTY
completion strategy, the Government of the Republic
of Serbia presented its views on the subject of the
residual mechanism to the ICTY and the Security
Council after the official position of the Government
was adopted on 13 March 2009.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again
that Serbia's commitment to full cooperation with the
ICTY will continue. The reports presented to the
Council also take note of that commitment, inviting
Serbia to continue to foster the level of cooperation
that has been achieved. Serbia will continue to make
every effort to see this cooperation through to a
successful end.

Let me also add our congratulations to Mr. John
Hocking on his appointment to the post of Registrar of
the Tribunal.

