Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Brazil for its initiative to
convene this open debate on the important issue of the
interdependence between security and development. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency Foreign
Minister Patriota in the Council Chamber to preside
over this meeting.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ambassador Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and Ms. Cliffe, Special
Representative of the World Bank, for their statements.

Security and development are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. Security is a prerequisite for
development, and development is possible only in a
peaceful and stable environment. Development is a
guarantee of security. Sustainable peace is possible
only through the maintenance of development
momentum. The maintenance of peace and the
promotion of development are important, Charter-
driven mandates of the United Nations. The Security
Council must attach great importance to the nexus
between security and development. I wish to
emphasize the following five points.

First, we must increase input into development
and eradicate the sources of conflict. Poverty and
underdevelopment are the major root causes that
trigger conflict and breed terrorism. The international
community, and the United Nations in particular, must
place greater emphasize on promoting the international
development agenda. Developed countries must further
increase their development assistance, provide debt
relief to developing countries, open their markets,
transfer technology, and help developing countries to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals as soon as
possible.

Secondly, development must be anchored in
environments free of war and turbulence. The United
Nations and the Security Council should vigourously
promote the culture of peace and encourage and
support the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, consultation, good offices and mediation. The
use or threat of use of force must be avoided in
international relations.

Thirdly, greater emphasis must be placed on
peacebuilding so as to prevent relapses into conflict. In
post-conflict countries or regions, progress must be
made simultaneously on the political, security and
development fronts throughout the development and
reconstruction process. Capacity-building efforts must
be expedited in post-conflict countries in order to
enhance governance, provide basic services and
advance development and reconstruction so that the
population can enjoy peace dividends at the earliest
opportunity. That will help to consolidate the political
reconciliation process and to stabilize post-conflict
situations. United Nations peacekeeping operations can
make greater contributions to early recovery,
development and reconstruction.

Fourthly, relevant United Nations agencies and
international organizations responsible for security and
development must enhance their coordination and form
synergies. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, but in strengthening peacebuilding
and development the PBC, the United Nations
development agencies and the Bretton Woods
institutions must play their roles to the full.

Fifthly, the United Nations and the Security
Council should pay greater attention to Africa. Seventy
per cent of the items on the Council's agenda involve
Africa. The interconnections between peace and
development are most pronounced in Africa. There can
be no international prosperity or stability without peace
and development in Africa. The international
community must provide greater support to Africa's
development and greater assistance to individual
African countries, the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations in order to maintain
peace and security in Africa.

