The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): Water,
peace and security are inextricably linked. With
demand for freshwater projected to grow by more than
40 per cent by the middle of the century, and with
climate change having a growing impact, water scarcity
is a growing concern.

By 2050, at least one in four people will live in
a country where the lack of fresh water is chronic or
recurrent. Strains on water access are already rising
in all regions. Without effective management of our
water resources, we risk intensified disputes between
communities and sectors and even increased tensions
among nations.

Three-quarters of United Nations Member States
share lakes or river basins with their neighbours.
Important river basins, such as the Nile, the Indus, the
Ganges, the Euphrates-Tigris and the Mekong provide a
lifeline for the economy, trade, culture and livelihoods
of surrounding communities. All told, there are more
than 270 internationally shared river basins that serve
as the primary source of fresh water for approximately
40 per cent of the world's population. That is why it is
essential that nations cooperate to ensure that water is
shared equitably and used sustainably.

Indeed, water has proven to be a catalyst for
cooperation among nations, even those that are not on
good terms. In the second half of the twentieth century
alone, 287 international water agreements were signed.
For example, in South America, Lake Titicaca, the
largest freshwater lake on the continent, has long been
a source of cooperation between Bolivia and Peru. The
1960 Indus Water Treaty between the Government of
India and the Government of Pakistan has survived
three wars between those two countries. In my own
experience, the Albufeira Convention, agreed during
my time as Prime Minister of Portugal, continues to
promote good relations on water management between
Portugal and Spain.

(spoke in English)

I should like to make a brief comment on that
agreement. During the time of my predecessor, the
discussions between the Governments of Portugal and
Spain were extremely difficult, and whenever there
was the perception that an agreement might be possible
there was an uproar in the press of both countries over
the question of whether or not the Government were
betraying the vital interests of their countries. When I
became Prime Minister and Jose' Maria Aznar became
Prime Minister of Spain, we decided that our common
interests were far more important than the difficulties
in the elaboration of the treaty, and so, with two small
teams on both sides, it was possible to quickly achieve
something that we both considered to be a reasonable
compromise - not a perfect solution for either country
but a reasonable compromise.

Until the last moment, the uproar went on and the
discussions in the media were furious about this issue,
but the proof that political will is decisive is that the
agreement was signed and, from that moment onwards,
the discussion completely stopped. Things are working
perfectly between the two countries, with enormous
benefits, namely, in the common management of the
rivers - allowing, for instance, floods to have a much
less devastating impact than in the past. Something
that had looked almost impossible became easy when
there was the political will to do it, and once there was
the political will to do it nobody paid a price. On the
contrary, everybody benefited. I think that this is a
lesson that can be used in many other parts of the world
where people are afraid to go the extra mile to reach an
agreement with a neighbour or with a partner.

Elsewhere in Europe, the Convention on the
Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes has fostered collaboration and
conflict resolution since 1992. As of March last year,
the Convention became open to all United Nations
Member States, offering the opportunity to create a
global framework for preventive diplomacy for dealing
with transboundary water issues.

The United Nations actively promotes mediation
and dialogue as effective tools for preventing and
resolving disputes over water and other natural
resources. For example, the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia is
collaborating closely with the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea and other partners to build capacity
in water diplomacy and to modernize the regional legal
framework on the management of transboundary water
resources. I look forward to visiting the Aral Sea in the
coming days. While there, I will discuss with all five
Governments of Central Asia how the United Nations is
supporting mediation to prevent and resolve local and
transboundary disputes over water in Central Asia and
elsewhere. We stand ready to engage in preventative
diplomacy and promote dialogue and mediation on
natural resources and other issues wherever and
whenever necessary.

Last year, the High-level Panel on Water, convened
by former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the
President of the World Bank, produced an action plan that
champions a comprehensive, inclusive and collaborative
way of developing and managing water resources, and
improving water- and sanitation-related services.

The United Nations has also published a guide
containing practical strategies and best practices in the
area of water diplomacy As we work to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, we will expand on these
initiatives. I commend this Security Council meeting
for highlighting how water is and should remain a
reason for cooperation, not conflict. Let us commit to
investing in water security to ensure durable peace and
security for all communities and nations.

