Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first of all to convey to you, Sir,
my delegation's congratulations on the excellent
manner in which you have guided the work of the
Council throughout this month. We are doubly
satisfied, since you represent a country that is united
with Cuba by deep ties of friendship and fraternity.

Convening this meeting is fully justified. The
escalation of violence in the region over the past few
days has reached extremely dangerous levels. The
Israeli forces have renewed their action against the
Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank. The most recent attacks carried out with missiles
from warships, planes, helicopters and tanks have
killed dozens of Palestinians and injured many others.
The attacks of the Israeli forces are now being directed
against installations that serve as headquarters for the
Palestinian National Authority, and they have
surrounded President Arafat in Ramallah and encircled
him with tanks in a completely unacceptable situation,
tantamount to house arrest, which must be ceased
immediately.

United Nations employees have been injured as a
result of recent Israeli attacks, and offices or
installations of the United Nations or directly related to
the Organization, including schools, have been
damaged.

This is occurring on a daily basis. The Council
continues to patently shirk its responsibility. It
passively contemplates the situation, which has a direct
effect on international peace and security. This organ
has not even managed to set up a protection force or
some other, similar impartial mechanism that could
protect the innocent Palestine population, see to a
ceasefire and monitor the situation in the field.

S/PV.4478

 

Veto number 24 of the United States on a draft
resolution on the Palestine question, to which we were
all witness on 14 December, prevented the Security
Council, once again, from discharging the functions
that are entrusted to it in the Charter.

The paralysis of the Council with respect to the
situation in Palestine is apparent not only when it fails
to approved urgently needed resolutions, but also when
it does not act to ensure compliance with those that it
has already adopted.

A lasting and just peace can only be achieved if
Israel complies with all the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council, including
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of this body,
and it respects its obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.

The United States must immediately suspend
financial support for belligerent goals and military
supplies to Israel, which, as evidence of complicity,
include planes, helicopters and missiles that are used
against civilians. It must also condemn state terrorism
by Israel, if it does indeed want a global war on
terrorism, wherever and however it appears.

Cuba considers that the heroic struggle of the
Palestinian people against Israeli aggression and
occupation is legitimate, and we feel deep solidarity
with their resistance and spirit of defiance that they
have expressed in the intifada.

At the same time, Cuba condemns suicide attacks
with bombs and other acts against Israeli civilians,
innocent victims of the spiral of violence that is
provoked by the policy of their Government. We also
oppose the manipulation of these isolated acts to call
into question the Palestinian people's exercise of
legitimate defence and to justify selective and large-
scale action against the Palestinian people.

Once again, we call upon the Security Council to
discharge its responsibilities and act without delay.

