Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We gather
to vote on resolution 2451 (2018) today in order to
address the ongoing conflict and humanitarian crisis in
Yemen and to endorse the Stockholm agreements.

The United States remains deeply concerned about
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen and maintains the
firm conviction that the best hope of resolving the
conflict and addressing the humanitarian crisis is a
political solution, taking the Stockholm agreements as
an important first step. The resolution empowers the
United Nations and its Member States to start the vital
work of implementing those agreements. We continue
to call on all involved in the conflict to allow unfettered
access and safe passage for humanitarian workers and to
facilitate the entry into and movement through Yemen
of fuel, food, medicine and other supplies needed to
save lives.

The resolution also makes a clear demand on
all parties for unhindered humanitarian access
and adherence to international law. It calls for the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
These demands are important, and we urge the parties
to adhere to them. We also hope for rapid progress on
stabilizing the economy and removing any bureaucratic
impediments to the delivery of vital humanitarian and
commercial goods.

Like the Stockholm agreements, this resolution
is an important step, but it is only an initial one.
Our overriding priority remains implementing the
agreements to enforce the ceasefire and oversee a
redeployment of forces in Hudaydah. We will be
watching closely. Success depends on the parties living
up to the obligations agreed to in Sweden.

This text places a tremendous obligation on the
Government of Yemen and the Houthis to act in good
faith, engage and compromise, and give the Yemeni
people a lasting peace. We are grateful to Martin
Griffiths and his team and to Sweden for doing the hard
work and providing the support that resulted in this
much-needed pause. We all have hard work to do in the
coming weeks, and we will embark on this endeavour
with a newfound determination.

The United States fully supports the Sweden
outcomes and their implementation by the parties, and
we look forward to the Secretary-General's forthcoming
proposals on how the United Nations will play its
role to support the commitments the parties made in
Sweden. We call upon all parties to give priority to the
rapid, safe and comprehensive delivery of humanitarian
assistance to millions of suffering Yemenis.

But just as the parties have responsibilities, so too
does the Security Council. When the Council speaks,
we must do so clearly and credibly, accurately reflecting
the facts on the ground and with the courage to address
those who choose to fan the flames of conflict. We had
hoped therefore to include a clear condemnation of the
Iranian regime for its role in prolonging this war. The
Council must not allow Iran's nefarious activities in the
region to disturb this welcome yet fragile agreement,
which so many have worked so hard to achieve. Iran
violates international law with impunity, sending
weapons and associated material to the Houthi in
contravention of the arms embargo provisions set out in

resolution 2216 (2015) and a violation of resolution 2231
(2015). These weapons pose a grave threat not only to
peace and security, but also to the innocent civilians
caught in the crossfire.

With a view to seeking clear accountability, the
United States has spoken out in this Chamber against
Iran's malign activities. It is long past time for every
other member of the Council to do the same.

While we voted for the draft resolution put forward
by our friends the United Kingdom, we regret that it
does not call Iran to account for its destructive agenda
in Yemen. We hope that in the days to come, Iranian
missiles or misdeeds do not shatter the promise of
peace and bring us back to where we were before. But
if that does happen, the Council may come to regret
that omission.

