Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to start,
Sir, by congratulating you as you begin your
presidency for the month of March. I seize this
opportunity also to commend the Permanent
Representative of China for his brilliant presidency
during the very busy month of February.

Today, we have an opportunity to assess the
remarkable progress accomplished in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past year: in national
reconciliation, in peace-building and in laying the
foundations of a modern State. We welcome Mr. Adnan
Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to the Security Council; we are
particularly honoured by his presence. We take this
opportunity to hail the efforts that have been made and
the commitment shown by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a peace-loving country based on
the rule of law.

I would like to extend our sincere appreciation to
Lord Ashdown, the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We thank Lord Ashdown for his report
(S/2004/ 126, annex, enclosure) and for his
commendable efforts to assist the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in this special hour of their history.

I also thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for the
comments he made to the Council this morning. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been a
very important building block of the success that we
have achieved so far.
We wish the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
the very best; we reiterate our confidence in their
ability to build a future of peace and progress. We once
again thank Mr. Terzic for articulating to the Security
Council the clear vision of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a vision, indeed, for the entire Balkan
region.

The commitment of Lord Ashdown to put the
country irreversibly on the road to statehood and the
European Union is indeed a noble one. Reaching those
goals has been made possible only thanks to hard work,
good policies and the steady support of the
international community. The priorities set for the
attainment of those objectives are clear and reasonable,
addressing the three pillars of the modern State:
effective judicial institutions, a modern market-
oriented economy and a functioning public
administration working for the common well-being.

The measures adopted on the rule of law, when
fully applied and enforced, will have far-reaching
consequences. The report mentions important reforms
such as the creation of the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council, the State Information and
Protection Agency and the Specialized Department for
Organized Crime, Economic Crime and Corruption; the
new Criminal Procedure Code; the restructuring of
police agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
under way; and completing the far-reaching reforms
related to law enforcement and the rule of law.

The War Crimes Chamber within the State Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important instrument
for achieving the objectives set by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia: making
war criminals accountable and promoting justice and
national reconciliation. This is a crucial contribution to
the establishment of the rule of law in the national
institutions of the country. In that regard, we support
the outlined structure and financing of the War Crimes
Chamber with a view to the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1503 (2003).

The economic reforms promoted by the Office of
the High Representative - the so-called bulldozer
initiative - to stimulate economic growth and job-
creation constitute another important component of the
reforms that are under way. The anticipated adoption of
50 new reforms during the first quarter of 2004 may be
fully credited to the "bulldozer initiative".

Other important pieces of draft legislation, when
enacted and put into force, will have important effects
on the country's economic life. I am referring to the
law on public enterprises, the law on investment of
public funds and the law on public procurement, along
with measures taken on the agricultural sector,
telecommunications, electric power and transportation.
Of great importance because of their structural
character were the establishment of a single country-
wide indirect taxation authority and the adoption of a
law on indirect taxation, which, as the report outlines,
will provide a guaranteed source of income for the
State treasury.

In his report, the High Representative attaches
great importance to three issues of fundamental
importance to the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
First is the law on defence enacted last November,
which opens the way to membership of the Partnership
for Peace within the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Secondly, other very important
reforms deal with intelligence reform, creating a
modern State intelligence agency and empowering the
country to respond to threats to its security. Finally,
there is the need to produce a statute for the city of
Mostar and to ensure the city's reunification by putting
an end to parallel structures that have divided Mostar
along ethnic lines. The determination of the High
Representative to impose a new statute for Mostar is a
clear demonstration of his commitment to overcome
the divisions and vested interests that hinder the
implementation of fundamental reforms.

The positive picture drawn in the report of
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina is clearly
confirmed by the very positive developments in the
process of reconciliation among the formerly deeply
opposed States of the region: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro. The tripartite
agreement, the simplification of procedures for the
movement of people and the separate bilateral
agreements among the three countries are a matter for
rejoicing and offer real hope for a better future for the
peoples of the region. Also encouraging is the pace of
the return of refugees and displaced persons. The 1
million returns registered by the end of 2003 show how
the many problems of the countries have been
successful tackled.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has the potential to
become a real success story, as Lord Ashdown again
reiterated this morning: a real success story for the
international community and, above all, for all of its
own people. The support of the international
community has been vital in making these
achievements. My delegation is confident that the
European Union in particular will continue to provide
support in promoting nation-building and development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is our hope that the
ambitious benchmarks set for Bosnia and Herzegovina
by the High Representative and by the international
community will be met with success, and in the
shortest possible time.

