Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council. I would also
like to congratulate Ambassador Takasu for his
excellent work as President during the month of April.
I thank High Representative Ashton very much for her
briefing today.

The United States shares the commitment of the
European Union (EU) to multilateral diplomacy as an
essential tool for addressing global challenges in our
interconnected world. In accordance with the United
Nations Charter, regional and subregional
organizations play important roles in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts.

The United States deeply appreciates the lasting
contributions that the EU has made to peace and
security across a wide range of issues. From conflict
prevention to peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the
European Union has been a critical partner of the
United Nations in managing crises throughout the
world.

The EU has worked together with Afghanistan's
Ministry of the Interior to strengthen the rule of law,
thereby contributing to international efforts to build up
the capacity of Afghan institutions to withstand and
defeat violent extremism. Or consider the Great Lakes
region of Africa, where the EU Special Representative,
in coordination with the United Nations and other
international partners, has worked towards lasting
solutions to numerous challenges.

The European Union is also sharing its
peacekeeping and peacebuilding expertise with other
regional organizations. We thank the EU for
committing substantial resources to furthering the
African Union's efforts to bring peace and security to
the continent. The United States applauds the EU's
creation and funding of the African Peace Facility, as
well as its contribution to building capacity for peace
operations. We also appreciate the EU's efforts to train
Somali security forces to fight terrorism more
effectively, and the EU's strong efforts to combat
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The United States is
also working alongside the African Union to ensure
that these investments pay dividends in the years to
come.

My Government is grateful for the EU's rapid
response to the earthquake in Haiti and for the EU's
role in organizing the successful donor conference held
in March. The United States remains deeply committed
to working with Haiti and its international partners in
the country's reconstruction and renewal.

The United States also shares the EU's
commitment to taking concrete action in the area of
women, peace and security, including empowering
women, deepening their involvement in political
processes and ending sexual violence in conflict zones,
including the horrific use of rape as a weapon of war.
We also welcome the EU's leadership on other
important initiatives, such as the protection of
civilians, particularly vulnerable children.

The United States applauds the many
contributions the EU has made to peace and security
and looks forward to continuing its partnership with
the EU to address pressing global challenges. We
encourage the continuing dialogue and deepening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union.

