I would like to express my deep appreciation to the German presidency for organizing today's open debate on pandemics and security, a timely and important topic for the Security Council, the United Nations and the world. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has created not just a health crisis, but a serious human-security crisis worldwide. Despite the tireless efforts of many around the globe, the disease continues to spread across borders and within the most vulnerable communities, damaging not only peaceful societies but also affecting international peace and security. First of all, I cannot overemphasize the importance of global solidarity in the fight against this invisible enemy of humankind. Japan welcomes the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) in response to the COVID-19 and expects it to be respected in full by the relevant parties. This is not the time for people to fight against each other but to unite in the fight against a common enemy. That is why Japan strongly supports the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and why we co-initiated the statement of support for the appeal that was joined by 172 Member States and observers. The statement of support noted that we must "muster all our efforts to save lives and alleviate social and economic devastation on our peoples". The Statement also recalls our obligation enshrined in the United Nations Charter, namely, to settle international disputes by peaceful means, which is much better than to call for a ceasefire after the outbreak of military conflicts. Under the current circumstances, I should particularly stress the importance of the rule of law and the peaceful resolution of disputes based on international law. When daunting challenges require us to show solidarity, it is out of the question to take advantage of the ongoing crisis and attempt to change the status quo by unilateral measures. Coercive actions need to be avoided as they inevitably divert attention away from the ongoing battle against our common enemy, COVID-19. Building on the appeal for a global ceasefire, we expect all relevant parties to take steady steps towards the peaceful resolution of disputes. COVID-19 has seriously affected peace in societies by posing a multifaceted threat to the survival, livelihood and dignity of people, in particular the most vulnerable. Unless we ensure human security and restore peace in our communities, we cannot expect relationships between groups of people, including nations, to be stable. Human security calls for people-centred, comprehensive, context-specific and prevention-oriented responses that strengthen the protection and empowerment of all people and all communities, leaving no one behind. Health being the most fundamental element of human security, Japan has long promoted a global health agenda, including the fight against infectious diseases and support for universal health coverage. The responses from all over the world to the Secretary-General's UN75 survey paint a clear picture of people's priorities in the time of COVID-19 and beyond: first, universal access to health care; secondly, strengthening solidarity between people and nations; and thirdly, rethinking the global economy to prevent inequality. COVID-19 has made it evident that achieving human security through greater collaboration and partnership so as to leave no one behind is of utmost importance today and in the days to come. In response to the United Nations appeal for humanitarian assistance, Japan decided as early as in March to provide approximately $140 million through six international organizations for technical and other assistance for medical professionals and others. In April, Japan further decided to provide additional assistance in the amount of more than $1.4 billion in order to strengthen capacity in the health and medical fields, increase the flow of medical and other supplies to developing countries, and support vulnerable people including women and girls. Japan made a pledge of $300 million at the Global Vaccine Summit in June to accelerate access to vaccines. At his briefing to the Security Council in April, the Secretary-General pointed out that the first pressing risk in the face of COVID-19 was the erosion of trust in public institutions, "particularly if citizens perceive that their authorities mishandled the response or are not transparent on the scope of the crisis". A society can be neither peaceful nor resilient unless people have trust both in their Governments and in each other. The pandemic has put this trust at stake, especially in already fragile and conflict-affected countries with weak institutions. Effective, accountable and inclusive institutions, whether in the security and judicial sectors or in socioeconomic fields, contribute to strengthening Governments' credibility, reducing vulnerability, ensuring human security and nurturing people's confidence that their Governments are respectful of their dignity. It is worthwhile considering stronger focus on institution-building in the ongoing review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, with the aim of realizing more effective system-wide support to countries affected by conflict, including through enhanced cooperation between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. In conclusion, I would like to underscore that combating this pandemic requires greater international cooperation and solidarity and a comprehensive and coordinated international response. It also requires that the United Nations play a central role in this endeavour.
