Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, allow
me to join others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadic', President of Serbia, and in thanking
him for his important statement. We also wish to
warmly acknowledge the participation of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

The latest development in Kosovo is a source of
profound concern to our delegation. Certainly, we are
mindful of the View regarding the unique character of
the Balkan region. We are not oblivious to the fact that
the issue of Kosovo is inseparable from the process of
the break-up of the former Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Above all, we sympathize with the recent
sufferings of the people in Kosovo.

The Kosovo issue has certain unique qualities.
However, it could be argued that all issues that are on
the agenda of the Council have their own unique
character. For Indonesia, however, they share one
overriding and fundamental quality, namely, that for all
these issues, dialogue and negotiations must be the
preferred option for their resolution.

Indonesia therefore regrets the failure to reach a
solution on Kosovo through dialogue and negotiation,
resulting in the unilateral declaration of independence
by Kosovo. That declaration has come despite the call
by many Council members, including Indonesia, for a
continuation of dialogue and negotiation.

From the very outset, the Government of
Indonesia has supported all efforts to address the
question of the final status of Kosovo in a peaceful
manner, through dialogue and negotiation. We maintain
our strong belief that a mutually acceptable agreement
emanating from that process will better guarantee
peace and stability in the region. It also offers the best
promise of preventing new tension or conflict in the
Balkan region.

We hear the view of those who contend that the
status quo has become untenable. Indeed, we
understand that View. Most important, the parties
directly affected themselves appear to be mindful of
that fact. The direct talks between Belgrade and
Pristina were, after all, designed to address this
situation. While the process has yet to yield the desired
result, we do not believe that all avenues for a
negotiated outcome have been exhausted.
Commitment, good faith and, most of all, patience are,
after all, key prerequisites for successful negotiations.
Here, we speak from experience.

It is difficult to comprehend the readiness to
declare the talks to be exhausted. We are reminded of
other seemingly intractable issues before the Council
where patience and perseverance in the pursuit of
negotiated outcome is counselled. Dialogue,
negotiation and reconciliation, not might, have
alleviated the challenge of prolonged conflict. Only
through this avenue of peace will new tensions - or
worse still, armed conflicts - not occur in the
Balkans. We should embrace this avenue instead of
giving in.

The potential implications of the forcible decision
on final status become especially poignant when set
against the principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and reaffirmed by international law, namely the
cardinal principles of the sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of all States Members of the United
Nations. Those well-tested principles serve to guide
interactions among States and nations in order to
maintain a stable and peaceful international system.
Those paramount principles have to be consistently
upheld by all Member States.

The Government of Indonesia will closely follow
developments on Kosovo. It will carefully consider the
full implications of the declaration, in the full light of
the principles and realities I mentioned earlier.

Indonesia expresses its deepest hope that
Kosovo's declaration of independence will not cause
new tension and open conflict. The tragic history of the
Balkan region should provide the Council with the
insight necessary to chart its course in a careful and
measured manner.

In shouldering its Charter-mandated
responsibilities, the Council should, at the minimum
and as a matter of urgency, transmit a clear message to
all the parties to exercise restraint and remain calm.
The Council should also make it clear that it continues
to be seized of the issue and that it will closely monitor
developments in the region. Not least, the Council
must inform itself fully and build a common and
shared understanding of the impact that this latest
development could have on the work and policy of the
current and legal administrator of Kosovo, namely the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. The Security Council should ensure that the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and Council
resolution 1244 (1999) are fully respected. Uncertainty
and lack of clarity on this issue would not be helpful at
all.

Indonesia has always believed that the Council
should be at the forefront on any issue pertaining to
international peace and security, as mandated by the
Charter. Time after time, the Council has been able to
react in a proportionate and careful manner on various
global issues. It has made a difference. This is one of
the global issues that we, the Council as a whole,
simply do not have the luxury of time to remain
indecisive and to stand on the sidelines.

We have always believed that the diverse
composition of the membership of the Council can
provide a nuanced and all-embracing View of the
world. Members of the Council representing the
diverse views of all regions can assist the Balkan
region to come to terms. In this regard, the Council has
to maintain its cohesiveness and exercise its leadership.
The international community is attentively watching
the Council in addressing this issue.

In conclusion, even at this juncture, we will
continue to espouse the need for dialogue and a
negotiated solution within the framework of Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and international law.

