Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the holding of this emergency
meeting of the Security Council. My delegation would
like to thank the speakers for their analyses of the
situation and their briefings.

The Ebola epidemic is not just a health crisis, but
a potential threat to global security. It requires a global
response that addresses both the health crisis and the
broader societal, economic, political and security
threats to the countries affected. The international
community must therefore act quickly to contain and
fight the crisis. Our efforts should focus on the needs
of the affected populations and should not isolate the
countries struggling with it. It is crucial to redouble our
efforts to find an effective and safe cure to treat those
who have already fallen ill and to prevent the spread of
the disease.

Switzerland welcomes the Ebola response road
map launched at the end of August by the World
Health Organization (WHO). While we need to act
swiftly, we also need to ensure that our efforts in the
field are calibrated and coordinated under the auspices
of the United Nations, thereby allowing international
and local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
multiply the impact of their operations. We also need to
be prepared to address the crisis over the longer term.

Switzerland acknowledges the emergency appeal
made in Geneva by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the WHO and the
Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola,
with a view to obtaining the means to cover the most
urgent needs in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. For
its part, Switzerland has so far provided humanitarian
assistance through the provision of 14 tons ofprotective
medical equipment to the Government of Liberia and
has scaled up the capacities of its office in Monrovia to
provide humanitarian aid.

From the onset of the crisis, Switzerland has
provided support to local NGOs in their efforts to
raise public awareness. Furthermore, Switzerland
is financially supporting Medecins Sans Frontieres,
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service. In total, Switzerland has
so far allocated some $3.9 million to the fight against
Ebola. Following the recent conclusion of an assessment
mission to Liberia, Switzerland is currently considering
options to further increase its contributions to assist the
international efforts.

Switzerland welcomes the decision of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union to authorize
the immediate deployment of an humanitarian, military
and civilian mission led by the African Union. We also
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Peacebuilding
Commission and invite it to further reflect on ways to
contribute to a solution to the crisis, including by acting
as platform to mobilize international support.

Finally, we welcome the Security Council's
willingness to carefully consider the implications ofthe
Ebola crisis on the current and future configuration of
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). As a fully
integrated peacekeeping operation, UNMIL should help
coordinate and support the international community's
effort to tackle Ebola, in close coordination with OCHA
and the crisis response mechanism.

Switzerland fully supports resolution 2177 (2014),
just adopted. My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for the leadership of the Council's presidency
on this urgent and important subject.

