Mr. Rivard (Canada) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Afghanistan for their thoughtful
interventions.

On 5 December, the participants at the Bonn
Conference on Afghanistan made clear that 2014 would
not mark the end of our common engagement in that
country, but rather a milestone in our continued
commitment to make Afghanistan a secure and
sustainable democracy. Canada and its partners
underlined the importance of mutual accountability
between the Afghan Government and the international
community to ensure a successful transition to and
beyond 2014.

The New Year will bring the renewal of the
important mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. It is clear that the Afghan
Government must inevitably assume greater part of the
responsibilities for the sovereignty of the country, but
the United Nations must also continue to play a long-
term role, working with Afghan institutions, both to
help promote and protect human rights and to build on
what has been achieved with regard to the integrity of
representative democracy in the country.

Between now and 2014, Canada will be investing
$360 million in Afghanistan. Our priorities are well
defined. We will invest in the future of Afghan children
and youth through implementing programmes in
education and health. We will advance security, the
rule of law and human rights, including through the
second-largest contribution to the NATO Training
Mission in Afghanistan. We will continue to encourage
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours by
way of active regional diplomacy, and we will deliver
humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people. At all
times, in the framework of our commitment to
implement Security Council resolutions on women,
peace and security, Canada will pay particular attention
to Afghan women and girls.

Canada will not end its commitment to
Afghanistan's stability at the completion of the
transition process. Canada's ultimate aim has been, and
continues to be, to help Afghans rebuild Afghanistan,
to make it a viable country that is better governed,
more stable and secure and never again a safe haven
for terrorists. Beyond 2014, we will stay engaged in
defending and further advancing the crucial gains made
in the protection of human rights and the establishment
of a transparent and representative democracy.

Cementing recent security gains will require a
concerted effort on the part of Afghanistan to maintain
its focus on the professionalization of the Afghan
National Security Forces. Only in a secure environment
can the Afghan population move toward economic
development, stability and peace. In that regard, we
welcome the progress made in the districts under the
first tranche of the security transition process. We hope
it will be possible to secure similar results in areas
included in the second tranche of the transition.

Security efforts alone, however, will not be
sufficient to guarantee the success of the transition.
The transition will also require the support of
transparent governance, a more robust rule of law and a
determination to undertake the reforms necessary to
develop the private sector and to attract foreign
investment.

Afghanistan's private sector economy will help
generate much-needed employment opportunities while
generating the State revenue necessary for successful
transformation. In this nascent phase of its
development, Canada encourages Afghanistan to work
assiduously to ensure it has an effective regulatory
framework to ensure sustainable benefits for its people
from the development of its natural resources. It is also
important to work with companies and other
stakeholders in multi-stakeholder initiatives aimed at
improving corporate social responsibility and
transparency, including the full implementation of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.

Canada is encouraged by progress in efforts
between the Government of Afghanistan and its
partners to advance the Afghan National Development
Strategy and national priority programmes.

(spoke in English)
Canada believes that Afghan civil society has a
central role to play in the Afghan-led transformation
process. In Bonn, Canada's Foreign Minister, the
Honourable John Baird, placed particular emphasis on
meeting civil society representatives and reiterated that
the inclusion of women in all Afghan-led
transformation efforts remains a priority for the
Government of Canada.

The importance of maintaining a strong focus on
defending women's rights in Afghanistan was
illustrated by the November 2011 United Nations
report on the implementation of the country's law on
the elimination of violence against women. We cannot
forget that, as the report states, there remains a long
way to go. We firmly believe that the full and equal
participation of women from diverse experiences and
fields, at all levels of decision-making, is essential to
developing a stronger society.

Building on progress accomplished, Canada will
continue to be an effective partner for human rights
reform. In this regard, we must not forget the right to
practice one's faith in peace. The recent attacks that
killed and injured dozens of Shiite worshippers on the
day of Ashura remind us that Afghanistan and its
neighbours must take every measure to promote and
preserve harmonious inter-ethnic and interreligious
relations in the country. It is significant that no
retribution has been exacted, and we applaud the
Afghan people for rising above that terrible
provocation and rejecting sectarian violence. Canada
hopes that this spirit will further encourage ongoing
efforts to strengthen the protection of vulnerable
groups' human rights.

Canada remains troubled by the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, caused by the ongoing
conflict and exacerbated by the worsening drought
conditions. Of particular concern are the deliberate
attacks against civilians and the continued violations of
international humanitarian law. Canada condemns
violence against humanitarian workers and calls all
parties to respect humanitarian principles to allow safe
and unhindered access to those in need.

The impact of drought in Afghanistan calls for
the most effective response to ensure that food reaches
the most vulnerable, particularly women and children,
before winter conditions prevent access. To this end,
Canada will contribute $13 million to the World Food
Programme to provide humanitarian assistance for
drought-affected populations in the northern and north-
eastern provinces of Afghanistan during the difficult
winter months.

The Bonn Conference provided an opportunity
for Afghanistan and the international community to
more clearly articulate the principles of the
reconciliation process. Canada supports these
principles and will continue to offer its support to
Afghan-led reconciliation efforts by encouraging active
engagement of Afghan civil society, including women
and vulnerable groups. Our firm belief is that national
political reconciliation will not hold until it reaches all
Afghans.

Equally important, reconciliation in Afghanistan
will require the support and cooperation of

Afghanistan's neighbours. Canada views as positive
the outcomes of the Istanbul meeting on security and
cooperation in the heart of Asia. Our ongoing
facilitation of Afghanistan's and Pakistan's efforts to
strengthen the security and management of their shared
border, by way of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Cooperation Process, is one practical way in which we
hope to contribute to this vision.

Finally, I would like to conclude by offering
Canada's warmest thanks to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for his
wholehearted dedication and remarkable work to
advance the common objectives of Afghanistan and its
partners toward peace and stability. Canada welcomes
the nomination of Mr. Jan Kubis to undertake the
continuation of the important work of the United
Nations in this period of new beginnings for the
international engagement in Afghanistan.

