I thank Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Qaddour for their briefings. The humanitarian needs in Syria are enormous and increasing, and the cross- border mechanism continues to serve as an essential component in the provision of life-saving humanitarian assistance. For this reason, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its support for resolution 2533 (2020). More than ever, there is an urgent need to effectively scale up cross-line deliveries to fill the gaps that now exist. Humanitarian assistance should never be politicized, and we encourage all parties to engage constructively on this matter to ensure that no one is deprived of aid. We take note of the 30 June fourth Brussels conference on supporting the future of Syria and the region. We support meaningful dialogue aimed at improving Syria's humanitarian situation and welcome the announcement of financial pledges for both Syria and the region. However, we must remain mindful that discussions focused on Syria ought to include the participation of the Syrian Government and we must give due consideration to their perspectives. Syria's humanitarian emergency has been made worse by the country's rapidly declining economy. Millions are now food insecure, and access to the most basic commodities is severely constrained. The grave threat of the coronavirus disease pandemic further compounds the socioeconomic challenges. The country's health- care system has been crippled by a decade of war and is incapable of withstanding a major outbreak. We yet again appeal to countries who have imposed unilateral coercive measures on Syria to forgo this course of action to afford the country a fair chance at confronting the current challenges. We further encourage the international community to contribute to Syria's reconstruction efforts to assist the overall recovery. We remain concerned by the numerous interruptions in the operations of the Allouk water station. We urge all parties to work together to ensure the sustained flow of water to the hundreds of thousands of civilians, residing in overcrowded camps and informal settlements, who are heavily dependent on its supply. Once again, we underscore the importance of preserving the ceasefire in the north-west and of establishing a lasting nationwide cessation of hostilities. Conflict takes lives, destroys critical infrastructure, forces displacement and disrupts the delivery of aid. We therefore urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint. Further, we remind them of their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law when conducting operations aimed at eradicating the scourge of terrorism. The Syrian people continue to pay the highest price of the conflict. The humanitarian situation is at its worst, and there will be no respite in the absence of a political solution. We encourage all parties to continue working together towards accomplishing the shared goal of restoring peace and stability in the country. Before closing, we would like to join with others in congratulating the Federal Republic of Germany on a successful presidency. We would also like to thank Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his valuable contributions to the work of the Security Council and wish him the very best of luck in his new appointment in Geneva.
