Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's important debate and for your
detailed and helpful concept note (S/2014/478, annex).
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General of the European External
Action Service and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations for their respective
briefings.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement and the representative of
Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

The increased complexity of ongoing conflicts
clearly underscores the need for a multidimensional and
integrated response. It is therefore understandable that
regional and subregional actors have an increasingly
important role in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. As an avid supporter of today's topic,
during its most recent presidency of the Council,
Indonesia held an open debate on United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security (see S/PV.5776). Presidential statement S/PRST/2007/42
underscored, among other issues, United Nations
political support for such organizations. That
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is well recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations, which emphasizes that such regional
arrangements should make every effort to achieve the
pacific settlement of local disputes before referring
them to the Security Council.

However, there remains a gap in more systematically
and effectively harnessing the role of key regional actors.
While regional entities can be vital partners in fostering
peace, including through their peacekeepers, mediators
and provision of civilian capacity enhancement, the
United Nations and the international community also
need to step up their political and technical support
to the relevant regional entities in strengthening their
capacities.

Indeed, with regional organizations' geographical,
cultural and historical proximity to conflicts in their
regions whose causes they deeply understand, they have
distinct advantages and are able to take approaches
that can contribute to the prevention and resolution
of conflicts in a unique manner. Furthermore, as we
have seen in some situations in Africa, troops can
quickly be readied and supplied. While stressing the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
three basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping,
we also emphasize an improvement in peacekeeping
mechanisms to ensure adequate and timely financial
and logistical resources for the missions.

Numerous cases show that without predictable and
sustained financing and support, regional operations
can experience setbacks in their missions, thereby also
impacting support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Crucially, the United Nations and regional
organizations must enhance their mutual trust and
confidence so that they are better prepared to swiftly
and flexibly draw on their respective comparative
advantages for the cause of peace. In that regard,
Indonesia welcomes the continued effort of the
Security Council to deepen the relationship between
peacekeeping and relevant regional organizations,
including the African Union Peace and Security
Council, on matters of mutual interest.

The wider, the more inclusive and more transparent
the dialogue is among peacekeeping stakeholders, the
more effective the outcomes will be. Given that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
is the most widely represented intergovernmental
forum to comprehensively consider United Nations
peacekeeping, my delegation also looks forward to the
enhanced proposals from the Special Committee on
today's theme.

In our own region of South-East Asia, ASEAN,
under the ASEAN-United Nations Comprehensive
Partnership, stands ready to support the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also believe that it is important to share experiences
and best practices with other regions, including on
improving ways to enhance relevant capacities for
addressing the whole spectrum of conflict from
initial occurrence to its aftermath. The inputs and
recommendations by regional organizations and troop-
contributing countries need to be appropriately taken
into account by the Council in its decision-making
process at the earliest stage so that a multidimensional
and integrated approach can be adopted.

In conclusion, Indonesia reiterates its support
for greater and systematic cooperation among all
peacekeeping stakeholders in concert by the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the C-34. We
are confident that today's debate and the resolution
adopted this morning (resolution 2167 (2014)) will
advance the work of the Council and other relevant
actors to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

