Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): As pointed out in today's
European Union statement, to which Poland adhered, this
is the third time in the last six months that the Security
Council has considered the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia. On the one hand, this shows that the process of
resolving differences between the parties to the conflict is
particularly difficult and is not bringing the expected
results. On the other hand, the frequency of our debates
on Georgia proves that there is a great deal of
determination among members of the international
community to assist that country in every possible way to
find a solution to its tragic problems.

This question of the international community's
determination - or, more generally speaking, its
involvement - arises before this Council rather
frequently. And from our experience as members of the
Security Council we know very well that there is a strict
interdependence between the will of the parties to a
conflict to settle their problems and the will of the
international community to become engaged in the
process of settlement.

 

Today, in the case of Georgia, we seem to be at a
crossroads. The numerous efforts made by the international
community have so far failed to solve the problems. Neither
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe nor the Commonwealth of
Independent States has been able to succeed. The initiatives
of the Ambassadors of the group of "Friends of Georgia"
in Tbilisi have not significantly improved the situation
either. Here one cannot question the will and commitment
of the community of States. We can, however, question the
will and commitment of those involved in the conflict.

In the draft resolution on which we are about to vote,
the Security Council expresses its deep concern at the
continued failure by the parties to resolve their differences
owing to the uncompromising position taken by the Abkhaz
side. It should be clearly stated that in situations like this
there is no room for uncompromising positions. Instead,
flexibility and moderation are required. We appeal to the
parties to the conflict, and particularly to the Abkhazians,
to demonstrate that their ultimate goal is a peaceful solution
of their differences.

Our delegation is of the view that the only solution to
the conflict is a comprehensive political settlement,
including determination and acceptance of the political
status of Abhkazia within the State of Georgia while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
latter.

We are dismayed to hear that refugees and displaced
persons are being barred by the Abkhaz side from returning
home. Indeed, today's draft resolution stresses that there
should be no linkage of the return of refugees and displaced
persons with the question of the political status of
Abkhazia. We expect that there will be a significant
acceleration in the process of the voluntary return of
refugees and displaced persons without delay or
preconditions, and that a timetable on the basis of that
submitted by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees will be observed. We must not
let demographic changes happen as a result of the conflict.

The continuous threat posed by landmines is very
distressing. Tragically, it is becoming a more and more
common feature of today's conflicts. That is why we
welcome with great appreciation the decision made by the
Secretariat to provide the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG) with engineering support and
adequate demining equipment. At the same time, we
condemn the laying of mines, notably in the Gali region.
They have already caused several deaths among the civilian
population, peace-keepers and international observers.
This is unacceptable.

I have already spoken of the determination and
commitment of the international community. But let us be
realistic. In the light of the lack of cooperation and
flexibility of those directly involved and in the light of
the increasingly dangerous environment for discharging
the peace-keeping mission, the interest of the members of
the international community might be fading away.

By all means, we should prevent this. And because
there is still a significant chance that the process of a
peaceful solution to the conflict in Georgia will end in
success, we are in favour of extending the mandate of
UNOMIG until the end of January 1997.

