Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): First, let
me join my colleagues in welcoming the Foreign Minister
of Georgia; he is most welcome, and we appreciate his
presence here today.

We are now in a critical period in the peace process
in Georgia. While the May ceasefire continues to hold,
the situation remains tense and attacks against
peacekeepers continue. The United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) continues to contribute to
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement and to play
a constructive role in the overall peace process. That is
why we will vote today in favour of extending the
mandate of UNOMIG for another six months.

We are concerned that the parties have not shown
the political will to renounce violence and to take steps
towards a comprehensive political settlement. The parties
must engage in substantive talks on the real issues: the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons and the
political status of Abkhazia. We look forward to further
progress in the Geneva process which addresses these
basic issues. We also hope that the upcoming meeting in
Athens on confidence-building measures will advance the
process. We thank the Government of Greece for its kind
offer to host this important meeting.

We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks on
the peacekeepers of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS). We remain deeply concerned about the
physical safety of the personnel of UNOMIG. We call
upon the parties to renew their commitment to protect the
personnel of UNOMIG and other international
peacekeepers. It is their responsibility to protect the
peacekeepers. To this end, both sides must rein in terrorist
activity. They must also cease violence and harassment
against refugees and internally displaced persons.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's efforts to
address the security of UNOMIG personnel with practical
measures. So long as the parties fail to protect UNOMIG,
we consider it essential that further force-protection
arrangements be made, and that the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a self-protection unit be approved
and implemented as soon as possible.

The situation in Abkhazia is deeply troubling. We
support the idea that, following the Secretary-General's
mid-term report, the Security Council should assess the
future of the UNOMIG mission in the overall effort to
achieve a political settlement in Georgia.

We thank the Secretary-General and, in particular,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
 

Mr. Bota, for their devotion to the search for peace in
Georgia. Mr. Bota's active leadership role in securing the
new ceasefire and his efforts in the Geneva process, and
especially his success in bringing the parties together, are
worthy of high commendation.

Finally, let me express our strong appreciation to the
men and women of UNOMIG. Their dedication in the
pursuit of peace also deserves high recognition.

