Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.

The events that we are witnessing are serious and,
unfortunately, not unprecedented. In 2008, 2012 and
2014, on each occasion the inhabitants of the Gaza
Strip have been caught between the rocket fire that we
condemn and the fire of the Israeli army, with all its
victims. Each time, the Israeli people have suffered
great distress. The history of the Middle East, more
than any other region of the world, repeats itself. Once
again, we are seeing a deadly spiral and the distancing
of a peace that seems increasingly unattainable every
time that serious efforts fail. A few weeks ago, we
were talking about our support for the peace initiative
and dialogue between the parties under the aegis of
the United States Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry.
Today, history is repeating itself and we are once again
at war.

In that context, as the Council and the international
community, what should our priorities be? Our
immediate and absolute priority must be to achieve a
ceasefire. On the one hand, the firing of missiles by
Hamas into Israel must cease. It violates international
humanitarian law. On the other hand, the Israeli air
strikes and ground offensive have already caused too
many deaths, those of nearly 300 Palestinians, 80 per
cent of whom are civilians, including 40 children.

I recall that, under international humanitarian law,
civilians should be protected. It is urgent to stop the
spiral of violence and a worsening of the disastrous
human toll of the crisis. The French Foreign Minister,
Mr. Laurent Fabius, is currently in the region. He has
met the Palestinian and the Egytian authorities, whose
mediation efforts we support. Tomorrow, he will meet
the Israeli and Jordanian authorities.

France also welcomes the role of the humanitarian
agencies in Gaza, in particular the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, the World Food Programme and the
World Health Organization, which are alleviating the
suffering and food insecurity of the Palestinian people.
Humanitarian teams fulfil a sacred mission and must
be able to act in accordance with the needs, with their
safety guaranteed.

However, a ceasefire is not enough. We must
establish the conditions for a lasting truce that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Israelis and Palestinians,
in particular in Gaza - on the one hand, security,
which is an absolute right, and, on the other hand, an
end to the blockade and economic development, which
are essential. Gaza must no longer be the outpost of
those who want to destroy Israel or an open-air prison.
We call on Hamas, first, to support the proposal for
an immediate ceasefire, and then to pave the way for
a final agreement by accepting the conditions set by
the Quartet, namely, the recognition of Israel, the
renunciation of violence and the acceptance of the
agreements signed by the Palestinian Authority.

In addition, Gaza must be able to resume a normal
way of life, since poverty, despair and inactivity swell
the ranks of Hamas rather than weaken it. It is therefore
important to work for the lifting of the blockade and the
opening of the border crossings, including at Rafah. In
that spirit, France has proposed the reimplementation
of the European Union Border Assistance Mission in
Rafah, which would improve the living conditions of
the population and support an effective return of the
Palestinian Authority.

Finally, it is above all necessary to restore
meaning to a political settlement. I have already had
the opportunity to say that the key features of such a
solution are known. Yet no one is able to implement
them. The relaunching and conclusion of the peace
process are the only solution that exists. Europeans
and Arabs, alongside the Americans, must mobilize
themselves in order to effectively provide both parties
with the assurances that they need to overcome their
fears. Indeed, while that wall of fear continues and
the feeling of each party that the other wants its
destruction, nothing will be possible. The old formulas
have not worked for the 20 years since the Oslo Accords
were signed. The two parties are clearly unable to move
towards peace by themselves. We need new ideas and
the efforts of everyone to help them in that direction,
which they are hesitant to take.

