The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council is following closely
the security and humanitarian situation in the
Sahel region, and has received regular briefings
on these issues.

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern about the insecurity and rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Sahel
region, which is further complicated by the
presence of armed groups and terrorist groups
and their activities, as well as by the proliferation
of weapons from within and outside the region,
that threaten peace, security and stability of
regional States. The Security Council calls for the
national authorities and international, regional
and subregional organizations to take urgent steps
to further their concerted efforts to address these
challenges in an effective and appropriate
manner.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the forcible seizure of power from the
democratically elected Government of Mali by
some elements of the Malian armed forces, and in
this regard recalls its press statement of 22 March
2012. The Security Council condemns the acts
initiated and carried out by mutinous troops
against the democratically elected Government
and demands they cease all violence and return to
their barracks. The Security Council calls for the
restoration of constitutional order and the holding
of elections as previously scheduled.

"The Security Council condemns the attacks
initiated and carried out by rebel groups against
Malian Government forces, and calls on the
rebels to cease all violence and to seek a peaceful
solution through appropriate political dialogue.
"The Security Council emphasizes the need
to uphold and respect the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Mali.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
over the fragile security and humanitarian
situation in the region, and notes that it has been
exacerbated by drought, food shortages and the
return of thousands of returnees following the
Libyan crisis and other crises in the region.

"The Security Council was also informed
that millions of people in the Sahel region are
suffering from that crisis, forcing thousands to
migrate to less affected neighbouring countries.

"The Security Council commends the joint
efforts made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other agencies of the
United Nations to provide humanitarian
assistance and to draw international attention to
the scale of the problem in the Sahel region. The
Security Council was informed of the proposal to
appoint a senior regional humanitarian
coordinator.

"The Security Council welcomes the
emergency programmes undertaken by the
national authorities of the region as an expression
of their primary responsibility. The Security
Council also welcomes the initiatives taken by
regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States, and efforts so far made by
bilateral and multilateral partners to assist the
Sahel countries to alleviate the regional food and
nutrition crisis. The Security Council encourages
the international community to provide support to
resolve the crisis in Mali and the Sahel region
based on an integrated strategy for immediate and
long-term needs, encompassing security,
development and humanitarian issues."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l2/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
12-27525
