Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Allow me first, Sir, to say how very pleased we
are to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council for the month of July. We are sure that, thanks to
your skills and well-known qualities, our work will be
successful. At the same time I should like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Elaraby and the entire delegation
of Egypt for their excellent work in conducting the business
of the Council in June.

I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome
His Excellency General Higino Carneiro, Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of the Government of Angola.

Since 8 May, the date of the last extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III, the situation in Angola with
regard to the consolidation of the peace process has
improved in an encouraging way, despite certain delays. In
fact, the adoption by the two parties of the framework
agreement on military matters, the beginning of the
incorporation of the military personnel of UNITA into the
Angolan Armed Forces, the agreement between the
President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi on the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation by the second week of August, and the
progress made in demining and lifting checkpoints are all
positive developments, which we applaud.

Accordingly, my delegation encourages the parties to
continue to show their commitment to peace by
destroying stocks of land-mines and by lifting all
checkpoints so as to guarantee the free circulation of
people and goods throughout all the territory of Angola.

The quarterng and disarmament of all UNITA
forces - another essential element of the peace
process - and the handing over of all their weapons,
should be completed without further delay.

We welcome the measures taken by the Government
of Angola towards peace, such as the amnesty proclaimed
in keeping with the Libreville accord, the completion of
the quartering of the rapid reaction police and the
adoption of the programme for the disarmament of the
civilian population. These important measures adopted by
the Government of Angola will, we are sure, help to
consolidate peace in this fraternal country.

Despite continuing delays, my delegation believes
that the process that has been started is on the right track.
We therefore encourage the President of Angola and the
head of UNITA to meet as soon as possible in Angola to
resolve all outstanding issues. In fact, only political will
and the determination of the parties can help to bring
about a lasting peace, stability and security in Angola.

As for security, the two parties and others interested
in Angola should take all necessary steps to guarantee the
security of United Nations personnel and the personnel of
other international organizations, as well as the premises
that they occupy, in addition to freedom of circulation for
humanitarian relief. This could encourage the international
community to continue to provide Angola with aid.

In the current stage of the process, the
demobilization of ex-combatants, their reintegration into
civil society and the recovery and reconstruction of the
Angolan economy are of the greatest importance.
Accordingly, my delegation encourages the international
community to provide the necessary financial resources
within the joint United Nations Appeal for Angola, in the
certain belief that the two parties will honour their
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.

 

We will support the draft resolution before us to
extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III because we are
optimistic enough to believe that the Angolan leaders,
particularly the head of UNITA, will renew their
commitment to the peace process that we have hoped for.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the efforts of the observer countries, the United States of
America, the Russian Federation and Portugal, to those of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and
to the entire personnel of UNAVEM. III for their
commitment to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

