Mr. Schulz (Germany): I thank Assistant Secretary-
General Keita for her briefing and her visit.

Since this is the first time that we have taken
the floor on this agenda item, let me briefly outline
Germany's approach to the situation in Darfur and the
Sudan more broadly.

To start with, we could not agree more with the
statement made by Assistant Secretary-General Keita
that a political solution to the conflict in Darfur is key
to sustainable peace in Darfur. Germany supported this
approach in 2011 and 2012, during our last term on the
Council, and our actions today are guided by the same
vision. That is why we support the mediation process
between the Government and the armed groups. Today,
we encourage all parties - the Government of the
Sudan and the Darfuri armed groups - to build on
the positive dynamics of the pre-negotiation agreement
signed in Berlin in December 2018. Progress needs to
be made urgently.

At the same time, we have to recognize that the
peace process in Darfur cannot be separated from
the overall political dynamic in the Sudan. Since
mid-December 2018, a substantial number of Sudanese
have demonstrated peacefully for respect for human
rights, the rule of law and a political transition. By
announcing a state of emergency on 22 February,
President Al-Bashir has limited the scope for the rule of
law and human rights in the Sudan. In this situation, it is
necessary to look even more closely at the benchmarks
for a withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in particular
the promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We call upon the Government of the Sudan
to respond to the legitimate grievances of the Sudanese
population politically and without force.

Building sustainable peace requires a long-term
strategy. To avoid relapse into conflict in Darfur, the
current transition processes, from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, need the full support and attention of
the Council, the international community, the United
Nations system and the host Government. The visit
by Assistant Secretaries-General Keita, Fernandez-
Taranco and Wahba reflects the priorities for United
Nations engagement: peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and long-term development. Germany supports those
priorities and we consider it to be our joint responsibility
to ensure that the decade-long international engagement
in Darfur delivers concrete and lasting results for the
people of that territory. In this context, I would like to
make three concluding points.

First, we have to do everything we can to ensure that

UNAMID, as long as it is deployed in Darfur, delivers
against the mandated tasks. That means all mandated
tasks. It means not only peacekeeping to start with, of
course, and as a priority, but also mediation, including
intercommunal mediation, peacebuilding and support
for internally displaced persons. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/l9, of December 2018, clearly outlines
the benchmarks that need to be achieved. An integrated
transition strategy and cooperation among all relevant
UnitedNations entities is therefore of utmost importance.
The upcoming strategic review should therefore
be used to assess the United Nations engagement
comprehensively and make recommendations on the
United Nations reconfiguration.

Secondly, we see it as the responsibility of
the international community, and in particular the
Security Council, to ensure that a relapse into conflict
is prevented. Any transition is challenging and any
transition demands responsibility and adequate
attention. In that context, we need to make sure that
UNAMID continues to receive sufficient political
support and sufficient financial means, including
programmatic funding, to implement its mandate. That
includes operational peacebuilding and stabilization
measures. We also need to make sure that a sufficiently
strong United Nations presence on the ground is built
up, in parallel with the UNAMID drawdown, and that
it will be in a position to support the consolidation of
the peacekeeping gains already achieved and continue
to advance mediation, peacebuilding - in particular in
the security sector - and development tasks. Germany
is committed to taking on responsibilities in this regard
as co-penholder, with the United Kingdom, on the
UNAMID file.

Thirdly and lastly, Germany is convinced that
we can succeed only in close collaboration with
the Government of the Sudan, but this must be a
partnership built on mutual trust; resolving the pending
issues around UNAMID's access to parts of Darfur;
demonstrating tangible progress in establishing a
presence of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Sudan, with access to Darfur and
human rights monitoring capacities; and engaging with
the Peacebuilding Commission. Those are steps that
would increase trust at the international level and work
towards progress in the mediation process, as well as on
intercommunal matters such as land and water.

