Ms. Bodin (spoke in French): On behalf of Save the
Children, I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation
to address the Security Council at this important debate.
Save the Children works in many countries affected
by armed conflict, delivering life-saving assistance
to millions of children and families in need. In New
York, we are also an active member of the Watchlist
on Children and Armed Conflict. As a child protection
adviser with Save the Children in the Central African
Republic, I work on a daily basis with girls and boys
impacted by conflict.

Drawing on Save the Children's experience in
situations of armed conflict around the world, I will
focus my remarks today on three areas: engagement
with armed groups, building protective environments
for children and the reintegration of children.

Save the Children's engagement with non-State
armed groups is guided by the single goal of protecting
children from violence, including their recruitment and
use by armed groups. Action plans in which parties to
armed conflict commit to measures to end violations
are one route to achieving the goal. In that regard, the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, led by the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and by UNICEF, shows
the potential for impact with State security forces.
Action plans have also proven to be an effective tool
for ending grave violations against children by armed
groups and should be pursued proactively wherever
possible. We call on States to facilitate access for the
United Nations and other specialized child-protection
actors to armed groups, and we also call upon the
United Nations to redouble its efforts to engage with
armed groups to get them to agree to and implement
action plans.

However, interventions with armed groups must
be tailored to each group and the specific contexts in
which they operate. In the Central African Republic,
we are faced with multiple armed groups, often with
weak command structures and little or no knowledge
of international standards and norms. In that context,
formal agreements may not be feasible with the leaders.
Instead, Save the Children has adopted a case-by-
case approach, enabling us to establish a dialogue
with around 20 individual anti-Balaka commanders at
the local level to build trust, We were also then able
to present the humanitarian protection principles and
secure the release of children. Since November 2013,
more than 800 girls and boys have been released
through interventions by Save the Children and other
organizations.

One ofthem, whom I will call Eric, is now 15 years
old. Eric joined an anti-Balaka group after his house
was burnt down and he became separated from his
parents during fighting between the anti-Balaka and
ex-Sele'ka groups in December 2013. While with the
group, he acted as a spy and a courier and took part
in attacks. In July 2014, following a series of child
protection training sessions and briefings run by Save
the Children's national team with his commanders, Eric
and nine other children were handed over to us. Today,
we have yet to locate his parents. He is living with a
foster family and is learning to be a carpenter, and his
prospects are good.

Elsewhere, Save the Children seeks to support the
United Nations engagement with armed groups. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
we support community-based child-protection
networks to enable communities to alert and report
to the United Nations system and local authorities
on grave Violations of children's rights, including
the abduction and recruitment of children by armed
groups. However, where United Nations engagement
with armed groups is not possible, complementary
approaches should be supported. Commitments
secured from non-State armed groups by international
non-governmental organizations, such as the Geneva
Call or local community-based organizations, can
result in immediate protection for children. They can
also serve as stepping stones towards action plans. That
is why Save the Children calls upon the United Nations
to strengthen its cooperation with non-governmental
child-protection stakeholders to develop coordinated
strategies in pursuit of the shared goal of ending and
preventing the grave Violations being committed
against children by armed groups.

We also stress the importance of supporting
national authorities in the design and implementation of
formal disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. We must consider the gender issue. Securing
the release of girls associated with armed groups is a
particular challenge in all of the situations in which we
work. They are often hidden from View and frequently
regarded not as members of the group but as "wives".
We therefore remind the Council of the importance of
developing gender-specific strategies for the release
and reintegration of girls associated with armed groups.

In addition to the engagement with non- State armed
groups, Save the Children emphasizes prevention
as an important component of all our programmes.
In Colombia, for example, our programmes aim to
strengthen the protective environment for children
by working closely with communities, schools and
local authorities to build local resilience and response
mechanisms. Save the Children's experience shows that
education and livelihood support are important factors
in both prevention and reintegration. Access to quality
education and income generation offers a route out of the
poverty that often underpins armed conflict and drives
child recruitment. For children formerly associated
with armed forces or groups, education also provides
a sense of normality and purpose and increases their
chances of successful reintegration.

For that reason, the protection of education is
critical. Pursuant to resolution 2143 (2014), we urge
Member States and all parties to conflict, including
armed groups, to take concrete measures to prevent
the military use of schools during armed conflict by
implementing and disseminating the available guidance
included, for example, in the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General's Guidance Note on Attacks
against Schools and Hospitals and the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack's Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict. State endorsement of the
Guidelines, through the signing of the Safe Schools
Initiative and the practical implementation of the
Guidelines, will contribute to establishing best practices
and thereby enhance the protection of schools.

Reintegration programmes also need to be adapted
to the context and must be planned as part of the
development of action plans or other strategies. In
the Central African Republic, because many children
are recruited by family or community members, we
are using community-based, rather than individual,
approaches. Our reintegration programmes there
and elsewhere promote psychosocial well-being by
creating opportunities for children and youth to rebuild
relations and develop critical life skills to enhance their
resilience. We also provide socioeconomic support to
vulnerable youth, including those formerly associated
with armed groups, through livelihood training and
other means of community-based economic support.

However, the effective reintegration and
strengthening of protection systems require sustained,
long-term interventions. Save the Children calls on
States Members of the United Nations and donors to
provide long-term financial support to prevention and
reintegration programmes. Moreover, Save the Children
is pursuing coordination activities with various actors
aimed at supporting reconciliation and peacebuilding,
rebuilding education and child protection systems,
and economic recovery. That must be reinforced by
the actions of States and the international community
to ensure that there are consequences for those who
commit grave violations against children. Individuals
committing such Violations must be held accountable
within the framework of the efforts being undertaken
to provide remedies for Violations. Save the Children
calls on the Council to support comprehensive
transitional-justice measures in tandem with action
plans and other approaches to armed groups.

Our work and that of other child protection actors
relies on a minimum level of security, for which we
often rely on United Nations operations and other
peacekeeping operations. We call on Member States
of the United Nations to ensure the rapid deployment
of all forces authorized to participate in peacekeeping
operations and to ensure that peacekeepers will be
deployed where children are at most risk. However,
peacekeepers must be able to guarantee the safety and
rights of children and not pose a threat themselves.
For this reason, peacekeeping officers must receive
comprehensive training on child protection prior to
deployment.

Finally, Save the Children also wants to add its
voice to the call made to the Secretary-General to
develop a policy that prohibits listed Government
security forces from contributing their troops to United
Nations missions.

