Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend to you,
Mr. President, as a good friend, our congratulations and
express my pleasure at seeing you presiding over the
Security Council. Secondly, I would like to extend to
you my thanks for responding to the request by the
Non-Aligned Movement to convene this open meeting
so that we, Members of the United Nations and of the
international community that has mandated the Council
to work on its behalf, may express our opinions.

The matter under consideration today- and I
would like to stress this - is not about Iraq and
Kuwait. This is a different issue that was discussed at
the Arab Summit in Beirut, where they found solutions
that we endorse. What we are here to consider is the
situation between the United States, Iraq and the region
as a whole.

Iraq has no problem with the Security Council or
the United Nations; rather, it is a problem between
United States and Iraq, indeed, between United States
and the region as a whole. This is the reality that
cannot be either circumvented or ignored.

What is the essence of the problem? Iraq
informed the Secretariat and the Council that it
welcomes the inspectors - they can come and inspect
anything they wished to inspect. Now, who is
preventing the resumption of the work of the
inspectors? Is it Iraq? We are faced with truly bizarre
contradictions here. Quite puzzling indeed!

Those who prevented the inspectors from going
into Iraq are the same ones who are urging them to go
back as soon as possible, and those who were calling
for the resumption of the work of the inspectors are the
same ones that are preventing them from resuming it.
How bizarre! Iraq did not expel the inspection teams;
they spent seven years and seven months there. They
inspected everywhere but were never expelled. The
Council did not ask them to leave. Who made them
leave Iraq is a very important question. Why do we
gloss over it?

It was said that Iraq is in possession of weapons
of mass destruction, but Iraq denies it. It was said that
Iraq has developed those weapons in the absence of the
inspectors, but Iraq said that it would accept their
return. Then it was said that Iraq was setting conditions
and obstacles, when Iraq has dropped all conditions
and obstacles that would prevent the inspectors from
fulfilling their tasks.
It is not a matter of weapons of mass destruction,
searching for them or destroying them. It seems that
this is not the objective - there is another objective. It
was said that Iraq was cooperating with the terrorists,
but it denied having any connection with any terrorist
organization. The other party could not come up with
any shred of evidence to prove the existence of any
such connections.

We oppose terrorism and are against all terrorists,
but we do not wish to fight terrorism with terrorism.
The international community has agreed to fight
terrorism but not to carry out acts of terrorism.

Iraq accepted all the conditions imposed on it.
The wonder of wonders is that those who are
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security are calling and preparing for war, while
those who have been accused of breaching
international peace and security are calling for
dialogue, peace, stability and negotiations. Those who
claim to support freedom are those who are calling for
war, while those who have been accused of being the
enemies of freedom are calling for peace. We live in a
world of contradictions.

What is the ultimate objective? This Council
bears a major responsibility. If an act of aggression is
unleashed against Iraq, it must be fully aware that
international peace and security will be in grave
danger. Why do we ask the Iraqi people to accept an
insult to their dignity? Is the objective to find and
destroy weapons of mass destruction, or is it the
destruction of the dignity, independence and territorial
integrity of the Iraqi people? Where are the human
rights to which some pay lip service and that they
claim to be defending? Are the Iraqi people not human
beings whose dignity, independence and territorial
integrity must be preserved? Do they not enjoy such
rights?

What is unfolding is an attempt to control the
entire region and to turn Iraq into a stationary base for
the presence that seeks to control it. We are no longer
deceived by any allegations. We are not children; we
were not born yesterday. The solution lies in the
prompt resumption of the work of the inspectors. There
are no conditions or obstacles to that resumption,
unless the dignity, humanity and independence of the
Iraqi people are deemed to be conditions or obstacles.
That must be refuted. Each one of us individually must
reject for others what we will not accept for ourselves.
We must do unto others as we would have them do
unto us.
Weapons of mass destruction must be destroyed,
not only in Iraq, but throughout the world and by all
who possess them. Why not? Why can we not live in a
world free from all weapons - not just weapons of
mass destruction, but all kinds. Let each start with his
own country. Why target Iraq alone? If we truly wish to
see a world free from threats of all kinds, we must
agree together on the elimination of all weapons of
mass destruction and others, including conventional
weapons.

Let us start a dialogue. Let us use the greatest gift
God gave to human beings - the blessing of mind and
speech. Human beings must use their minds and their
tongues to solve their problems. Those who use their
fangs, talons and brawn are mere animals that have
been denied that God-given blessing. Why should we
turn the world from a human place into a jungle? Why
should we not resort to dialogue? Why are we avoiding
dialogue? Why are we refusing to negotiate? Why do
we resort to missiles and aircraft carriers? Why do we
resort to bombs? Are these solutions to our problems?
No; they create our problems. Will they bring peace
and stability to the world? Never; they are
counterproductive and lead to the opposite result. Any
people that is subject to aggression has the right to
defend itself by all means. Human beings themselves,
by the simplest of means, will become weapons of
mass destruction. Given that they are already dead, at
least their death in self-defence will be dignified.

That is the direction in which Iraq is being
pushed. Iraqis are a proud and courageous people. They
will know very well how to defend themselves. The
Council is responsible. We find everything we have
read in the newspapers about the draft resolutions
before the Council to be very inauspicious. They offer
no reason for optimism. The 10 non-permanent
members have had nothing to do with those draft
resolutions. In other words, they have become exactly
like us - mere spectators. This is wrong and must not
continue. They are here to represent the majority of the
world.

Incidentally, we appreciate and respect the
positions of China, Russia and France. Those countries
have demonstrated their devotion to international peace
and security and their keen interest in not exposing the
world to danger. It is incredible that the Council should
continue to be held hostage. I would suggest to the 10
non-permanent members that they go back to the
regional groups that nominated them with every new
draft resolution in order to ascertain their position and
to give voice to it here. Only in this way will the
international community, represented by the United
Nations, be represented here in the Council.

As things stand, we are nothing but extras, mere
spectators. This is unbelievable. Where is the
democracy that some talk about? What democracy is
evinced in the work of the Council? 15 this democracy?
The United Nations is not allowed to participate. The
ten non-permanent members are not allowed to
participate and the other three are just fighting. What
work is the Council doing on behalf ofthe international
community? They have nothing to do with this. Where
is the world being led? Where to? This is what causes
fanaticism. I had said, in a statement before this
Council, that if the insults and the demeaning of the
Islamic and Arab peoples continue, they will provide
the best atmosphere for fanatic and extremist groups in
the Arab and Islamic world. I said that here in a
previous statement. Please. Go back to it.

Today, in the light of the threats to the region, the
Council is giving legitimacy to the worst and most
fanatical of all groups. The masses will consider those
movements and groups as expressions of their will.
They will support them. I do not at all rule out that the
next stage in the Arab world will be under the
leadership of extremist Islamic groups, and I said that
here before.

Those groups are the ones who are going to be in
power because the official Arab regimes have lost their
legitimacy. I told the Council here on a previous
occasion that these Arab regimes no longer have a fig
leaf to cover themselves with.

The extremists are ready and the oppressed Arab
masses will be with them and behind them and will
follow their directions. We will see what will happen to
our world. Why do we not resort to our minds and
intellects? Why do we not resort to dialogue? Why do
we resort to the dialogue oftanks, missiles and bombs?
Why?

Why do we resort to gunpowder, that deadly and
destructive invention? I call upon the Council not to
adopt any resolution that would demean the dignity of
the Iraqi people or human rights in Iraq. Iraq said:
please return. By all means, come in. Even the palaces
are open. The whole of Iraq is open. Come in. What
else do you want from Iraq?

There is no need for a further resolution, if you
adopt one. What you have is sufficient and does not
prevent the inspectors from fulfilling their task. Iraq
has supported them. But do not include anything that
would be imposed by political and economic pressures,
by phone calls to the capitals or by meetings with the
ambassadors in respective capitals. Council members
are not here to represent their countries alone. Please
go back to the constituencies, to the regional groups
that have nominated you. Those regional groups will
give you the position that you can express here.

The Arab world cannot endure any more. What is
happening in Palestine is more than enough. The
Council has not been able to do anything at all. It has
been paralysed. Its resolutions have been paralysed.
But when it comes to an Arab or Islamic country the
Council is summoned to action in the middle of the
night and on weekends and before the beginning of the
work week.

What has happened in our region and outside it in
the last few days is a warning bell. We strongly oppose
such acts. If people sense danger, their reactions will
not be organized; they will not be done by groups.
They will be individual acts that cannot be predicted or
tracked because they will be simply individual acts.

I advise the Council to take into account its
responsibility and role in maintaining international
peace and security. I advise the Council to call for the
prompt return of the inspectors to resume their work.
Then there will be no need for a pretext to attack Iraq.
It has been attacked more than enough. At least 1.7
million Iraqi citizens have died. Even their food, their
rice and wheat have to be approved by a committee
here. What else does the Council want? What else is
required? Even medication must be approved and come
before a committee. What more is required of Iraq?
Iraq has not expelled those inspectors. Ask who
expelled them and who forced them to leave. How can
we hold Iraq responsible for every single mistake?

I call upon members of the Council to take the
honourable position not just in this world, but also
honourable in the eyes of God on the Day of
Judgement, because we will all be brought to account
as individuals, not as peoples, not as Governments.

I would like to reiterate our solidarity with Iraq.
Incidentally, I would like to reaffirm that the leader of
my country, Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, has
worked for the last two months, more than two months,
with the brothers in Baghdad. He has been in touch
with the United Kingdom at the highest level. He also
mandated me to convey a message to the Secretary-
General. I also conveyed a message from him to
President George Bush. He has brought pressure on the
brothers in Iraq to accept the return of the inspectors
and not put any obstacles in their way.
We thank our brothers in Iraq for responding
positively. I hope that the positive steps will be met
with more positive steps. I hope the Council deals with
Iraq the way Iraq has dealt with the Council.

