Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the delegation of Gabon for organizing today's
debate on this important issue. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for her
comments and presence today, and Mr. Costa and His
Excellency Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their remarks.

Every year thousands of conventional arms worth
millions of dollars flood illegally into every conflict
zone in Africa, despite Security Council arms
embargos. These ongoing weapons flows mean many
thousands of deaths, millions of displaced persons and
refugees, and billions of dollars spent on humanitarian
assistance and emergency relief aid. The numbers are
heartbreaking. United Nations-generated data suggests
that conflicts fuelled by the illicit arms trade have left
an estimated 14 million refugees homeless worldwide
and 26 million people internally displaced.

The instability and insecurity born of these
conflicts are massive obstacles to development. We all
understand that Africa is harmed disproportionately by
these trends. Of the 20 countries that experience the
lowest levels of human development, all but one of
them are in Africa and more than half of these
countries have been shaken by significant levels of
Violence since 1990.

One stark example is the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the transfer of arms into the eastern
part of the country fuels a terrible conflict and
threatens stability in the Great Lakes region. Indeed, a
vicious cycle of underdevelopment and insecurity in
Central Africa and elsewhere stokes conflict and illicit
arms flows, and that in turn can thwart well-intentioned
Governments and international actors working for
progress.

To stem this tide of illicit arms, we must not only
strictly observe and enforce United Nations arms
sanctions regimes; we must also rigorously implement
other international or regional instruments, as well as
national export controls on arms flows to embargoed
regions in Africa. Moreover, we should consider which
controls are appropriate for arms transfers to conflict
zones not subject to Security Council sanctions.

The United States is particularly proud of our
extensive and rigorous system of export controls. We
engage and assist other States, both bilaterally and
through multilateral organizations and regimes, to raise
their standards and to prohibit the transfer of
capabilities to rogue States, terrorist groups and groups
seeking to unsettle regions.

Conventional arms transfers are a crucial national
security concern for the United States. We have always
supported effective action based on the highest
standards of responsibility to control the international
transfer of arms. Indeed, we face questions of both law
and responsibility here. Legal but reckless international
transfers often fuel the illicit arms trade. For this
reason, the United States voted in the General
Assembly last fall to support a strong and robust arms
trade treaty.

We will actively support arms trade treaty
negotiations so long as the United Nations Conference
on the Arms Trade Treaty takes its decisions by
consensus. This is necessary to ensure that all countries
can be held to standards that will improve the global
standard, to ensure the widest possible support for the
treaty and to avoid loopholes that may be exploited by
those wishing to export arms irresponsibly.

My Government is also dedicated to combating
the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
through support for destroying stockpiles of surplus,
poorly secured or otherwise at-risk weapons and
munitions. Since 2001, the United States has funded
the destruction of more than 1.3 million small arms and
light weapons, more than 50,000 tons of ordnance and
nearly 32,000 man-portable air defence systems in over
38 countries around the world, including six of the
11 States members of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.

The illicit arms trade hurts African countries
disproportionately, but this issue should be a source of
global concern. Illicit small arms can intensify and
spread regional conflicts and the linkages among arms
trafficking, narcotraffrcking, terrorism and organized
crime are very real. In the most basic sense, traffickers
are traffickers. Narcotics traffickers, for instance, may
very well use their established routes and networks to
traffic in weapons or humans, should the situation
present itself.

Given the stakes here, my Government is
particularly pleased to be participating this June in the
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. We join Chairperson-designate Ambassador
Macedo in noting that the Meeting will be crucial to
helping lay the foundation for a successful Review
Conference in 2012.

