Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico welcomes the convening of this
debate and thanks the Secretary-General for his annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2007/757),
which was presented in January by his Special
Representative, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
which the Council is considering today.

This comprehensive and detailed report fully sets
out the progress achieved in the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1379 (2001),
1460 (2003) and 1539 (2004). It analyses the status of
implementation of measures to put an end to the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. It
refers to the progress made in the application of the
monitoring mechanism and the submission of reports
and provides information about the inclusion of child
protection in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

My delegation wishes to highlight the
determination to bring about the submission of this
report, which was the result of considerable
consultation, and which emphasizes the humanitarian
dimension of this issue and focuses on the need to
provide broad and effective protection for children
endangered and affected by armed conflicts.

In this context, we also welcome the work of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and emphasize how important it is that
the Security Council enable the group to recommend
the imposition of selective measures against parties to
armed conflict that commit serious violations against
children.

This wide-ranging report allows us to stress that
even though progress has been noted in certain
countries, every year children suffer more as a result of
armed conflict, in the light of the changing nature of
the conflicts and wars that take place throughout the
world. Over the past two decades, more than 2 million
children have died in conflict zones; another 6 million
have been left permanently handicapped; more than a
quarter of a million of young people have been
exploited as child soldiers in at least 30 countries; and
thousands of girls have been victims of sexual
exploitation, rape and prostitution. There is no region
in the world immune to this trend.

In this context, Mexico shares the concerns
expressed in the report of the Secretary-General, such
as those relating to the ongoing recruitment of children
in camps for refugees and internally displaced persons;
sexual and gender-based violence against children; the
detention of children presumed to be associated with
armed groups; the increase in the number of systematic
and deliberate attacks against students, teachers and
schools; and the ongoing impunity of those who
commit crimes against children, particularly the
recruitment and use of children by Governmental
forces or armed groups. My delegation also agrees that
it is important that peacebuilding operations take into
account the need to protect and reintegrate children
into society. Long-term rehabilitation and development
programmes linked to disarmament and demobilization
must help to reintegrate those children successfully and
sustainably.

Given the gravity of the situation, it is important
that the Security Council pay the same attention and
act with equal zeal with regard to all categories of
violation of the rights of children in armed conflict -
those relating not only to the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, but also to the killing and mutilation of
children; rape and other serious sexual crimes;
kidnappings and attacks on schools and hospitals; and
the denial of access to humanitarian assistance for
children, as noted in the 10-year strategic review of the
Graca Machel report.

It is also important for the Security Council to
adopt selective and effective sanctions against
persistent offenders who continue systematically to
commit serious crimes against children during armed
conflicts, flouting the recommendations of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
resolutions of the Council.

We also feel that peacekeeping missions and
special political missions play a very important role in
that process. We therefore believe it appropriate for
child protection advisors to be present in such missions
with a view to strengthening monitoring and
08-2361]
responding rapidly in situations that affect children in
armed conflict. My delegation also supports on-site
visits by the Special Representative to obtain first-hand
information of the situation on the ground.

In armed conflicts, children are the principal
victims; they are the targets of those conflicts and have
increasingly become their instruments. By definition,
children are innocent, especially vulnerable, and the
least responsible for conflicts, and yet, as we well
know, they suffer disproportionately from the excesses
of war. Children also represent the present and the
future of our society. If we destroy them, we are also
destroying our possibility of living together.

