Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Prime
Minister, as you preside over the Security Council
today, and would like to thank our Swedish partners
for their initiative in organizing today's meeting. We
wish you a successful and productive presidency of the
Security Council for July, and we are sure that your
very professional team will handle any problems. We
greatly appreciate the contributions of the Secretary-
General and today's briefers, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Ms. Henrietta Fore and Ms. Yenny Londofio, to
our discussion.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/465)
confirms that children in a number of countries around
the world that are involved in armed confrontations
continue to encounter brutal violence. One of the main
reasons for their plight is that the parties to armed
conflicts frequently ignore the norms of international
humanitarian law and non-governmental armed
groups make open use of barbaric methods of warfare.
The Russian Federation firmly condemns all crimes
against children, including their recruitment and
use as combatants, their murder or abduction, sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and denials
of access for humanitarian organizations to help them.
In acknowledging its responsibility, the Security
Council cannot remain indifferent and should make
unfailing efforts to protect children in situations of
armed conflict.

The situation in a number of countries in the
Middle East and North Africa remains extremely
difficult. The weakening of State mechanisms in Syria
as a result of illegal external interference resulted in
a flood of terrorist groups there. As the Secretary-
General's report notes, the militants are not shy of
using even very young children in their ranks, and
their systematic recruitment of minors, deprivation of
their access to education, and general violence have
become commonplace, something that the international
community has no intention of becoming reconciled
to. Jihadists do not hesitate to involve children in their
inhuman designs for fabricating incidents, including
those involving allegedly chemical substances. They
do this to get international attention, denigrate the
legitimate authorities and bring punishment down on
them from the world community. For our part, we will
continue to reveal the true face of pseudo-humanitarian
non-governmental organizations such as the White
Helmets, which have brought shame on themselves by
collaborating with openly terrorist groups in Syria.

The situation in Yemen has noticeably deteriorated,
with hundreds of children killed and injured as a result
of strikes and shelling. The widespread destruction of
schools, hospitals and infrastructure creates intolerable
living conditions and deprives children ofa future. The
future of Palestinian children is worrying, thanks in part
to Israel's continuing policies of expanding settlements
and demolishing Palestinian property, including
schools. Many children are at risk of being unable to
attend school this summer because the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East is underfunded. We consider it unacceptable
to impose ideologies of hatred and nationalism on
children and raise them with false historical facts
and values. Children should not be discriminated
against on the basis of nationality, denied the right
to receive education in their native language and free
development. Unfortunately, we are seeing egregious
cases of such violations in various countries and will
continue to draw attention to them.

International humanitarian law includes a
significant body of norms designed to protect children
and civil infrastructure during armed conflicts. The
efforts of the international community should be
focused on ensuring the implementation of existing
obligations. Bringing those responsible for serious
crimes against children and violations of international
humanitarian law to justice is crucial, and primary
responsibility for taking the necessary measures in
this area rests with States. Many States involved in
armed conflicts are making significant efforts to
improve the situation of children. However, they need
the support of the international community within a
framework of respectful and constructive dialogue and
with unconditional respect for the principles of State
sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs.

Once again, we call for an end to the pernicious
policy of imposing unilateral restrictions on countries
in conflict. For example, the sanctions imposed on
Syria, as we read in the report of the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights,
Mr. Jazairy, following his visit to the Syrian Arab
Republic, are in essence a collective punishment of all
Syrians, including children.

The Russian Federation supports the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and her initiatives.
In particular, I would like to note that the Russian
football association, along with a number of other such
federations, has joined the Special Representative's
Children, Not Soldiers: Let Them Play information
campaign, in the framework of the 2018 FIFA World
Cup championship currently being held in Russia.
Over the course of the championship, we and our
Swedish colleagues have agreed to display the official
World Cup football on the Council table as a symbol
of peace and harmony among nations and of the desire
to fight and compete only in sporting events. The
work of the Special Representative implies a special
responsibility, impartiality and objectivity, and it is
extremely important to have reliable and verifiable
information reflected in the reports of the Secretary-
General. With respect to such issues, any politicization
is unacceptable.

We note the contribution of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to efforts to
support States in preparing and implementing national
plans of action for protecting children in armed
conflict. The practice of appointing experts on the
protection of children in peacekeeping missions has
proved positive. We expect these officials to monitor
situations effectively and fulfil their mandate. In our
View, any duplication of functions or reporting by
other components of United Nations country missions
is wasteful.

We have taken note of the recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report. Overall, the Council's
efforts should be based on approaches that have been
developed and approved within the United Nations
framework. The Russian Federation supported today's
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018), on children and
armed conflict. It contains a comprehensive set of
provisions whose implementation will strengthen
cooperation in this area. For our part, we are ready
to pursue comprehensive cooperation in order to
effectively protect children from the consequences of
armed action.

