Mr. Kakanur (India): Madam President, I thank
you for convening today's debate on the importance
of reconciliation and the process of peacebuilding. We
appreciate the comprehensive and insightful briefings
on the subject by the Secretary-General and the
other briefers.

Reconciliation is a crucial step in stopping the
cycle of violence and insecurity in post-conflict
situations and in building sustainable peace. Given the
immense complexities and unique local context of each
post-conflict theatre, there can be no one-size-fits-all
template for such dynamic situations. Reconciliation
is a long and arduous process, and artificially imposed
standards or timelines are unlikely to achieve success.
My delegation is of the view that reconciliation has
to be a truly homegrown process. The inherent limits
on the breadth, depth and duration of any external
peacebuilding mission suggests that the kind of
deep-rooted sustainable change that peacebuilding
seeks to bring about requires the long-term support
and commitment of a critical mass of domestic
actors, including civil society, youth, women and
religious leaders.

Well-meaning reconciliation efforts of the United
Nations or the wider international humanitarian
community may not be in tune with the realities on
the ground. Expecting domestic actors to uncritically
embrace external norms and ideas as inherently superior
to domestic ones is being unrealistic. Conflict corrodes
and destroys human infrastructural and institutional
capacities. Such capacities need to be rebuilt if national
actors are to exercise a meaningful degree of ownership
over events in the post-conflict period. While it
would be a mistake to overlook domestic institutions
and practices as sources of peacebuilding, it would
be erroneous to uncritically romanticize them. It is
therefore necessary that adequate capacity-building
resources are made available for building robust
institutions and State structures.

Peace and justice are the primary links in any
post-conflict scenario. India supports enhanced
international cooperation for the development and
codification of international criminal law and to
strengthen the rule of law as a whole. We also believe
that, for a truly effective and credible international
justice system, we must avoid selectivity, partiality
and double standards in the application of rule of law
at the global level. In this context, our view is that the
United Nations must play a non-prescriptive supporting
and facilitating role. The United Nations must ensure
the inclusiveness, ownership and participation of all
stakeholders in the reconciliation process. Equally
important is United Nations support for humanitarian
assistance, the protection and promotion of human
rights, and the facilitation of political reconciliation
processes in accordance with the principles of neutrality
and impartiality.

We reject an unwarranted reference by the
delegation of Pakistan earlier today to the situation in
an integral part of India (see S/PV.8668). Let me recall
that both sides have solemnly agreed to resolve such
issues through means agreed to by the parties.

In conclusion, if peacebuilding is to move beyond
being an exercise in social engineering, we must
acknowledge that peacebuilding resources exist within
conflict-affected societies themselves.

