Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate focusing
on the ways and means to counter the malevolent
propaganda and twisted narratives of terrorism.

Pakistan aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation countries.

Pakistan unequivocally condemns terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. There can be no
justification for the killing of innocent people, but we
know from history that even the most abominable of
mass murderers have crafted twisted webs of narratives
to justify their heinous acts. Terrorists do the same.

Terrorism cannot be associated with any religion,
culture or region. The ideologies and narratives of the
various terrorist groups emanate from diverse sources.
But three characteristics seem common to all. First,
they seek to recruit followers by stoking people's
sense of fear and deprivation and by manipulating
the prevailing perceptions of victimization and
injustice that fuel extremism. Secondly, they create
a web of complex and false interpretations of beliefs,
disseminating them as widely and as often as possible.
And thirdly, their narrative seeks to provide a path to an
illusionary salvation.

If we are to defeat terrorism, it is imperative
that we counter that schematic approach of terrorists
comprehensively and at every step. There is no point
in emptying a tank through one tap, while it is being
constantly replenished through others. Terrorists seek
to exploit fears and grievances, real or perceived,
emanating from diverse factors, local or external.
While individual Member States should do all they
can to address socioeconomic conditions and political
factors at the national level, we must also address
the international drivers that contribute to injustice,
inequality, hatred and deprivation.

The condoning of foreign interventions and
occupation and the denial of the right of self-
determination, all in violation of the agreed principles
of international law, provide fertile ground for
terrorist propaganda to take root. The persistence of
those conditions and the failure of the international
community to redress genuine grievances of the weak
against the powerful are important factors that create
the breeding grounds of terrorism. If conflicts spawn
terrorism and if terrorist narratives feed off conflict
situations, it is critical to seek an end to those conflicts
in order to deprive terrorists of their oxygen.

In the second area, we lack concerted efforts to
counter the messages and rationales spewed out by
terrorist groups that fuel violent acts. In the battle
of ideas, much ground has been lost to the narrative
of terrorists owing to, for example, the failure to
prevent xenophobia, Islamophobia and other forms of
discrimination, the confusion of hate speech with free
speech, and the profiling of entire communities on the
pretext of seeking to strengthen security measures,
which is counterproductive. Such actions have only
strengthened the divisive notions of "us" and "them",
which is what the terrorists prey on. They want to make
us believe that a clash of civilizations is inevitable and
even necessary.

We must not allow them to do that. Not only do
we need to develop a more robust counter-narrative
against terrorist ideologies, we also need effective
communications strategies appropriate to our digital
age. The use of social-media platforms by terrorists
is unprecedented, particularly in the way they engage
young people, disseminate messages and mobilize
recruits. That requires effective responses to such
messages on our part, efforts to counter online
radicalization and measures to prevent such groups
from exploiting digital space.

The terrorist narratives and ideologies are aimed
at radicalization, which leads from indoctrination
to action. There are several ways to counter that
phenomenon. First, we need to invest in efforts to create
opportunities. We must offer hopeful alternatives to
the narratives used by terrorists, who seek to invoke
fear and hold out the false promise of an idyllic future.
Secondly, we need to make the young aware of the dire
consequences of following the violent path prescribed
by terrorist ideologies. Many examples can be found
among people who have renounced terrorism. Thirdly,
we need to prevent any glorification of terrorist
acts, whether intended or unintended, in the print or
broadcast media.

My country's national action plan to counter
terrorism contains six specific action points that
directly and indirectly seek to counter the narratives
and ideologies of terrorists. We are committed to
fighting this battle of minds, as much as we are
committed to fighting the terrorists on the ground.
Pakistan stands ready to share its national experience
with the international community in order to further
our common goal of defeating terrorism and eliminating
violent extremism.

