Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): The international
conference on Afghanistan held at Berlin on 31 March
and 1 April reaffirmed the strong commitment of the
international community to the Afghan people, with
ministerial-level participation from many countries,
despite the concern previously expressed about the
shift of international attention from Afghanistan to
other issues, such as Iraq. Japan, for its part, announced
its readiness to extend further grant assistance
amounting to $400 million over the coming two years,
which brings Japan's contributions since September
2001 to over $1 billion. The total commitment by the
donor community at the conference for the
reconstruction and development of Afghanistan
amounts to $8.2 billion over the next three years.

As one of the conference co-Chairs, Japan
warmly welcomes that outcome and expresses its
gratitude to the Government of Germany for having
hosted the conference.

Japan has stressed from the beginning that the
reinforcement of the political process, a seamless
transition from humanitarian assistance to recovery and
reconstruction, and the establishment and nationwide
expansion of security are closely interlinked and
should be addressed in a comprehensive manner. Japan
also believes that it is particularly important to bring
about human security, with the goal of achieving
nation-building and society-building through the
protection and empowerment of every individual in
Afghanistan. From that perspective, we believe that the
conference, which integrated the Bonn process for
peace and security and the Tokyo process for
reconstruction, was an important step towards the
consolidation of peace in Afghanistan.

Acknowledging that success, I would like to point
out three issues that need to be dealt with going
forward. The first relates to the elections. The formal
announcement by President Karzai of the organization
of both presidential and parliamentary elections in
September provided an opportunity for the conference
to accelerate the preparation process even further. All
necessary tasks should be expeditiously carried out in
the coming months, including overcoming the delays in
voter registration, preparing to provide overseas
Afghans with voting opportunities and mobilizing
resources that are necessary to successfully implement
the elections. Japan is resolved to extend assistance to
ensure the success of the elections. As part of such
assistance, it has already committed to providing $8.2
million for voter registration.

Secondly, with regard to security, we welcome
the fact that the international community expressed its
determination at the conference to assist further in the
stabilization of the security situation, not only in Kabul
and some provincial cities, but throughout the entire
country, specifically through the deployment of
Provincial Reconstruction Teams, in order to restore
security and to contribute to the country's
reconstruction and development.

Japan, together with the United Nations Mission
of Assistance in Afghanistan, has been leading the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process and, as of mid-February, more than 5,500 ex-
combatants have been disarmed and demobilized in
four areas, including Kabul, in the pilot phase of the
DDR programme.

The vigorous implementation and intensification
of the programme ahead of the elections is a task of the
greatest importance. We need to further strengthen our
efforts to address such requirements as achieving
complete disarmament in Kabul, disarming the
commanders, accelerating reintegration programmes
and creating job opportunities. We strongly urge all
Afghan parties to make a full commitment to DDR, and
reiterate our request to neighbouring countries and the
international community to support the programme.

Thirdly, one of the most discussed issues at the
conference was drug production and trafficking, and
the importance of taking effective countermeasures in
this regard was fully recognized. Enforcement alone
will not solve the problem. An integrated approach
involving the simultaneous implementation of
measures to introduce alternative crops and to promote
DDR for the regional groups engaging in drug
production is required. In this connection, the
importance of agriculture and rural development cannot
be overemphasized. Japan has been accelerating
comprehensive community development projects in the
provinces under the so-called Ogata Initiative in an
attempt to achieve human security, focusing on
reconstruction at the provincial community levels, and
we believe such initiatives will also help to support the
fight against drugs.

Substantive results have been achieved since the
signing of the Bonn Agreement and the holding of the
Tokyo conference, but much more must be done in
order to conduct the elections - the last and most
important milestone of the Bonn process. Furthermore,
efforts towards rebuilding Afghanistan and achieving
lasting peace should not come to a close with the
forthcoming elections. The long-term commitment of
the international community is essential. I would like
to stress that it is of critical importance for the
credibility of the United Nations that, once it has
embarked upon a project, it continue its engagement in
it until its objectives are attained. A lasting partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community,
as emphasized in the Berlin declaration, is what we
should strive to sustain, in order to ensure a promising
future for the country as a whole.

