Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting and the important
briefings by Special Representative Ghassan Salame
and Ambassador Skoog of Sweden, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

Peru deplores the outbreaks of violence in Tripoli in
the past few days, especially where they have led to the
death of civilians, including children. We urge all the
parties concerned to respect the ceasefire and protect
civilians. We support the efforts and good offices of
the Special Representative in that regard. We have been
closely following the progress of the implementation of
the United Nations action plan for Libya, as well as the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to facilitate a political solution, led by the
Libyans themselves, that will produce institutions
capable of exercising authority over the entire territory.

In line with the presidential statement of 6 June
(S/PRST/2018/11), we consider the Libyan Political
Agreement to be the only viable framework for
overcoming the current political stalemate among
the main stakeholders, and in order to do that we
want to emphasize the importance of improving the
participation of civil society, especially women and
young people. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the role of the National Conference, promoted by the
Special Representative, which has enabled the direct
participation of more than 7,000 citizens in more
than 40 cities, and has channelled their concerns and
expectations in an open and inclusive dialogue. We
look forward to his final report on that.

However, we have to express our concern about
the lack of progress in realizing the changes proposed
by the Political Agreement, owing to the stagnation in
the negotiations between the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State. It is essential that the
parties make a good-faith commitment to reversing the
situation. It will also be essential to continue working to
ensure that the parliamentary and presidential elections
scheduled for December take place as agreed on at the
Paris conference. It is urgent that the relevant rules
be adopted and the necessary security and financing
guaranteed. We also want to emphasize the importance
of mass participation by the country's citizens,
particularly women and young people, as well as the
various political forces' commitment to accepting the
election results within the current legal framework and
avoiding any deterioration of security in Libya. We also
underscore how important it is that the international
community and regional organizations maintain their
support throughout the process.

On another topic, we note with concern the
deterioration of the Libyan economy and its potential
impact on the country's stability. If the conflict is
to be overcome, a commitment on the control and
the transparent and efficient management of the
hydrocarbons that represent the country's main
resources is essential. In that regard, we eagerly await the
proposals that the Secretary-General has requested for
improving Libya's financial institutions' transparency,
unity and operation, based on some essential reforms
that can ensure that the country's public resources are
managed appropriately, transparently and efficiently.
We believe that the Mission can use its good offices to
promote those efforts, which should include independent
audits and actions aimed at facilitating the legitimate
Libyan authorities' financial control over the entire
territory and its resources. It will be important to ensure
that there is no repetition of the incidents regarding
the control of oil terminals and increase security at
production facilities. The international community
must also be firm and united in recognizing the
legitimate representatives of the Libyan Government.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the decisions
agreed on at the economic dialogue in June, and wejoin
the Secretary-General's call to the Libyan authorities to
comply with the economic reforms agreed there.

Lastly, we must express our concern about the
continuing reports of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Libya. It will be
crucial to address the vulnerable situation of the
country's thousands of migrants, particularly women
and children, and the unscrupulous activities of
organized crime and its links to terrorist groups. In
that regard, we want to support the Secretary-General's
call for the closure of the detention centres and to
salute the valuable work of UNICEF, the International
Organization for Migration and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in their
efforts to protect unaccompanied migrant children.

I would like to conclude by thanking Mr. Salame
for his work and reaffirming our support to his team
and to UNSMIL as a whole in this historic context of
defining the future of Libya.

