Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing
on the progress made in the implementation of the
principle of accountability for the serious crimes
and mass atrocities committed in Iraq by Da'esh. It
commends Mr. Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2379 (2017), on the presentation of
his third report, which informs the Council about the
progress made and the challenges that remain to be
addressed. We also thank Mr. Kachi, member of Iraqi
civil society, for his very enlightening briefing.

My country reiterates its support for Mr. Khan and
his team and thanks him for the quality of the work
accomplished thus far. It also welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2490 (2019) extending for 12 months the
mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD). My delegation urges UNITAD to continue
its cooperation with the Iraqi authorities; ethnic and
religious communities; civil society, particularly
women; and State and institutional actors, in order to
consolidate the gains made thus far.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that UNITAD,
working in synergy with the Iraqi authorities, will
be able to identify appropriate responses despite
the multiple complex challenges that remain. These
challenges include the transnational nature of Da'esh's
activities, which requires us to identify areas ofjudicial
cooperation between the States of the region so that the
members of that terrorist organization who are being
detained beyond Iraqi borders can be made to answer
for their crimes.

My country urges UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities
to further strengthen their cooperation in order to
develop consensus-based judicial mechanisms that will
allow for crimes committed by Da'esh to be covered
by the Iraqi legal arsenal. In that context, my country
welcomes the establishment of the UNITAD witness
protection programme and commends its excellent
cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and INTERPOL.
Cote d'Ivoire is of the view that our collective
commitment to translate into concrete action the
principle of accountability for mass crimes committed
during conflicts, in particular by terrorist groups,
goes well beyond the context of Iraq and the region.
That is above all a challenge to international peace
and security that requires the mobilization of the
entire United Nations system as well as of all actors
involved in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

My country wishes to reaffirm the urgent need
to find lasting responses to the structural causes of
insecurity and instability in our countries and regions.
In that context, combating poverty and unemployment
should be at the heart of our priorities, as should
ensuring better socioeconomic prospects to safeguard
youth from radical rhetoric and the temptation to
join terrorist groups. My country therefore calls on
the international community to continue supporting
national and regional socioeconomic development
strategies through investments that can generate
employment and help provide basic services. That
is also true of the much-needed economic and social
reconstruction of Iraq as well as all of the other regions
ravaged by terrorism, transnational organized crime
and community-based conflict.

To conclude, Cote d'Ivoire once again wishes every
success to Mr. Khan and the United Nations Investigative
Team. It remains convinced that UNITAD's success
will undoubtedly constitute a positive example and
a decisive step forward in the action of the United
Nations and the international community to fully and
effectively implement the principle of accountability
for all terrorist actors and organizations that commit
mass crimes.

