Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I also
join those welcoming Minister De Gucht to the Council
today in light of Belgium's contribution to the work on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo over recent
months and years.

The resolutions we are adopting today reflect the
extensive work in the Security Council in recent
months to address what is an ongoing humanitarian
tragedy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
our efforts to avert the risk of descent into much worse
conflict, with all the attendant potential regional
implications.

One resolution reviews the arms embargo and
specific individual sanctions, and the other extends, for
a further 12 months, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). I welcome the fact that we now have a
more focused mandate for MONUC which, for the first
time, sets a clear order of priorities for the Mission and
for United Nations troops on the ground. It also
includes an important clarification of the relationship
between MONUC and the Government security forces,
which should help address some of the issues MONUC
faced in the recent fighting in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

MONUC's first task is the protection of civilians.
My delegation remains appalled at the persistent high
levels of sexual violence, in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo in particular, perpetrated by the
armed groups, including, sadly, some of the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Systematic rape seems to be used by groups, like the
Forces Democratiques de la Liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), as a weapon to subjugate and divide local
communities. We look to MONUC to do more to bring
an end to that horrific practice and to do more to
protect women as they go about their daily business.

As the text of the resolution states, there is no
military solution to the conflict in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The only solution to lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region is political
reconciliation and cooperation. We commend the
Secretary-General's appointment of President Obasanjo
as his Special Envoy on the Great Lakes region. This
was a decisive move that has already had considerable
impact. President Obasanjo, together with President
Mkapa, have important roles in bringing the parties
back to the twin tracks of the Nairobi and Goma
processes, and they have my Government's full
backing.

We are encouraged today by the attendance of
Their Excellencies Foreign Minister Thambwe of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ambassador
Nsengimana of Rwanda. Cooperation between their
two countries is one of the keys to forging peace,
stability and prosperity in the Kivus and beyond. The
Governments of both countries have signalled their
commitment to peace through the closer working
relationship they have developed over recent weeks.
One big stumbling block remains: the shared blight of
the presence of the FDLR on Congolese soil.

We commend the recent improvements on
cooperation on tackling the FDLR and the renewed
commitment of all parties to a common approach to
dismantling the FDLR, as set out in the Nairobi
agreement. A crucial part of this is that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has to ensure
that there is no further collusion or arms transfer from
the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique du
Congo (FARDC) to the FDLR, as indicated by the
recent report of the Group of Experts on the arms
embargo against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the same vein, the Group of Experts has
provided evidence that the forces of General Nkunda of
the Congres national pour la defense du peuple
received support from Rwanda, with the knowledge of
the Government in Kigali. The Government of Rwanda
has to bring such support to an end.

The political process of the crisis in North Kivu
has to be backed with effective military support, and
we commend the efforts of MONUC to reorganize its
troops within the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
response to renewed fighting in and around Goma.
However, it does require more resources, and it is now
over a month since the Council authorized an
additional 3,000 personnel. There remains a shortage
of firm commitments, and the timeline for deployment
has slipped from two months to as much as six months.
We must redouble our efforts to ensure that we see
these extra boots on the ground as soon as possible.

May I close by observing that the search for
peacekeeping resources, in particular enablers such as
engineers, helicopters and airlifts, is becoming harder.

We seem to be approaching the limits of global
peacekeeping capacity. This reflects well on the
significant successes United Nations missions have had
in building peace and stability in, for example, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, southern Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and
much of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but the
Security Council and the wider international
community need to be more strategic with the limited
peacekeeping resources we have at our disposal. That
is a set of issues that we will need to consider in 2009
in some depth. We welcome the discussions proposed
under the French presidency to focus all of our minds
on that.

