Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
French presidency for organizing this timely debate.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and other speakers for
their briefings.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf ofthe European Union and that to be delivered
on behalf of the Human Security Network.

Slovenia joins others in condemning the grave
violations committed against children during armed
conflict by armed non-State actors, including heinous
acts by Daesh in Syria and Iraq, and by Boko Haram
in Nigeria and neighbouring States. Children should
not be recruited as soldiers, used as suicide bombers,
abducted, trafficked or sold for use in hostilities,
forcibly married or used as sex slaves. They should
not be deliberate targets of killing or maiming caused
by non-exploded landmines or remnants of war, rape
or other forms of sexual violence. All those acts
cause irreparable damage to the lives of the children
affected, as well as to their families, and have long-
term consequences for the communities.

Slovenia believes that abductions are one of the
grave violations committed against children in armed
conflict, and recent cases of abduction are proof that
Council action is required. In that respect, we call on
the Council to set abductions as a trigger for the listing
of parties in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
relevant annual reports.

Last year we witnessed an increased number of
attacks and the use of schools by armed non-state actors,
such as attacks by the Taliban in Afghanistan and
Pakistan and Boko Haram in Nigeria. In that regard, we
would like to recall resolution 2143 (2014) and to call
on all non-State armed groups to respect the civilian
character of schools in accordance with international
humanitarian law. We call on the Security Council and
its Working Group to use all the tools at their disposal
to address the impact of acts of armed non-State actors
on children in situations of armed conflict and to
increase pressure on persistent perpetrators to comply
with international standards.

To demonstrate that grave violations against children
in armed conflict are inadmissible, the perpetrators of
such crimes, including armed non-State actors, must be
held accountable through the national justice system
or, when applicable, through international justice
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The confirmation by the ICC Appeals Chamber
of the verdict and the sentence against Thomas Lubanga
in December 2014 was an important step in the fight
against impunity.

Armed non-State actors represent the vast majority
of parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-
General's latest annual report (S/2014/339) on children
and armed conflict, and most of them are persistent
perpetrators. We welcome the efforts by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to negotiate and help implement
action plans with 12 such actors. At the same time,
we encourage the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to develop strategies for outreach to
those parties, and urge all the countries concerned
to enable access to armed non-State actors. We also
see the merit in having non-State actors sign a deed
of commitment for the protection of children from the
effect of armed conflict, and commend the efforts of
those who have already done so.

Let me also use this opportunity to underline the
importance of rehabilitating children. Slovenia has
been supporting different initiatives in that respect.
Most recently, we supported a biannual regional
project to reduce the vulnerability of Syrian refugees,
in particular children and youth, to the negative
consequences of mines and other remnants of war.
That project, entitled "Tomorrow is Ours", is carried
out by the International Trust Fund Enhancing Human
Security in Jordan and Lebanon. The project also offers
psychosocial support and education to Syrian children
in order to help them overcome their trauma, improve
their psychosocial well-being and develop more solid
foundations for the future.

In conclusion, let me stress that, since the
groundbreaking Machel report almost 20 years ago
(see A/51/306), the adoption of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict 15 years ago
and the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) 10 years
ago, the international community has made enormous
progress in lessening the impact of armed conflict on
children. We must persist in those efforts, as we also
face new challenges on the children in armed conflict
agenda.

