Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
First of all, I would like to express my thanks to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open meeting and this
important debate. I am also pleased to express deepest
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the excellent
report he has given us on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations.

For decades now the international community has been
aware of the importance of ensuring the safety and security
of refugees and displaced persons and others affected by
conflicts. Therefore, sustained efforts were made in order
to have the necessary legislation in place to protect these
people. This is why many conventions and agreements have
been signed - for example, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights of 1948, the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
the Additional Protocols of 1977 and the 1951 Convention
and 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees.

On the other hand, it has become clear that
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons
is often hijacked, so to speak. Moreover, humanitarian
personnel have also become victims of attack. This
continues to be one of the main problems that the
international community has to resolve.

In this connection, my delegation expresses its great
concern regarding attacks on international personnel who
are providing emergency assistance. We condemn the
attacks on them, because they are violations of international
law.

My delegation is in full agreement with the
conclusions reached at by the Secretary-General in his
report with regard to the responsibility incumbent on States
to provide for and ensure the safety and security of
personnel of the United Nations and of humanitarian
organizations.

It is of the utmost importance that the Security
Council be kept regularly informed of the humanitarian
situation in various conflict areas so that the Council can
have a comprehensive picture of what is going on, and
thereby be able to adopt the appropriate resolutions in order
to deal with any problems encountered.

My delegation also endorses the recommendations of
the Secretary-General's report, including improving the
level of safety for humanitarian and emergency assistance
in conflict areas and the means of providing such
assistance. Efforts must be made at the national and
international level in order to find a solution to these
matters.

In conclusion, I must pay tribute to the international
and regional efforts made to ensure protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons.
The role played by the United Nations and its specialized
agencies is an important pioneering role. Governmental
and non-governmental organizations also undertake far-
reaching activities in this domain.

My delegation would also like to stress the need for
coordinating the efforts made by States for the purpose of
providing better humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons, and for ensuring the safety of
providing that assistance. Accordingly, we await eagerly
the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution on
this matter.

