Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to convey our deepest condolences and _ heartfelt sympathies to the bereaved family members of victims of the tragic accident involving Ukrainian International Airlines flight 752 in Iran. I would now like to congratulate you, Sir, on Viet Nam's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January, as well as to commend the convening of this timely and important open debate. My delegation aligns itself with the statements to be made by the representatives of Azerbaijan and the Philippines on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), respectively. Today's debate is being held against the backdrop of increasing hatred and mistrust, the growing threat of extremism and terrorism and the continued proliferation and possession of weapons of mass destruction. As those security threats are shared, so too must be their solutions. A few days ago we were highly alarmed by the geopolitical tension in the Middle East. Malaysia has always believed that every effort should be undertaken to resolve disputes and conflicts through peaceful means in accordance with the principles of international law, without resorting to the use or threat of use of force. We join others in calling for all parties concerned to avoid further provocation, exercise maximum restraint and de-escalate tensions. Malaysia continues to believe that multilateralism is nothing other than responding to the aspirations of the peoples and the needs of humankind as a whole. The Preamble of the United Nations Charter - "We the peoples" - serves as a constant reminder of our resolve to serve humankind collectively through peaceful means. It is therefore fundamental for us to reaffirm our faith in multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core, by upholding the Charter of the United Nations and advancing its three pillars of peace and security, human rights and development. In our view, multilateralism does not in any sense represent a threat to nation States. Instead, we see it asa platform and means to address the complex challenges that no country can overcome on its own. Our strong commitment to multilateralism, in particular in international cooperation on peace and security, is well demonstrated and articulated, as it was particularly during our membership on the Security Council and has been by the participation of our peacekeepers in peacekeeping operations around the world. As a member of ASEAN, Malaysia will remain steadfast in contributing to regional and global peace and security. ASEAN's strong commitment to this important agenda is also demonstrated through the membership of two ASEAN countries in the Council today. We stand ready to enhance existing ASEAN- United Nations collaboration in peacekeeping and peacebuilding through training programmes and exchanges involving policies and best practices. There is high expectation for the Security Council to deliver stability, peace and security to the world. At the same time, there is a growing demand for the Council to adapt to new political realities. In that regard, Malaysia continues to call for collective efforts to reform the Security Council and improve its working methods. Malaysia also wishes to stress the importance of the prompt, effective and full implementation of Security Council resolutions. The survival of humankind depends upon us working together. We need cooperation, not confrontation. Malaysia has been, and will continue to be, a strong supporter of multilateralism and an advocate for the use of diplomacy for peace. To that end, we remain committed to upholding the rule of law and the rules-based international order and supporting international cooperation. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Malaysia calls on all parties to renew and intensify efforts in upholding the Charter, to engage in frank and productive dialogue and to strengthen multilateral action for a more peaceful, secure and sustainable world.
