Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution 2312
(2016), which extends for an additional year the mandate
of resolution 2240 (2015), on the illicit smuggling of
migrants and human trafficking in the Mediterranean
Sea. We did so because we believe that the reasons that
led our delegation a year ago to take the same decision
have not changed significantly. We are thus consistent
in maintaining our position as it was expressed in 2015.

We reiterate our doubts that the resolution is
an adequate instrument to comprehensively and
appropriately address the tragedy being lived out by
thousands of human beings - which is a consequence
of the tragedy of war, political instability, poverty,
terrorism and widespread violence that are plaguing
major regions of Africa and the Middle East - who
are desperately trying to reach safe havens even at the
risk of their own lives, while becoming the victims of
criminal organizations that benefit from the smuggling
in and trafficking of human beings.

The report (S/2016/766) of the Secretary-General
submitted in accordance with resolution 2240 (2015)
expresses deep concern in paragraphs 59 and 3,
respectively that

"the number of men, women and children who
die or go missing in the Mediterranean Sea has
not fallen,

"[and that] national and regional efforts have
not resulted in an immediate improvement in
the situation".

In accordance with statistics of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for the month of August, there were 3,177
deaths and disappearances in the Mediterranean Sea.
The number of unaccompanied or separated minors
who reached Italy via the Mediterranean also has
significantly increased as compared to 2015 -by
approximately 116 per cent for the period from January
to July.

The complexity and multidimensional nature
of the phenomenon requires a comprehensive
approach that goes beyond a merely military and
security-oriented approachk, including recourse to
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as
some States within this organ claim to encourage.
Venezuela once again therefore rejects the security-
and criminalization-oriented approach to the issue of
asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. We have to ask
ourselves whether the flow of asylum seekers, refugees
and migrants towards the shores of the Mediterranean
has been reduced or is merely an issue of containing
them on land? Is it perhaps the case that the existence
of criminal organizations linked to human trafficking
and smuggling is the root cause of the flows ofrefugees
and migrants from Africa to Europe?

We could find answers to those questions, if we
began by acknowledging that this human tragedy has
worsened in recent years as the political, economic
and social situation in the Middle East and North
Africa - the result of foreign interference, military
interventionism and war - has continued to worsen in
tandem. Those who promote destabilization and crisis in
legal and legitimately constituted Governments should
bear in mind that the significant increase in the flows
of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees is primarily
a consequence of the terrible, violent conditions and
social disintegration that have fomented armed conflict
and military aggression in countries such as Libya,
Syria and Iraq, among others, as well as poverty and
social exclusion affecting the poorest countries.

For Venezuela, today's resolution addresses only
a tiny part of this complex problem, and we believe
that it is essential to consider and adopt measures
in connection with the underlying causes, which
are forcing thousands of people to undertake such
dangerous maritime journeys, as well as the reasons
that lead them to become victims of human trafficking
and smuggling.

The report of the Secretary-General also states in
paragraphs 4 and 6, respectively, that,
"increasing control over some routes may have
led to more frequent use of other routes

"[a]s controls tighten and in the absence of
commensurate safe and regular pathways, irregular
crossings become more difficult, leading to a
growing market for the services of smugglers".

It is not by building walls or invoking Chapter VII
of the Charter that we must address the underlying
causes for the flows of asylum seekers, refugees and
migrants towards other regions, including Europe. It
seems that, beyond the argument of fighting against
criminal gangs, the purpose of such resolutions is
simply to prevent these poor and desperate human
beings from reaching safer destinations, as can be seen
by the increasing number of restrictive and exclusionary
policies that have proliferated in some European
countries with regard to asylum seekers and migrants
seeking shelter, which have moreover spread racist and
xenophobic feelings in the region, thereby undermining
governance in receiving countries.

According to several studies, to date, 70 walls have
been built or are under construction around the world.
Through measures such as these, we are gradually
heading towards a world in which the countries of the
North will be surrounded by walls that will, rather
than respond with the solidarity and human and moral
responsibility called for by the situation, prevent them
from seeing and becoming sensitized to the terrible
reality of the people plagued by wars, most of which are
encouraged and promoted by the centres of power. We
cannot forget, as during other periods in history, how
Latin America and the Caribbean - and especially
Venezuela - opened their doors to millions of citizens
who sought security, peace and opportunities in
our countries.

We wish to furthermore point out that the
implementation of international measures to alleviate
this human tragedy must be carried out in a concerted
and coordinated manner. The issue requires broad-
based and democratic forums for discussion, such as
the General Assembly, to ensure the full participation
of all Member States, with the involvement of
countries of origin, transit and destination. Similarly,
it is also fundamental that there be coordination and
the generation of synergies between these countries
and the various entities of the United Nations having
competence in the area and the existing regional and
subregional mechanisms.

To conclude, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its unequivocal commitment to fulfilling
the obligations under the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and
other international legal instruments and resolutions
related to the issue of human trafficking, as well as to
the inescapable principle of shared but differentiated
responsibility, which should be borne in mind in
addressing this issue.

