Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): Let me join previous
speakers in welcoming to this meeting Foreign
Minister Miranda of Angola. My delegation would like
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. This gives us an opportunity to
exchange views on the final report of the Monitoring
Mechanism on the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council against UNITA. We thank Ambassador Ryan
for his presentation ofthe report earlier in this meeting.
We also want to express our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Juan Larrain, Chairman of the Monitoring
Mechanism, and the team he leads for their valuable
work.

Last April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1295 (2000) on the basis of the
recommendations of the report of the Panel of Experts
established by Security Council resolution 1237
(1999). The Panel was mandated to investigate
violations of the sanctions, identify the violators and
propose ways and means to make the sanctions more
effective. It left some unfinished business, such as
leads not investigated for want of time. In addition, the
Monitoring Mechanism was also mandated to
investigate any additional leads relating to allegations
of violations of the measures and to collect additional
relevant information. These tasks were aimed at
improving the implementation ofthe measures imposed
against UNITA.

Bangladesh welcomes the report, which is well-
structured, with supporting information. We find that
the method of work adopted by the Mechanism was
suitable to the task. We are particularly happy that a
strict evidentiary standard has been employed and that
the views of concerned quarters have been reflected, as
appropriate.

We have examined the Mechanism's
recommendations with interest. In doing so, we see
value in keeping in mind the recommendations of the
Panel, as appropriate. Our comments, therefore, will
focus on seeing where the Mechanism has advanced
the cause.

In the area of the illegal arms trade, the work
done on reviewing the export and import procedures of
concerned countries, on current practices in the
issuance of end-user certificates and on the uncovering
of forged ones, as well as the profiling of firms or
brokers involved in the export and import of arms,
merits our appreciation. The latter, however, remains
unfinished and should be a key task for the Mechanism
in future. We cannot overemphasize the need for
concerned States to strengthen legislation relating to
the export and import of arms and to check for forged
end-user certificates. The system of issuance of such
certificates should be made more secure, and a
mechanism should be set up to facilitate the
verification of their authenticity by authorities in arms-
exporting countries.

The issue of transport naturally arises when
discussing illegal arms trafficking. The report vividly
brings out the nefarious activities of individuals and
the countries that collaborate with them. We support
the recommendations relating to tighter controls on
aircraft registration procedures and agree that aircraft
used in sanctions-busting should be de-registered and
their pilots de-licensed. Obviously, enforcement will be
up to the concerned Governments.

The report argues that with the loss of secure
areas inside Angola, UNITA increasingly has resorted
to using its representatives abroad to maintain contact
with dealers and to manage its external relations as a
whole. The Mechanism found UNITA structures in
certain European, Western and southern African
countries as well as in the United States. While it is
encouraging to note that most such countries have
formally ended UNITA representation on their soil,
UNITA continues to have a presence in some identified
countries, using non-governmental organizations as
fronts. Clearly, these actions are designed to
circumvent the sanctions, and the States concerned
have an obligation to prevent this.

Owing to their long stay in certain countries,
some UNITA representatives have acquired nationality
or permanent resident status there, along with rights
that allow them to continue their activities and travel
abroad. One problem identified by the report in this
area is a conflict that appears for the member States of
the Schengen Agreement - a conflict between their
national obligation to allow their nationals free
movement across their borders and the international
obligation flowing from the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We believe that a way must be found out of
this situation, in consultation with the concerned
States. It has also been reported that travel documents
issued by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) have been used by UNITA
representatives. We believe that a regularly updated
United Nations list of senior UNITA officials and their
adult family members forms the basis for action to be
taken by Governments for effective implementation of
the sanctions relating to the ban on travel and on
UNITA representation abroad.

The people of Angola have for a very long time
lived in an unreal world, characterized by a great
wealth of natural resources, contrasting with poverty
and despair. Angola's diamonds have bred only
suffering for its people and sustained the one of the
longest-lasting conflicts in the world. In the report, the
Mechanism, inter alia, traces the history of UNITA's
diamond mining and its linkage to different phases of
its military capability. The report also establishes
details on the rough diamond export mechanisms that
UNITA employed and the role that certain neighbours
and individual brokers played in it. On the other hand,
considerable statistics are provided in its follow-up on
the Panel's work on diamond centres. However, the
Mechanism realized that UNITA was able to hide most
of its trade from the official statistics maintained in
these centres. This necessitates the tracking of the
origin of rough diamonds.

The Mechanism suggested that devising a global
certificate of origin regime would resolve much of the
problem of illicit diamond smuggling and protect the
legitimate diamond industry. Supporting measures such
as licensing diamond miners and buyers, profiling
production from mines and recording the
characteristics of diamonds from each mine will be
required to settle disputes regarding the origin of
diamonds. The Angolan single channel buying system
(ASCorp) is a laudable effort towards this end. On the
other hand, the standardization of statistics and custom
codes by diamond centres will be useful for monitoring
the movement of diamonds.

The work of the Mechanism helped to further
enhance the Council's understanding of the ways and
means employed by those violating the sanctions. It has
become apparent that there remains some unfinished
business that the Mechanism will have to address.
Notwithstanding the ongoing nature ofthe process, we
believe that it is vitally important to focus on tasks that
should help close the loopholes and make the sanctions
against UNITA more effective. On this understanding
of its remaining tasks, we agreed to the three-month
extension of the Mechanism's mandate. Before doing
that, however, we were constrained to raise the issue of
fair and equitable representation. We found it difficult
to accept that no candidate from Asia was proposed for
inclusion in the Panel of Experts or in the Mechanism.

The weakest aspect ofthe United Nations quest to
curb UNITA's capability to wage war remains the funds
and financial network. We believe it is important for
the Council to have an insight into these matters in
order to ascertain the extent to which they support
UNITA's continued war efforts. Due to the technical
nature of the work of tracing UNITA's assets and
financial resources, the Committee agreed to the
commissioning of a private firm for a feasibility study.

The report of the study and the need for further
work are currently under active consideration in the
sanctions Committee with a view to taking a decision.
There may be a need to strike a balance between
desirability and feasibility. The work of both the Panel
and the Mechanism brings to the fore the issue of
continuity in monitoring the implementation of
sanctions. We welcome that in principle, and we look
forward to further consideration of it in the Council.

We believe that no regime of sanctions can be
effective unless Member States and all other relevant
actors fulfil their obligations under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. While we urge all
concerned to act accordingly, the larger goal of
bringing back peace and stability to the people of
Angola should not be lost sight of. The international
community has to guard against the appalling prospect
ofthat people enduring a no-war-no-peace situation for
an indefinite period, compounding the humanitarian
crisis. Such situations are often left at the doorstep of
the international community for resolution. That is
why, alongside sanctions, a process of peaceful
resolution of disputes and of genuine national
reconciliation is what we encourage. The responsibility
for this fully rests with the players at the national level.
The work of the United Nations and of other
humanitarian actors is essentially aimed at facilitating
such a process in Angola, not at achieving a military
solution.

