Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the three
Chairpersons of the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Thomas Mayr-
Harting, Ertugrul Apakan and Claude Heller,
respectively, for their comprehensive briefings.

Terrorism is a global threat that requires
collective and resolute action by all countries. Uganda
reiterates its condemnation of all acts of terrorism and
reaffirms that such acts are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation and of who commits
them. In this regard, we support the work of the three
Committees and commend them for developing
common strategies to advance the global fight against
terrorism.

The briefings of the Committee Chairpersons
have highlighted the progress made in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions in the
fight against terrorism and the challenges encountered
in the course of their work. Given the increased level
of sophistication of global terrorist networks, our
collective efforts should continue to focus on denying
terrorists any safe havens, closing sources of terrorist
financing and reducing State vulnerability, while at the
same time enhancing the preparedness and response
capacities of States.

Uganda commends the cooperation and
coordination among the three Committees and expert
groups, which have had a positive impact on the fight
against terrorism. We also welcome the increased
outreach activities and sharing of information by the
three Committees with the stakeholders. We thank
those countries, organizations and financial institutions
that have provided and continue to provide financial
and technical support for the implementation of the
respective resolutions.

We commend the closer cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and countries as an effective way of
fighting terrorism. At the continental level, the African
Union summit held in Kampala in July called for
enhanced cooperation to boost the continent's
collective action against terrorism.

Finally, Uganda shares the conclusions of the
Chairpersons that coordination and cooperation among
Member States, the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations provide an essential way to
counter the threat of terrorism. The work of the three
Committees is vital within the United Nations
framework and the wider efforts of the international
community. They can continue to count on Uganda's
unequivocal and full support.

