Ms. Sison (United States of America): We welcome
the Security Council's decision today to extend for
another six months the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). That was
the right decision. UNISFA provides critical security
to the Abyei Area and helps communities that live and
travel through Abyei to prevent and mitigate Violence.
We are grateful to Ethiopia for the very significant role
it plays in maintaining peace and security in Abyei.

The United States fully concurs with the Secretary-
General's assessment that the conflict over Abyei is a
political problem that requires a political solution. As
we all discussed here in the Chamber during the April
briefing on peacekeeping (see S/PV.7926), when the
security Council considers whether a peacekeeping
operation is the right tool for us to use in the maintenance
of peace and security, we must consider whether the
mission supports a political solution.

In reviewing the mandate of UNISFA, the United
States carefully considered whether the mission was
appropriately aligned with the will of the parties and
the current security situation in Abyei. Regrettably,
since 2011 the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan have consistently lacked commitment to engage
in the work necessary to resolve Abyei's final status
and to establish the interim measures previously agreed
to by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan
to jointly administer and police the Abyei Area. In
addition, the Sudan and South Sudan continue to place
restrictions on UNISFA, thereby inhibiting its ability to
carry out the very mandate both States requested.

When we took the decision to authorize UNISFA,
and when we subsequently added tasks in support of
the joint border monitoring mission, there was a clear
commitment from both the Sudan and South Sudan
to carry out certain steps and a request for the United
Nations to support their efforts. While UNISFA has done
its part, the Sudan and South Sudan have not taken the
necessary steps to fully operationalize the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM).
We continue to support the JBVMM. concept, but five
years of obstacles to the deployment of the mission is
enough. Until the parties remove the obstacles and take
the steps towards making the Mechanism effective,
UNISFA will not be able to fully carry out its mandate.

That speaks to a broader point applicable to all
peacekeeping missions: the Security Council should
not indefinitely support mandates that lack the strategic
consent of the parties. When we are faced with those
challenges, we must use the leverage we have to
ensure our peacekeeping operations are effective. That
includes demanding that States that are benefiting from
our missions comply with their agreements with the
United Nations and with each other. If they do not, then
it is ourjob to take action.

We therefore welcome the Council's decision that
this will be the last extension of UNISFA's mandate
to support the Border Monitoring Mechanism unless
the parties can clearly demonstrate through their
actions, including through the steps outlined in today's
resolution, that they are achieving the full functioning
of the Mechanism. It is incumbent upon all of us as
Council members to question the status quo when we
have recognized that the status quo is not working.

The United States has committed to helping to
support security and stability in Abyei, the Sudan,
South Sudan and the region. We urge a reinvigorated
political process leading to a permanent solution for the
status of Abyei. We also call on the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan to honour their commitments
to support UNISFA's full deployment and to remove all
obstacles to its operation.

