Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like, on behalf of the Arab Group,
to congratulate your friendly country on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We are grateful to the Republic of Korea, especially
Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan, for organizing this
debate, which provides an opportunity to reinforce
the measures that the Security Council has adopted to
protect civilians. We also wish to thank the Secretary-
General, the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
participation in this meeting.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) notes that civilians form the bulk of the
victims in cases of armed conflict as the result, inter
alia, of deliberate targeting and collateral attacks that
violate international humanitarian law and human
rights law. The report also points out that there is much
work to be done, if we are to deal with the fundamental
and important challenges presented by the protection
of civilians, particularly ensuring the compliance of all
parties to a conflict with the principles of international
humanitarian law. The fact that various parties to
conflicts refuse, relying on a culture of impunity, to
comply with the provisions regarding the protection of
civilians should not be ignored and should be dealt with
severely and promptly, since otherwise the parties are
encouraged to threaten civilians.

Despite the progress that has been made in
strengthening the protection of civilians in cases of
armed conflict, the issue continues to pose a challenge to
international law and humanitarian law and requires us
to do more to compel parties to conflict to refrain from
using explosive weapons in densely populated areas.
We cannot talk about the protection of civilians without
taking into consideration the problem of security.
Improving security is therefore not only a humanitarian
task but one that requires various efforts, in particular
the application of the relevant laws aimed at protecting
civilians in armed conflict without distinction at both
the national and the international levels.
It is indeed sad that while we are holding this
debate, many civilians all over the world, and notably
in our Arab region, have to cope with acts of violence
that result in deaths and the displacement of refugees.
Women and children are the most vulnerable to such
risks and the most affected, particularly through sexual
violence and physical and psychological abuse, and they
form the bulk of displaced refugees. People's houses,
schools and hospitals are being targeted to a degree that
the international community can no longer ignore under
any pretext. Considering the international response so
far, bearing in mind humanitarian principles and the
goal of protecting as many civilians as possible, and
looking beyond the work of the various United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the international community
must, through its international institutions, build on its
positive achievements and continue its efforts to protect
civilians.

The Arab Group urges the Security Council to
continue to strive to take the necessary measures to
protect civilians and strengthen prompt accountability
for any violations against civilians. We also wish to
affirm the importance of mandating United Nations
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians, one of the
most significant measures that the Security Council
can take to strengthen protection.

We would like to touch on two specific cases,
without prejudice to any others. Violence is a constantly
recurring phenomenon in the occupied Palestinian
territory, and since the last meeting of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/PV.6790), the people of Gaza have been subjected
to Israeli aggression. This time, as often before, the
occupying forces showed no regard for the lives of
civilians, as the Israeli air force bombed residential
areas, resulting in the deaths of several hundred men,
women and even children in Gaza. We ask: How long
will Israel continue to believe that it can disregard
the importance of human life and use excessive force
without accountability? The occupied Palestinian
territory has become one of the most egregious
examples of a place where the Geneva Conventions are
violated and international humanitarian law ignored.

In Syria, the threat that Syrians are facing as a
result of the evolution of the current crisis has reached
terrifying proportions. The Arab Summit held in
Baghdad in 2012 called on the Syrian Government to
end all acts of violence, protect Syrian civilians, allow
international organizations immediate access, hold
all those responsible for violations of human rights
accountable and not tolerate impunity. On 12 November,
the League of Arab States expressed its deep concern
about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Syria and its serious attendant effects on civilians,
calling on the Security Council to put an end to the
cycle of violence in Syria and provide all necessary
support for the people of Syria to defend themselves
and strengthen and coordinate Arab and international
efforts.

Speaking in my national capacity, I would like to
say that Israel's repeated acts of aggression against
the Palestinians have gone beyond all humanitarian
principles and standards of international legitimacy.
All kinds of weapons and excessive force have been
used against civilians, notably in the Gaza Strip. The
Israeli Government has refused to halt the crimes
being committed by armed settlers against Palestinian
civilians, who are already suffering from Israel's
oppressive policies, which threaten their security and
deprive them of the ability to exercise their fundamental
rights. The Palestinian economy is under siege, and
Palestinians' standard of living has fallen as a result
of the obstacles put in the way of a normal life and
the withholding of their tax revenues. The Gaza Strip
has become an enormous prison in which all civilians
suffer.

Conditions in the sister republic of Syria have,
regrettably, led to one of the major situations where
civilians are in danger. The oppressive policies of the
regime have resulted in the deaths of almost 70,000
Syrian nationals, most of them civilians, including
women, children and the elderly; not to mention the
hundreds of thousands of wounded and the detainees;
families that have lost their heads of household and their
houses; the displaced persons and refugees and others
who are suffering from shortages of food and needed
medicines. The approach of the Syrian regime since the
Syrian people's protests began has been characterized
by a basic disregard for the population and for citizens'
rights, dignity, security and freedom. It has not
complied with international humanitarian principles,
notably the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and has shown a total
disregard for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the collective responsibility of the
international community to observe and protect human
rights for all, as affirmed in paragraph (c) of Article 55
of the Charter: "universal respect for, and observance
of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all".

Civilians in Syria are increasingly subject to dangers
and threats as the Syrian regime has used its entire
military arsenal, including indiscriminate weapons like
cluster bombs, in residential areas. The regime pursues
oppressive policies that affect only civilians, such as
cutting off electricity, communications and food and
medical supplies, in addition to targeting hospitals and
other medical facilities, which increases the suffering
of civilians who have nowhere to go. They cannot
even seek refuge in hospitals or places of worship. The
unjustified targeting of civilians is one of the most
abhorrent violations of human rights and a flagrant
breach of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, and is a challenge to international
legitimacy, including resolution 1894 (2009) regarding
the protection of civilians.

Furthermore, and taking into consideration the
State's fundamental responsibility to protect its
citizens, Syria's deliberate and methodical policies are
in disregard of its responsibility and represent a shabby
attempt to control the country through the use of force,
threats and terrorism. It is indeed regrettable that
women and children in Syria are the most vulnerable to
such oppressive policies. In many cases, rape has been
used by malicious loyalists of the Syrian regime against
women and children. The displacement of more than
700,000 Syrians to neighbouring States as refugees and
of around 2 million more inside the country has affected
the education of hundreds of thousands of children, and
traumatized them and other victims. Not only has the
Syrian regime made life hell for those Syrians who have
been forced to seek refuge in camps in neighbouring
States, but it also planted mines along the routes they
take to escape those oppressive policies and hindered
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to them.

The State of Qatar calls once again on the
international community, and in particular the
Security Council, to assume their role, as established
in the Charter of the United Nations, in maintaining
international peace and security and to respond firmly,
affirmatively and promptly to the dangers faced by the
Syrian civilians. We are of the view that, should the
Council fail to find a solution to the Syrian problem,
the United Nations should take measures to protect
Syrian civilians. In their suffering, the Syrian people
are losing confidence in the international community.

