Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
today. We also thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing earlier today.

Last week, as the State of Palestine assumed the
Chair of the Group of 77 and China for 2019, it was
not only a vote of confidence by the international
community on Palestine's ability to steer the Group, but
also an expression of solidarity with the long-suffering
Palestinian people. Unfortunately, such moments of
hope and optimism have become increasingly rare in
the parched political landscape of the region. For the
Palestinians, the looming shadow of an illegal and
oppressive occupation has grown only darker with every
passing year. Their fundamental human rights continue
to be violated with abandon. Their aspiration for a life
of dignity and freedom remains a distant ideal. Besides
generating endless hostility and discord, that has also
diminished prospects for durable peace in the region.

The Special Coordinator already provided a
grim assessment that the region stands on the brink
of another precipice. Unabated settlement activity
in the occupied territory directly contributes to this
worsening situation. As the Special Coordinator noted,
instead of ceasing those illegal settlements, Israel has
in fact stepped up construction of new housing units
in the occupied West Bank. That trend is emblematic
of the blatant Israeli disregard for international law
and the collective will of the international community,
including resolution 2334 (2016). It is also a setback
to peace and a retreat from a two-State solution to a
one-State reality. Creating alternate facts on the ground
cannot change historic realities or neutralize the legal
rights of people living under occupation - in Palestine
or, indeed, elsewhere.

Meanwhile, the plight of the ordinary citizens of
Gaza is not only an unabated humanitarian tragedy;
it is also a moral outrage. That travesty must end. A
viable, independent and contiguous State of Palestine,
on the basis of internationally agreed parameters, the
pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, is the only sustainable assurance for enduring
peace in the Middle East. It is also a prerequisite for
international peace and stability. Sufficient, predictable
and sustainable financing for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East is equally imperative.

The situation in the Middle East is a sobering
reminder that the region remains engulfed in the throes
of conflict, instability and violence. The conflict in
Syria continues to exact an enormous human cost. An
intra-Syrian process of inclusive political engagement
remains the only pathway to achieve durable peace and
stability in the country. We are confident that ongoing
efforts under the aegis of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pedersen, will make a
tangible contribution towards this end.

Pakistan also welcomes the renewed diplomatic
momentum to find a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen. The Stockholm Agreement was an important
first step. It is now critical that the sides follow through
on their commitments in a credible and transparent
manner. This is vital not only for lasting peace in
the country, but also for the well-being of millions of
Yemeni people - including women and children - in
desperate need of urgent humanitarian assistance. The
forthcoming high-level pledging conference in Geneva
will also be a good measure of the international
community's continued support to the Yemeni people.

Outlining his priorities for 2019, the Secretary-
General underscored the fact that the needs and
expectations of people with respect to the United
Nations can be met only by accelerating the surge in
diplomacy. Nowhere is such a surge more urgently
needed than in the Middle East, especially in Palestine.
For far too long, the Palestinians have looked to this
Chamber with expectant eyes and wondered, as
