Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
Mr. Michael Keating, and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their
briefings at today's meeting.

We begin by commending the United Nations and the
African Union on their coordinated and joint efforts in
Somalia to build peace, rebuild the State, strengthen the
rule of law, reform the security sector and achieve other
important goals. Their work reflects relevant ongoing
efforts to seek stability and security in the country
and the region. The continuous support and assistance
provided by AMISOM, UNSOM. and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia should reflect a high degree
of transparency and information-sharing to enable the
Federal Government of Somalia to continue its efforts
to counter the serious threat posed by terrorist groups
and with regard to constitutional structure in order to
strengthen the Federal State. We believe that stabilizing
Somalia should be achieved mainly by formalizing the
status of the federal member states, implementing the
security strategy, building resilience and promoting
socioeconomic transformation. The Government of
Somalia must determine its priorities according to its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

We commend the President of Somalia on his recent
visits to various regions of the country in order to step
up and accelerate efforts at dialogue and reconciliation.
At the political level, the political road map for
inclusive politics for the period 2017-2020, outlined by
the Council of Ministers of the Federal Government,
along with the efforts of the National Security Council,
has led to significant progress, which we believe will
be mutually beneficial for the Federal Government and
for federal states.

With regard to security, we believe that it is
essential that the transition plan developed by Federal
Government be reflected when the security, military

and police forces, as well as thejudiciary and correction
authorities, are fully operational. Similarly in that area,
we note that it is imperative that Somali ownership
develops within a relationship based on trust, consensus
and inclusiveness among the Federal Government and
federal states alike. In addition, UNSOM. support to
the National Intelligence and Security Agency is Vital
to improve the capacity required for demobilization,
reintegration and disarmament and weapons and
maritime security management.

Bolivia fully supports all African Union efforts
to implement mediation, preventive diplomacy and
dialogue initiatives to promote a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict. We highlight the meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on 30 April,
during which it committed to providing full support to
Somalia in achieving its transition goals. Nonetheless,
we believe that the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community as a whole
must continue to work together to build the capacity
of AMISOM. to ensure that the Somali security forces
can assume full responsibility for maintaining their
country's security in the near future.

Al-Shabaab continues to pose a latent threat to
Somalia. The attacks perpetrated by that terrorist
group have again served to underscore the importance
of identifying measures to counter it, in particular in
Mogadishu, where attacks carried out with improvised
explosive devices, car bombs and heavy weaponry have
claimed the lives ofhundreds and caused major damage.
We also note with alarm the ongoing high levels of
sexual Violence perpetrated against women and girls,
particularly those who have been forcibly displaced.

Finally, but no less important, is economic
transformation. Bolivia believes that in order to ensure
lasting, sustainable peace and to alleviate the fragility
ofthe Somali State, there is a need to reform the security
sector, and the international community must work to
restructure its external debt, as in a post-conflict phase
there cannot be sustainable peace without development,
and there can be no development if this important issue
is not resolved.

