Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine wishes to express
its gratitude to the Malaysian presidency for organizing
today's useful debate. We also wish to thank today's
briefers for their valuable insights.

While fully aligning myself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the Charge d'affaires of the
Delegation of the European Union, I would like to make
some comments in my national capacity.

For 12 years now, resolution 1540 (2004) has
been playing a crucial role in strengthening global
and regional non-proliferation efforts. Its objective of
prevention makes the resolution a unique and valuable
tool. Ukraine has always been actively engaged in the
global process of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
non-proliferation and disarmament, making historic
contributions in this endeavour. We have consistently
supported effective multilateral efforts aimed at
preventing and combating the proliferation of weapons
and materials of mass destruction. As a State with past
possession ofnuclear-weapons andafull-fledgedpartyto
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, Ukraine is strongly
committed to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and exerts every effort to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring materials and technologies that
could be used as weapons of mass destruction.

With a view to tackling the growing threat of the
proliferation of WMDs globally, we support initiatives
aimed at further strengthening the role and potential
of resolution 1540 (2004) for the long term, such as
the recent establishment of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004). Reaffirming its commitment
to the resolution in the framework of the 2016 Nuclear
Security Summit in Washington, DC, Ukraine joined
the initiative named "Promoting full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)". It is
also worth mentioning that during the 2014 Nuclear
Security Summit, held in The Hague, Ukraine joined a
similar effort and made its valuable contribution to its
implementation.

Together with the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we organized a workshop on the assessment
of implementation and the role of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) in achieving the aims of
non-proliferation and disarmament, which took place
in Kyiv in November 2013. A year later, the OSCE, the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the
Ukrainian Chemists Union and the International Centre
for Chemical Safety and Security in Poland, with the
support of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
initiated a national round table on capabilities in field
of chemical safety and security and the development of
an integrated chemical safety and security programme
in Ukraine, including promotion of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). That effort resulted in the
comprehensive review and an integrated programme of
chemical safety and security in Ukraine.

We also fully support the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular in coordinating international
efforts aimed at ensuring the proper implementation
of that resolution. Ukraine consistently provides the
Committee reports on its national legislation, including
updates on our export and border controls and the
physical protection of the relevant sensitive facilities.
We work continuously to improve our technical
capabilities aimed at monitoring, detecting and
preventing illegal trafficking in chemical, biological
and nuclear materials. In particular, relevant work
is being systematically carried out with a View to
enhancing the efficiency of the relevant monitoring
systems at the State border checkpoints. The use of
mobile radiation-monitoring systems that provide
monitoring of green control is also being expanded.

Let me also mention that a State plan on the
interaction between the central and local authorities
in cases of sabotage committed on nuclear facilities,
nuclear materials and other sources of ionizing
radiation during their use, storage or transportation
and on nuclear waste has already been approved in
Ukraine. I think that it is quite natural that, against
such a backdrop, Ukraine cannot and will not tolerate
any breaches of the principle of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

We would echo the statement of the delegation of
Japan with regard to its deep concern about the gradual,
persistent, irresponsible and highly provocative actions
on the part of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, which pose a threat and continue to undermine
the security situation on the Korean peninsula, as
well as undermining regional peace and stability.
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of the Council and
the broader international community to restore respect
for its norms, to ensure fulfilment of respect for the
international commitment and obligations, as well as to
prevent further violations.

The issue of the full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is one ofthe priorities okaraine
as an elected member of the Council. We welcome the
constructive and results-oriented approach taken by
the Spanish chairmanship during the comprehensive
review of the resolution's implementation, which is to
be completed by the end of 2016. It is important that
that endeavour also focus on ways to ensure that the
relevant international legal norms are fully respected
and implemented by all States.

Today, however, the full implementation of the
resolution is being undermined by one of the members
of the 1540 Committee. The Russian Federation
committed not only an act of military aggression
against a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations - Ukraine - but also, having violated all the
relevant international rules and norms, invaded certain
nuclear sites in Ukrainian territory, namely, in Crimea.
The occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the ongoing Russian aggression in the east of
Ukraine have left the low-enriched uranium research
reactor in Sevastopol without due control on the part of
the Ukrainian national regulators, as well as two nuclear
repositories and more than 1,200 radionuclide sources.

It is worth recalling that resolution 1540 (2004)
established an obligation, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, for all Member States
to develop and enforce appropriate legal and regulatory
measures against the proliferation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery, in particular to prevent the spread of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors, and to
abstain from providing of any financial help to them.

By carrying out military aggression against
Ukraine and providing illegal armed groups with
modern weapons and financing them, Russia has
brutally violated that obligation, which it assumed
voluntarily under resolution 1540 (2004). In particular,
it has destroyed the security system of the industrial
sites and plants situated in the territories of the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions of Ukraine that contain chemical,
biological and radioactive materials. To be precise,
according to the data of the State Nuclear Regulatory
Inspectorate of Ukraine, in the temporarily occupied
territories of eastern Ukraine alone, the Russian
aggression has left 65 enterprises that use sources of
ionizing radiation without proper controls.

Furthermore, because of external aggression,
Ukraine has lost its State border control over some
areas of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions bordering
Russia. As a result, some parts of the Ukrainian border
can be used by smugglers to illegally transfer into, or
through, the territory of Ukraine chemical, biological
and radioactive materials from Russia. That overall
situation poses a real threat to the non-proliferation
regime and, without a doubt, violates the key principles
of resolution 1540 (2004). In that regard, we have time
and again urged all States to seek to influence the
Russian Federation in all possible ways in order to stop
its aggressive and hostile actions against Ukraine and
finally to abide by its obligations in accordance with
resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, let me reiterate Ukraine's unwavering
commitment to universal respect for and integrity of
the global non-proliferation regime.

