The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the tenth
report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) (8/2002/169)
and expresses its intention to consider its
recommendations. The Security Council calls on
all the parties to the conflict to display their
political will in order to achieve a peaceful
settlement and reconciliation. The Security
Council urges all the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement (5/1998/815) to fulfil all
their commitments under the Agreement and
under the relevant resolutions of the Council.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of the inter-Congolese dialogue,
which is an essential element to achieve lasting
peace. It reiterates its strong support for the
Facilitator and his team. It calls on all Congolese
parties to participate in this process, and to do so
in a constructive spirit.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It also stresses that the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration process of the armed groups
mentioned in annex A, Chapter 9.1 of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement is another key element for
the settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and in this regard:
- reiterates its support for MONUC, which is
deploying in the East of the country in order to
facilitate this process;

- calls on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to fulfil its commitments
regarding the repatriation of the ex-combatants in
Kamina;

7 taking note of the request expressed by President
Kabila to the Security Council, requests MONUC
to make a first assessment of the number of
members of the Rwandan armed groups (ex-FAR and Interahamwe) in the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to report
to the Council by the end of March. Based on this
assessment, the Council will examine whether
any further support should be given to MONUC
in the execution of its task;

7 recalls that all parties have a major responsibility
to contribute to the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
process and that the Joint Military Commission
has a role in this respect, in cooperation with
MONUC.

"The Security Council takes note of the
reinforcement of the MONUC presence in
Kisangani and reiterates its demand that the city
be demilitarized, in accordance with its relevant
resolutions. In this regard, it also stresses the
importance of the full reopening of the Congo
River, including to commercial traffic, and calls
on all parties to cooperate in this regard.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the persistent human rights violations, in
particular in the east of the country, and calls on
all parties to put an end to these violations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.
