Mr. Zoumanigui (Guinea) (spoke in French):
First, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
welcome you, Mr. President, and say how pleased we
are that you are presiding over our work on the
question before us. I would also like to thank
Mr. Guehenno for his briefing, which sheds new light
on recent developments in Kosovo.

The constant attention the Council has dedicated
to the question of Kosovo emanates from its will and
determination to make a contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

At the Council's meeting on 21 January 2002, my
delegation welcomed the progress made in
implementing that resolution over the course of the
prior year. That progress included, among other things:
the promulgation of the Constitutional Framework; the
signing, on 5 November 2001, of a common document
between the Government of the former Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK); the
successful legislative elections held on 17 November
2001; and the establishment, on 10 December 2001, of
the Kosovo Assembly, along with the election of the
Assembly's President.

Two years later, it should be noted that that
progress has been followed up by other, equally
important, advances, even though serious concerns still
remain, including the effective establishment of
political and administrative institutions in Kosovo;
high-level meetings between UNMIK representatives
and the Belgrade authorities, particularly the one held
on 21 January 2002 on the question of missing,
detained or repatriated persons; the conversion of
transitional departments into provisional self-
government ministries; the expansion of the UNMIK
administration into the northern part of Mitrovica; the
gradual transfer of powers to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government; and the holding of
municipal elections.

My delegation is pleased with the progress made
so far and we consider that it is now up to all the
participants and all sectors in Kosovo to come together
and consolidate their efforts in a spirit of tolerance and
unity, so that they can assume their responsibilities in
the search for adequate solutions to the issues that
remain unresolved.

A recent evaluation of the situation in Kosovo
leads my delegation to make the following
observations. The leaders of the democratic Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must act in strict
compliance with the powers given to them under the
Constitutional Framework. In that regard, we support
the position taken by Mr. Holkeri following the
Assembly's 11 September 2003 decision to abrogate all
laws relative to Kosovo enacted in Yugoslavia and
Serbia after 22 March 1989. Kosovar leaders have to
make greater efforts towards reconciliation, avoiding
any action that might deepen existing divisions, while
cooperating with UNMIK.

Particular attention should be paid to the media so
that they can function to increase public awareness
among the various communities. Developing
professional and independent media that will be better
able to assume their responsibilities will require
significant assistance.

In regard to the establishment of the rule of law,
the various murders that have occurred recently and the
attack on a World Bank delegation in the northern
sector of Mitrovica on 6 December demonstrate that
security continues to be an issue of real concern. My
delegation appreciates the special security measures
taken by the multinational forces and the local units,
following information received concerning possible
attacks against international organizations in Kosovo.
In that regard, we would like to emphasize once again
the need to consolidate existing mechanisms in order to
improve the operation of the police services, the justice
system and prisons, in order to facilitate equal access
to justice and to combat impunity.

On the question of freedom of movement and
maintaining the cultural heritage of each community,
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government should
focus their efforts on developing a culture of mutual
acceptance among the different communities.

In addition, the appointment of Mr. Nenad
Radosavljevic as a Senior Adviser to UNMIK on
repatriation and effective integration of ethnic
minorities and the setting up of a special group to
speed up the return of refugees and facilitate their
reintegration and the restitution of their property, are
welcome developments. Now we need to support those
mechanisms by giving them the necessary resources.
The input of the international community, in particular
the donor community, will be extremely useful in that
regard.

The same applies for housing and real estate
programmes. In that connection, the efforts of UNMIK
and the United Nations Development Programme,
which have facilitated the start of construction on 50
homes, should also be supported.

With respect to the economy, we must strengthen
the current legislative and administrative framework,
focus more attention on job creation and on the
regional dimension of economic exchanges, and define
the appropriate mechanisms to that end. My delegation
is pleased with the establishment by Mr. Holkeri of a
special group tasked with detecting possible fraudulent
and corrupt activities in UNMIK and in institutions that
operate on public money, and we hope that the work of
this group will provide definitive results. With respect
to the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, the
different parties must do some bold thinking to
continue to look for peaceful solutions to problems of
common concern for the benefit of their people and for
the region.

With respect to the Kosovo Protection Corps, my
delegation continues to emphasize that they must
maintain their legal status to avoid any ambiguity. In
this respect, we would encourage the actions taken by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force to better structure and
better operate this institution.

Settling the question of Kosovo requires the
international community, and particularly the
Kosovars, to better assume their responsibilities in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). My delegation is
pleased with the launching on 5 November 2003, in
Belgrade and Pristina, of a review mechanism, which
gives new impetus to implementation of standards
before status, and we therefore support the statement
made last Friday on this subject by the President of the
Security Council. We are of the view that the
implementation plan that Mr. Holkeri will be working
on in close collaboration with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and, if needed, with
other interested parties, will allow us to assess progress
made by the Institutions in satisfying these standards.

It is our hope that, based on progress made during
periodic assessments, that the comprehensive review in
2005 of progress made will allow us to chart future
strategies to resolve the Kosovo question, particularly
with respect to final status determination.

And finally, my delegation remains convinced
that bringing about lasting peace in Kosovo depends on
the ongoing commitment of all the Kosovars to ignore
their differences and their senseless quarrels and to
focus on questions of common concern so as to
promote the general welfare. Only that way can the
efforts of the international community in the province
succeed.

