Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): Let me begin by
welcoming the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), two of whom are also
officials of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I thank them for the reports that
they submitted (S/2014/350, annex, and S/2014/313, annex), which we studied with great attention.

At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation of the acknowledgement of the continued
high level of cooperation of the Republic of Serbia
with the ICTY that the President and the Prosecutor
mentioned in their reports. A partial testimony to that
is the fact that there are no remaining fugitives and that
most of the 3,500 requests for assistance received from
the Office of the Prosecutor or the defence counsels
in accessing documents, archives and witnesses have
been processed, with only those of a more recent date
pending.

In that vein, I would like to express the commitment
of the new Government of Serbia to continuing that
successful cooperation with the ICTY and with the
International Residual Mechanism. We hope that the
remaining proceedings will be completed as planned,
in particular given the duration and problems in
completing certain cases, the length of detention of
some indictees and the delay in appeal judgements in
the cases of a number of sentenced persons.

Serbia is determined to make a contribution to
regional peace and reconciliation in the firm belief
that, to that end, the quest and respect for justice and
fairness are of vital importance. We consider that, in
that regard, regional cooperation is very important and
that it must continue to be a priority.

We would therefore like to point out that the
progress that has been achieved over the past year in
the field of regional cooperation by Serbia in trying war
crimes has been highlighted in the progress report on
Serbia by the European Commission for 2013. Overall,
82 new pieces of information and evidence have been
exchanged in cases of war crimes in the region, the
highest progress recorded in regional cooperation so
far. That cooperation is based on bilateral cooperation
protocols between the prosecutorial offices of Serbia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, as stated in the
reports.

I would like to make special mention of the
cooperation with the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, due to which six new indictments
have been raised. The cooperation in the exchange
of data, information and evidence is taking place in
38 cases of war crimes and other criminal offences
against international law through liaison officers in the
two prosecutorial offices. Similarly, the cooperation
with the State Attorney's Office of Croatia has been
improved and should lead to the identification of new
indictments. We are convinced that the new proceedings
for war crimes will bring justice to a great number of
victims.

To that end, the trying of war crimes within
national jurisdictions is of paramount importance.
In Serbia, the number of the cases tried in domestic

courts has increased considerably in the most recent
period. The assistance provided to national judicial
authorities by the Office of the Prosecutor for the
purpose of strengthening national capacities has been
very important. Special mention in this context should
be made of the European Union/ICTY training project
for national prosecutors and young professionals from
the former Yugoslavia.

As I stated at the previous Security Council debate
six months ago (see S/PV.7073), bearing in mind that
Serbia is firmly committed to cooperation with the
ICTY and the fact that 20 years have elapsed since its
establishment, my country attaches great importance
to the initiative that those convicted by the Tribunal
in The Hague be allowed to serve their sentences in
the States that emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. In that context, let me recall that, since
2009, Serbia has requested to sign such an agreement
with the ICTY and sought very actively to promote
the initiative all along. Its officials have written to the
United Nations and the ICTY on a number of occasions
yet, regrettably, no progress has been made due to the
fact that this question continues to be determined by
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council of May 1993, which states that the
enforcement of sentences should take place outside the
territory of the former Yugoslavia.

Without prejudging the recommendation of the
Secretary-General and bearing in mind President
Meron's statement in his report to the effect that the
International Residual Mechanism is actively working
to secure additional agreements to increase its
enforcement capacity and welcomes the cooperation
of States in that regard, Serbia would appreciate an
opportunity to sign such an agreement.

Let me repeat that the results of the cooperation
with the ICTY over the years indicate that my country
takes this question seriously and that it is ready to
accept international supervision of the enforcement
of sentences and to provide all necessary guarantees.
Let me also recall that the Republic of Serbia signed,
on 20 January 2011, an agreement on the enforcement
of criminal sentences with the International Criminal
Court. Under the agreement, persons convicted before
the Court for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide may serve their sentences in Serbia. My
country has been the first country in South-East Europe
to sign such an agreement, with the United Kingdom,
Austria, Belgium, Denmark and Finland being the only
ones that did so before it.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
readiness of Serbia for, and its interest in, addressing the
question of the ICTY archives. We advised the Security
Council of our official position on the matter in October
2008. My country is ready to participate actively in all
future discussions and to continue to cooperate with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
this question. Also, as in the past, Serbia is ready to
fulfil its obligations resulting from cooperation with
the ICTY and the International Residual Mechanism.

Let me conclude by expressing my country's
satisfaction concerning the progress made in the
establishment of the operational capacities of the branch
of the International Residual Mechanism in The Hague

over the past year. A successful commencement of
work is of key importance to the implementation of the
mission of the ICTY in accordance with its mandate, in
particular in enabling the continued work of national
judiciary in prosecuting war crimes. The international
judicial system has a key role to play in the process
and is duty-bound to make a contribution through full
respect for international norms, human rights and the
right to a fair hearing and defence. Let me point out
once again that Serbia is committed to regional peace,
stability and reconciliation.

