Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): We thank
you, Sir, for allowing us to participate and share our
views on the important issue of strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU), at
today's open meeting. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. My delegation is also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his statement and participation in this
meeting.

Our appreciation also goes to Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union operations,
for introducing his important report (S/2008/813), and
we hope that he will continue to accompany the
process to its logical conclusion.

Today, the need to strengthen and enhance the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations remains more important than ever before
because we are seeing an increased reliance on regional
organizations in addressing and resolving some of the
conflicts facing us. We are encouraged to note that,
over the years, the cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU has improved. The recent
partnership between the United Nations and the AU in
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur is testimony to the fact that
United Nations cooperation and partnership with
regional organizations are crucial.

In addition, we commend the decision of the
Security Council to adopt a resolution approving the
proposals to strengthen and provide support to the

09-2716]
African Union Mission in Somalia. We hope that
positive development will lead to greater and more
systematic cooperation and partnership.

Notwithstanding the need for enhanced
cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, that cooperation
does not seek to absolve the Security Council of its
Charter-mandated responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, the
Security Council remains the main international body
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. South
Africa believes strongly that we should coordinate our
collective security efforts under the auspices of United
Nations. It is for this reason that, during its tenure as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, South
Africa focused on the important question of the
enhancement of the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union.

Among others, resolution 1809 (2008) recognizes
the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing regional organizations
when they undertake peacekeeping under United
Nations authority. Furthermore, the said resolution
welcomed the Secretary-General's proposal to establish
an African Union-United Nations panel to consider in
depth the modalities of how to support peacekeeping
operations.

South Africa welcomes the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel on modalities for support
to African Union operations. We also commend the
tireless efforts of Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the
panel and other members of the panel, in preparing the
report. As noted in paragraph 4 of the report, the panel
consulted as widely as possible with the United
Nations, the African Union and other relevant
interlocutors.

South Africa welcomes the bold
recommendations contained in the report of the panel.
It should, however, be noted that those
recommendations reflect a work in progress and do not
provide conclusive answers on ensuring necessary,
sustainable and predictable resources for African
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the African
Union.

My delegation welcomes the panel's
recommendations, in particular in paragraph 90 of the

report relating to the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions. The issue of the funding of regional
peacekeeping operations remains central to enhancing
and streamlining the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union. We believe that this
recommendation is the first important step towards
addressing the most important constraints that limit
Africa's capacity to resolve conflicts on our continent.

For its part, the AU remains committed to
resolving African conflicts. The operationalization of
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Continental
Early Warning System, post-conflict reconstruction and
development and the Panel of the Wise and the African
Standby Force are clear indications of that resolve and
the basic framework for addressing peace and security
on the continent. However, that commitment is not
matched by the resources at its disposal. For its part,
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
should augment its efforts in a concrete manner.

The issue of capacity-building is equally
important. My delegation concurs with the argument
raised by the panel on the importance of enhancing the
institutional capacity of the AU. We believe that any
efforts aimed at improving that area should build on
existing mechanisms. In that context, we commend the
ongoing efforts by various stakeholders aimed at
providing support to the AU in the area of capacity-
building. In particular, my delegation would like to
acknowledge the continuing pivotal role that the
European Union, through the new African Peace
Facility, is playing in enhancing the early response
mechanism of the African-led mediation and peace
support operations.

My delegation fully supports the panel's view
that its recommendations are only an initial phase in a
long-term process of developing and supporting the
AU's own capacity. In that regard, South Africa
endorses the panel's recommendation that a joint
African Union-United Nations team should be
established to examine the detailed modalities to
support the recommendations made in the report. We
would also like to say that we share the views of the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Lamamra, and thank him for being here.

In conclusion, we are pleased that the Security
Council will adopt a presidential statement that
contains language addressing common and mutual
challenges and opportunities facing both the United

Nations and the AU. For its part, South Africa supports
that statement but also lends its support to the common
endeavours aimed at further enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular. We therefore hope that the Secretary-
General will continue his efforts in that direction.

