Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): As mentioned by
earlier speakers, Haiti has seen significant political
developments in recent months, most notably in the
holding of legislative, presidential and municipal
elections in August and October.

I wish to express my appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore for
her briefing, to which we listened intently, and to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/225). Malaysia
believes that the Council's discussion today is important
in enabling us to take stock of the developments in
Haiti with a View to assisting the country in charting
its future course.

While welcoming the recent holding of elections
in Haiti, my delegation notes that they were beset
by a number of challenges, including the repeated
postponement of presidential elections and allegations
of fraud and vote manipulation. Other challenges, such
as low voter turnout and the general insecurity felt by
the population during the voting exercise and during the
period immediately afterwards, show a lack of political
space for all. Against that background, we commend
the initiative of the Provisional Electoral Council in
having taken certain proactive measures for the October
round of elections. In the light of the lessons learned
from the August round, former President Martelly's
establishment of the Independent Electoral Evaluation
Commission is also commendable. Looking ahead,
we believe that a revitalized and newly reconstituted
Provisional Electoral Council, free from allegations of
bias or manipulations, could contribute positively to the
conclusion of the current electoral cycle. The ability
to organize the next round of elections in a peaceful,
transparent and inclusive manner would certainly help
to restore public confidence in Haitian State institutions
and democracy in the country.

Malaysia commends the Haitian National Police
for its role in maintaining peace and security during
the election process. The fact that the police and
military of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) were only requested to step in
on a few occasions is testament to the national police's
competence. Undoubtedly, the professionalism and
impartiality shown by the national police must be further
encouraged and enhanced with a view to cementing the
population's trust. We also pay tribute to MINUSTAH,
especially its police and military components, for
its important role in providing the broader security
blanket during the tense election period. In the light
of the political developments, Malaysia welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendations for a strategic
assessment of the future presence and role of the United
Nations in Haiti, which should commence after the
inauguration of the new President.

While regretting that the presidential elections
were not concluded by the 7 February deadline,
we are nevertheless optimistic that the provisional
Government, led by Jocelerme Privert and Prime
Minister designate Fritz Alphonse Jean, will be able
the conclude the third electoral round within the agreed
timelines. In reaffirming support for a Haitian-led
and Haitian-owned road map for the swift conclusion
of the current electoral cycle, Malaysia believes that
both the President and the Prime Minister-designate
have a critical role to play in bridging differences and
in galvanizing broad support and consensus across the
spectrum of the political class and the wider public
in moving the political process forward. In noting
that a large portion of elections to the legislature has
been completed, my delegation notes that no woman
candidates were elected to either chamber of the
legislature. We encourage the Government and the
Haitian political establishment to reflect seriously on
this and to consider taking the appropriate measures to
ensure that women's voices are adequately represented.

We are encouraged by the ongoing efforts of the
Haitian authorities and the United Nations in the
surveillance, rapid-alert and coordinated response to
the cholera epidemic, which has seen the lowest rate
since its outbreak in 2010. On a related note and in
the interest of achieving closure and justice for the
victims, we would encourage greater engagement by
the Secretariat with those victims, particularly on the
issue of possible remedies and compensations, where
appropriate. It is important for the continuing credibility
of and respect for the United Nations as a whole that
the Secretary-General exercise and demonstrate
leadership on this issue, including by responding to the
letter of allegations from the Human Rights Council
special procedures.

On the human rights situation of children in
Haiti, our attention is drawn to the situation of some
200,000 children who are vulnerable to exploitation
and to physical, emotional and sexual abuse through
the practice of restavek. We call upon the Haitian
authorities to address this issue and to possibly consider
and implement the recommendations of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child.

Finally, Malaysia reiterates its appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore for her leadership and to the entire MINUSTAH
team for their sustained and exemplary contributions
in leading the United Nations and the international
community's support for Haiti.

