The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

We thank Joint Special Representative Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo for his briefing and take this opportunity
to commend the work he is doing together with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

First, we welcome the report of continued stability
in Darfur, and the fact that the security situation
continued to improve during the reporting period, as
well as the decrease in clashes among communities. We
therefore commend the great efforts being made by the
Government of the Sudan to that end. We highlight the
decision of both the Government and the armed groups,
including that led by Adbul Wahid, to unilaterally extend
the ceasefire in the areas of operations until the end of
this year, and we hope that this will be an important
step towards achieving a permanent ceasefire.

Similarly, we believe that this scenario allows us
to focus on addressing the root causes of the conflict
and to move towards building sustainable peace. To that
end, we need to strengthen the rule of law in Darfur,
promote institutional capacity and the rule of law, and
secure funding for activities that contribute to recovery
and development in the area.

With regard to the proposed benchmarks, we
underscore the way in which the Secretariat has worked
on them. It is important that they be agreed with the
Government, taking into account the provisions of
resolution 2429 (2018) with regard to UNAMID's exit by
2020.Mycountryagreesthatwemustcomplywithcertain
parameters for the Mission's exit, but those must have
realistic deadlines. We also emphasize that it is essential
to have adequate funding to support the Government's
efforts, and we therefore call for international
cooperation to that end.

With regard to the political situation, we welcome
the communique of the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 19 September, in which it
announced its decision to consider taking measures
against those who obstruct the negotiations and called
on those actors to join the peace process by December,
at the latest. We encourage the Security Council to
support the communique and to take decisions along
the same lines.

We recognize the efforts of the Government,
the members of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and UNAMID to promote
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. We also stress the need to redouble our
efforts to resolve the remaining differences on the Doha
Document for Peace. We call on the non-signatory
movements to participate constructively in the dialogue
with the Government so as to bring about a definitive
cessation of hostilities.

We emphasize that the only possible solution
to the situation in Darfur is a political process that
addresses the root causes of the conflict, primarily the
disputes over natural resources and land ownership. We
welcome the work of United Nations programmes and
entities to review the progress made on issues related to
land ownership, as it is key to resolving disputes among
internally displaced persons and enabling their safe,
dignified and voluntary return to their places of origin.

The humanitarian situation remains one of the
most important challenges. The living conditions faced
by internally displaced persons are a matter of great
concern. We must therefore ensure unhindered access
to UNAMID and humanitarian workers in order to
meet local needs. Mine action, in particular the removal
of explosive remnants ofwar, is critical to guaranteeing
the safe return of internally displaced persons and the
mission's secure operation.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need to create
financing mechanisms to prevent the resurgence
of the conflict. The support and cooperation of the
international community will be fundamental to
promoting sustainable development in Darfur, building
the capacity of the United Nations country team and
ensuring the successful withdrawal of UNAMID.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

