Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We have closely reviewed the fifteenth report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/3 60), which was prepared
by Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
In that regard, we would like to acknowledge that, at
long last and with some reluctance, Ms. Zerrougui
has focused on a small number of facts related to the
recruitment of children by the terrorists of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups that have killed, slaughtered
and dismembered children in the Syrian Arab Republic
for more than five years now. In order to set the record
straight, we would like to make the following remarks.

First, the report does not reveal, in its research and
narrative, the main reason for the suffering of children
and girls in my country, which is largely due to the
systematic spread of the extremist Wahhabi Saudi
ideology, consolidated by the House of Saud when, in
the eighteenth century, it adopted the practices of the
pervert Muhammad ibn Abd Al-Wahhab in killing,
slaughtering and invading and in enslaving women.
These perverted practices of Muhammad ibn Abd
Al-Wahhab has have now reached the gates of Muscat
and Karbala.

The whole world was shocked by the video of the
horrendous slaughter of a Palestinian child, Abdullah
Issa, who sat wounded and dazed while surrounded
by human beasts belonging to a genetically modified
opposition group some people consider to be moderate.
The child was slaughtered in accordance with the
Wahhabi ISIL sense of legitimacy that allowed them to
commit this disgusting crime.

But this crime is a genetically modified crime.
The Nour Al-Din Al-Zenki group, a group of moderate
thieves originating from Turkey that was described by
the United States Ambassador at a previous meeting as
consisting of"rebel fighters", as the Council will recall,
is a terrorist group that follows the perverted Wahhabi
intellectual way of thinking and receives financial
and arms support from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Western
Powers and the Erdogan regime; it is this group that
committed this "moderate" criminal act.

The conscience of the world has come to recognize
how these Wahhabi regimes facilitated the murder
of the innocent children killed in cold blood in the
Al-Zara massacre, which was carried out by armed
groups in a village in the rural area of Hama a few
months ago, as well as other massacres perpetrated
in Syria. These regimes had a contract with the Devil
himself to implement a bloody programme that has
killed innocent children in Syria and Iraq in front of
schools and hospitals. These regimes were responsible
for the drowning of the Syrian child Aylan on the
Turkish coast of the Mediterranean, and for the deaths
of hundreds of children following the aerial bombing
by the international alliance led by the United States of
America in the city of Manbij, in a rural area of Aleppo.

The Military Operations Centre in Amman, which
includes intelligence services representing the United
States of America, France, Turkey, Qatar, Jordan, Israel
and Saudi Arabia, has now mobilized some 7,000 to
9,000 fighters on our borders inside Jordan. They intend
to launch this barbarous moderate opposition on our
southern border with Jordan in order for it to commit
crimes against our children, destroy our infrastructure
and attack the Syrian army. If this were taking place
in any other State, would the Council have called these
demagogues "the moderate armed opposition", or
would they have dealt with them as thugs?

Secondly, the report fails to refer to the suffering
of children in refugee camps in neighbouring countries,
which is a critical issue. In this regard, we cannot
but express our deep concern at the ongoing rape of
children and the emergence of the phenomenon of the
human slave trade in camps in Turkey and Lebanon.
We are also deeply saddened at the new phenomenon
of the trade in the human organs of these children, not
to mention the rape and sexual harassment of Syrian
children and women. The trade in organs in Turkish
refugee camps such as the Nizip camp was reported by
the Turkish mass media.

The Turkish newspaper BirGiin published a story
about the rape of 30 Syrian children ranging in age
between 8 and 12. In addition, youth and children
are recruited to join terrorist groups. On 5 June 2016,
The New York Times published an article entitled "In
Turkey, a Syrian child 'has to work to survive'". Instead
of receiving education in a classroom, such children
work hard all day long in textile mills. More than
1 million Syrian children live in Turkey, and thousands
of them, unable to read or write, work in sweatshops
and factories.

A few days ago, in the Rukban refugee camp in
Jordan, two children died because of the difficult
conditions there, including lack of health care and
polluted water. The cause of death of one of them, who
was 10 months old, was yellow fever, as a result of
polluted water.

Thirdly, we stress the demand that Ms. Zerrougui's
team investigate the fate of the hundreds of children
abducted by elements of the terrorist Army of Islam,
Liwa' al-Tawhid units and the Free Syrian Army
in the areas of Damascus, Aleppo and Latakia. We
reiterate the appeal made to the Security Council and
Ms. Zerrougui's Office to determine the whereabouts
of those children. We provided Ms. Zerrougui with
electronic sites documenting cases of the recruitment
of children by what is known as the Al-Nusra Front and
the Saudi terrorist Abdullah Al-Muhaysini, and a tweet
by the Saudi terrorist ideologue Mohammed Al-Arifi in
which he addressed the moderate opposition. We also
call on the Office of Ms. Zerrougui to provide us with
the names of the five Syrian children who, according to
the report, were recruited by Government forces into
popular committees. So far we have not received any
information in this regard.

We reiterate the same question to Ms. Zerrougui's
team: why did the authors of the report fail to refer to
the forced economic measures imposed on the Syrian
people, further tightening the noose that is suffocating
children in Syria?

Fourthly, the report totally ignores the suffering,
anxiety and terror of Syrian children in the occupied
Syrian Golan as a result of the occupation force's
practices, such as the siege and torture of the Syrian
population and its consequent ill effects on children.
The Israeli occupation forces put an infant under
house arrest in the occupied city of Majdal Shams.
His father was a student at Damascus University,
and his wife, from the Golan, gave birth to her child
in Damascus. When both of them returned after the
husband graduated from Damascus University, the
Israeli occupation forces arrested the infant, who was
only a year and three months old at the time, and put
him under house arrest for two years. This story has not
been heard by Ms. Zerrougui.

Furthermore, the Israeli curriculum is imposed on
Syrian children in the occupied Golan; they are being
exploited economically, which affects their growth
and overall health. In addition, 50 children in the
occupied Syrian Golan have fallen victim to the more
than 2 million mines planted by the Israeli occupation
forces. Again, Ms. Zerrougui failed to hear this story.

Nor can we ignore the moral scandal represented
by the failure of the Secretary-General to include
the facts in Ms. Zerrougui's report with regard to the
crimes committed by Saudi Arabia against the children
of Yemen. Over 953 children were killed and over 1,168
children were injured before the report was published.
Representatives are undoubtedly familiar with the
political exploitation practiced by the Saudi delegation
when they threatened the Secretary-General with using
financial pressure and withholding financial assistance
to United Nations specialized agencies.

All those who have shed tears before you,
Mr. President, today over the plight of the Syrian
children play a major part in the killing of Syrian
children, adults and civilians. Many who spoke about
my country in their statements are actually primary
partners in killing our population. They shed tears for
Aleppo, Idlib and are partners in those crimes. Now
they are farming the flames of action against Syria from
the borders of Jordan. This is a crime par excellence.

