Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Let me join others in commending your
delegation for convening this debate and for the
instructive concept note (S/2010/ 167) distributed to
facilitate this discussion. We are grateful for and
welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate,
and we thank the Secretary-General and all those who
have put forward recommendations that we believe will
greatly enhance our consideration of this issue.

Many post-conflict reconstruction efforts tend to
follow a common path, establishing a semblance of a
functioning administration, providing security and
economic recovery in order to create prosperity, and
empowering citizens to take ownership in democratic
governance. However, despite these similarities, we
should remember that each situation is unique to its
own specific historical context. Allow me therefore to
make the following points in contribution to this
debate.

To realize effective peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries, emphasis should be placed on national
ownership. Post-conflict needs are evident, and
peacebuilding plays a significant role in mitigating and
addressing those needs. As such, peacebuilding should
be given adequate and appropriate support in the form
of human and financial resources.

The creation of an effective and efficient
peacebuilding architecture is crucial to conducting and
operationalizing peacebuilding mandates. It is equally
important to have a mechanism for mutual
accountability that monitors the commitments of all
actors.

Post-conflict management should avoid leaving a
vacuum that could lead to a recurrence of violence. If
peacebuilding is to fill the gap, there must be effective
coordination among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Peacebuilding should involve the formulation
of an exit strategy and should avoid perpetual
dependency.
We are encouraged by the leadership the German
delegation brings to the PBC and, in particular, by the
focused approach on those issues, which we believe
will make the Peacebuilding Commission perform
better.

In conclusion, if there is any lesson to be learned
from Rwanda's reconstruction experience, it is that
there is a need to understand the root causes of conflict
and to address them, using universal values that
incorporate home-grown solutions.

