Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing, which has provided a useful update on the
issues identified in the report on the Security Council's
mission to Kosovo and Belgrade in mid-June.

National reconciliation, economic reconstruction
and the preparations for elections are all part of the
process which we hope will lead to a stable and multi-
ethnic Kosovo. In this regard, Mr. Guehenno has
rightly emphasized that the activities of pillar 1 and
increased cooperation between the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) provide a basis for
improving law and order and security for all the people
of Kosovo. My delegation also attaches importance to
the development of a sound working relationship
between UNMIK and the Belgrade authorities, as key
to the full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

At our briefing last month we encouraged
UNMIK to continue to focus on the implementation of
initiatives that would provide for greater protection of
the minority communities, encourage the participation
of these communities in the political process and
facilitate a greater return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. It is clear that the problem of
missing persons continues to be an issue that causes
anxiety for the people of Kosovo and one that hinders
our progress towards reconciliation. We are therefore
pleased to hear that the Contact Group is now meeting
on a fortnightly basis, and we can only hope that the
efforts aimed at locating missing persons and the
identification of missing persons after exhumation will
add to the climate of stability. We are pleased that
UNMIK police are about to begin work on the
exhumation of grave sites, and we urge the speedy
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
signed between UNMIK and the International
Commission on Missing Persons to begin DNA testing
on unidentified bodies. We support the work of the
forensic experts, and we hope that more will be sent by
those countries which are able to assist in this
important work.

Secondly, on the issue of refugee returns, we
agree with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General that successful and sustainable returns require
a safe and secure environment with an acceptable level
of freedom of movement for returnees. They also
require inter-ethnic dialogue among political and
community leaders to build confidence among
communities and a substantial commitment of
resources by the international community. We therefore
feel that reconciliation efforts must coincide with those
aimed at economic reconstruction and the creation of a
viable and sustainable economic basis in Kosovo.

The issue of property sales is also essential in
ensuring the peaceful coexistence of ethnic groups in
Kosovo. We have read reports of the sale of minority
housing, and it has been indicated that this appears to
be a guise for ethnic cleansing. We support the steps
being taken by UNMIK to address this problem and
welcome the draft regulation on the registration of
contracts for the sale of real property in specific
geographic areas of Kosovo. We hope that this
regulation will halt what is perceived as unfair
treatment of vulnerable communities.

The conflict in the neighbouring former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia also continues to have an
impact on the situation in Kosovo. Mr. Guehenno
reported that some 62,000 refugees from the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remain in Kosovo,
while some 12,000 have returned to their home
country. We certainly hope that this situation will be
stabilized. It is one which requires close watching by
the Council.

On the situation of law and order, my delegation
is appreciative of the efforts of UNMIK to improve law
and order and reduce crime and violence. The reports
of UNMIK's recent discovery of more caches of
military weapons and ammunition is something that my
delegation is very concerned about. We believe that it
is important that UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) continue their disarmament efforts and their
monitoring of the borders. With the consolidation of
pillar I and other initiatives highlighted by
Mr. Guehenno, we hope that additional progress will be
made to interdict weapons.

In closing, I wish to inform the Council, in my
capacity as Chairperson of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1160, that the Committee has
taken steps to send a formal request to KFOR to
regularly provide detailed information, including that
pertaining to the origin, type and quantity of weapons
seized, in order to enable the Committee to pursue any
possible violations. We look forward to receiving the
cooperation promised by KFOR during the Security
Council's mission last month.

