Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their
briefings. By the way, at the outset I would like to take
advantage of this opportunity to ask Mr. Lowcock
where the United Nations is getting its evidence and
data on deaths in Damascus, for instance. According
to the Syrian authorities' information, for example, just
since 22 January, 12 people have died in Damascus,
while the United Nations figure is 11 for the whole
month. Where is he getting his information from? The
White Helmets, maybe?

Today, as has been usual recently, the United States
delegation devoted its statement to Russia. It told us that
it knew what we were going to say today, which it does
not. And I am pleased about that, because it means that
it did not see our statement before the meeting began.

On 24 January, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2401 (2018), in an important decision
aimed at improving the humanitarian situation in Syria,
especially in areas where the danger of military clashes
remains or there are obstacles of one kind or another to
the civilian population's access to essential assistance.
Today many questions have been asked - emphatic
questions, rhetorical questions, questions aimed
directly at us. We answered the questions asked of us
during our discussion at the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018). There are a lot of people here who like to pick
citations from the resolution that they like and forget
the ones that do not suit them. IfI may, I will quote two
extracts from it, from paragraph 1 and paragraph 10.
(spoke in English)

"Demands that all parties cease hostilities
without delay, and engage immediately to ensure full
and comprehensive implementation of this demand
by all parties, for a durable humanitarian pause for
at least 30 consecutive days throughout Syria, to
enable the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery
of humanitarian aid and medical evacuations".

"[U]nderscores the need for the parties to agree on
humanitarian pauses, days oftranquillity, localized
ceasefires and truces to allow humanitarian
agencies safe and unhindered access to all affected
areas in Syria".

(spoke in Russian)

Has everyone read the resolution? We have said,
and we will say it again, that any sustained pause must
be preceded by an agreement between the parties on
de-escalation. The demands that military activity end
overnight are either the result of a misunderstanding of
the realities or a deliberate exploitation of this human
tragedy. The statement by the United States delegation
simply rewrote resolution 2401 (2018). What sort of
joint effort, such as the Permanent Representative of
France called for today, can we talk about in these
circumstances after what we heard today in the United
States delegation's statement? Russia has announced
the establishment in eastern Ghouta of daily five-hour
humanitarian pauses. Everything possible is being done
to ensure that they function successfully. Specifically,
medical and temporary accommodation posts have
been equipped, ambulance teams organized, motor
transport provided. We call on the United Nations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other recognized humanitarian organizations to join
these efforts.

However, on the very first day, the militias took
advantage of the announcement of the pause to go on
the offensive. The same thing happened on the second
day. The mortar shelling continued, including in the
humanitarian operations corridors. Not a single person
was able to leave the danger area. We took note of
the relevant letters submitted on behalf of the illegal
armed groups. We were told previously that the most
convenient way of informing Council members about
them was being sought. It has been found and it is
indeed highly original - directly through the work
e-mail addresses of all the political coordinators,
meaning that someone deliberately sent the relevant
contact information to dubious individuals from the
ranks of the radical Syrian opposition. It is very similar
to the situation that occurred when information about
the closed negotiations on humanitarian resolutions
became available to Western media agencies.

However, we hope that the opposition leaders are
serious and that their deeds will match their words. We
are expecting clear guarantees in that regard from the
militias' foreign sponsors, many of whom are seated
around this table. The first thing that is needed is a
definitive repudiation of the terrorist organizations.
It has to be understood that terrorists continue to be
a legitimate target of military operations, and we will
not stand on ceremony with them. Overall, we have to
decide on the most effective way to neutralize Jabhat
Al-Nusra in eastern Ghouta. Why can't some members
show a willingness to cooperate on that issue? Or do
they not want to?

The information background to this issue is
overheated to the point of no return. If we had not
adopted resolution 2401 (2018), it is difficult even to
imagine what the Western media outlets would have
made of it or how they would have portrayed Russia.
But even now, when the resolution has been adopted,
our Western partners act as if everything in it pertains
solely to Damascus and Russia, and that its successful
implementation depends almost entirely on the will of
our two countries, while they, the self-styled champions
of humanity, somehow imagine that they have an
exclusive right to lecture us on the subject. In various
media outlets, especially American ones, there have
been false allegations that we mock the tragedy of this
war and the situation in eastern Ghouta, and that we say
that the campaign is exaggerated and fake.

I will ask these humanistic gentlemen once again:
Where were they when American aircraft blew Raqqa
off the face of the Earth? Where were the cries and
the hand-wringing? Months have passed since the
terrorists were banished from that city and yet it is still
uninhabitable. On top of that, there are new reports
of 24 civilian casualties from Coalition air strikes in
Deir ez-Zor province. Who are they - second-class
citizens? Or when innocent people die from democratic
bombs, is that somehow immaterial - perhaps even
honourable? We urge the United Nations ~ in fact, we
insist - to send an assessment mission to Raqqa as
soon as possible, and that the Coalition, which is in de
facto control of the area, give it all necessary support.
We also expect that instead of establishing quasi-
administrations in areas liberated from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, the Coalition leadership
will come up with a plan to turn them over to the central
authorities, in consideration of the Security Council's
repeated affirmations of Syria's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That would be a great deal more
constructive than the relentless quest to find what is a
non-existent basis in international law for maintaining
its presence on Syrian territory.

If Council members have interesting ideas on
how to raise the profile of local Government and find
effective ways to rebuild the ethnic and religious
balance that existed before the war, they should present
them to the Syrians in the negotiations in Geneva and
let them decide the issues for themselves through the
mediation of the United Nations. We also demand that
the Coalition open humanitarian access to the territory
it is occupying around the Al-Tanf military base in
order to bring aid to the residents of the Rukban camp
as soon as possible. By the way, that is also a provision
of resolution 2401 (2018).

It is not for nothing that we keep saying that
what is going on is painfully reminiscent of the
situation in eastern Aleppo when the West unleashed
a wave of monstrous anti-Russian hysteria. We are
the only country being asked to implement resolution
2401 (2018). We are being criticized for instituting
humanitarian pauses. Some claim that there are not
enough of them. Demands, demands, demands. For
some reason, someone is always bossily demanding
something of Russia. Britain's Foreign Secretary has
altogether decided that he is the prosecutor who is
threatening to punish our country. Apparently, he called
for today's meeting to be convened. He said so himself.

The Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic is making daily
and hourly efforts to achieve a cessation of hostilities,
establish humanitarian pauses and ease the suffering
of civilians. May I ask what other members have done
to implement resolution 2401 (2018)? Has even one of
their countries lifted a finger? Have they brought their
influence to bear on those whom they consider the
moderate opposition? Have they persuaded them to lay
down their weapons and stop taking hostages?

The hugely complex issue that the Syrian conflict
represents is being used for unscrupulous purposes. The
rivers of tears roll down only when the next stronghold
where militias and terrorists mingle is threatened, at

which point an unheard-of level of action kicks in. The
real aim is the regime, as some members like to refer to
the lawful Syrian authorities. Any hint of its success in
fighting terrorism on its own territory is a thorn in their
side. They are ready to use any means to stop it.

This is a warning. We know about the chemical
evidence being fabricated in order to blame Damascus.
We know about the meetings on the subject, where they
are being held and who is taking part in them. Today
we once again heard unsubstantiated allegations about
the Syrian Government's use of chemical weapons.
I am tired of asking if members understand the
futility of Damascus using chemical weapons from
both a military and a political point of view, and the
completely believable probability of militias using
chemical provocations. I think they do understand
it perfectly, but they persist in seeking an excuse for
military intervention. United States officials, and the
head of the Foreign Office and others, have already
talked about military strikes against Syria, and it is
obvious where that intellectual activity is heading.
We urge everyone to stop the dirty tricks and join the
concerted efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation
in Syria by implementing the resolution we have just
adopted. We hope that the United Nations generally and
Mr. Lowcock personally, as Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, will rise to the occasion.

We have circulated a draft presidential statement
on the resolution's implementation. We have placed it
under the silence procedure until 1 p.m., and we call on
the Council to adopt it. We hope that there will be no
objections before one o'clock. I will take the liberty of
reading it out.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council, with reference to its
resolution 2401 (2018), urges all parties to implement
it and, to this end, further urges all armed groups and
all Member States with influence on them to ensure
the safety of the announced humanitarian corridors for
evacuation from eastern Ghouta. The Security Council
calls for the establishment of similar humanitarian
corridors in Al-Tanf and Rukban. The Security Council
requests the Secretary-General to expeditiously send a
mission to Raqqa to assess humanitarian needs there.

(spoke in Russian)

And by the way, we, like the other members of
the Security Council, believe that there can only
be a political solution to the Syrian conflict. We are
doing everything we can to achieve that, and certainly
somewhat more than those who have been spreading
fire and fury today. We propose, as we have always
proposed, that they join in these efforts, rather than
throw up road blocks in an attempt to serve their own
geopolitical agendas.

