Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like other Security Council members, we also wish to thank the Secretariat and all those involved in organizing this meeting. We thank Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his presentation of the Secretary- General's report on the Mission (S/2020/603) and for his briefing on the implementation of the obligations under the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the situation in the country, which, like others, could not escape the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We also welcome the traditional participation in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. We also listened with great interest to the compelling assessments of Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega. We expect that, as the epidemiological situation in Colombia improves, Colombians will be catching up in all the areas where progress either faltered or slowed during the fight against COVID-19. As the Secretary- General's report rightly mentions, the country needs to make immediate progress on all tracks - from agricultural reforms to the political and socioeconomic reintegration of former combatants and ensuring their safety and security. The peace process in Colombia should not be put on hold. It is important to revitalize the dialogue among the various political parties as quickly as possible in order to facilitate mutual understanding on key issues relating to the country's future development and the reform process. We welcome the Colombian Government's declared commitment to the obligations under the peace agreement and fully share the Secretary- General's call to observe them. The Secretary-General and the Security Council see the peace agreement in the form in which it was signed over three years ago as the basis for a settlement. It has made possible broad international support for the Colombian peace process. We hope that all political forces in the country will demonstrate the necessary national ownership and focus on its implementation. We regret that the authorities of the country did not observe the unilateral ceasefire initiatives proposed, in line with the Secretary-General's call. We recallthat there can be no sustainable peace without the participation of all key forces, including the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional. We call on Bogota to promptly engage in a constructive dialogue with Havana and Oslo in order to settle the issue of the status of negotiators currently on the island. At the same time, it is imperative that the existing guarantee protocols be observed. I recall that Cuba hosts those individuals on its territory as part of its international mediator obligations. In conclusion, I would like to repeat that in the Council we have frequently called Colombia a showcase for effective international support. Today it needs to justify to that trust by becoming a showcase of national ownership. As a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia stands ready to continue to support the Colombian peace process provided that the Government is committed to fully implementing the final peace agreement. We trust that the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will continue to play a significant role in ensuring the reintegration of former members of armed groups into peaceful life and political activities.
