Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana: First of all,
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for inviting us to
address the Security Council on this important
question. I take this opportunity to commend the
Council for the significant amount of attention it
continues to devote to a number of issues of concern to
Africa.

Africa is fully seized of the complexity of the
situation in Zimbabwe. And, as we all witnessed, at the
recently concluded summit in Sharm el-Sheikh African
leaders shouldered their full responsibility to address
the issue within the context of efforts towards
strengthening democratic governance throughout the
continent. The African Union (AU) has been closely
monitoring and working on the situation in Zimbabwe,
together with the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). It is in that context that key
components of the African Union such as the
Pan-African Parliament, SADC as the subregional
organization concerned and the AU Commission have
all been closely engaged and have deployed various
efforts towards the preparation and observation of the
election in Zimbabwe. The efforts made so far have
included the deployment of almost 1,000 election
observers from various bodies within the continent and
the active involvement of leaders such as President
Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, former President
Kabbah of Sierra Leone, who leads the African Union
observation team for the election, and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping.
Furthermore, both the Executive Council of the
African Union and the Assembly of 53 countries' heads
of State or Government devoted serious attention to the
question during the summit in Sharm el-Sheikh. A
resolution was issued, by which the Assembly
expressed its deep concern at the prevailing situation in
Zimbabwe. We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for drawing the attention of the Council to that
decision, to which various speakers have referred
today.

Considering the urgent need to prevent the further
worsening of the situation, and in order to avoid the
spread of conflict, with the consequent negative impact
on the country and the subregion, and further
considering the need to create an environment
conducive to democracy, the Assembly decided to
encourage President Robert Mugabe and the leader of
the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC),
Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai, to honour their commitment to
initiate dialogue with a view to promoting peace,
stability, democracy and the reconciliation of the
Zimbabwean people; to support the call for the creation
of a government of national unity; to support the
SADC facilitation; and to recommend that SADC
mediation efforts should be continued in order to
resolve the problems that are being faced. In that
regard, SADC should establish a mechanism on the
ground in order to seize the momentum for a
negotiated solution. The Assembly also decided to
appeal to States and all parties concerned to refrain
from any action that may have a negative impact on the
climate of dialogue.

The Assembly also expressed its conviction that,
in the spirit of all SADC initiatives, the people of
Zimbabwe will be able to resolve their differences and
08-41947

work together once again as one nation, provided they
receive undivided support from SADC, the African
Union and the world at large.

Today, we still wish to appeal to the Security
Council to lend its full support to the implementation
of that resolution of the African Union and to give the
region's current efforts a chance. SADC and the
African Union are working unrelentingly towards the
speedy resolution of the political crisis in Zimbabwe
and are working to facilitate reconciliation of the
Zimbabwean people.

Today, we, the African Union and SADC, also
need the full support and confidence of the
international community in assuming leadership in the
resolution of this African political crisis.

It is indeed because we are fully cognizant of the
seriousness of the situation in Zimbabwe that we, as
Africans, have assumed our full responsibility for
finding an acceptable and lasting political solution.

Finally, we believe that the support of the Council
for the decision of the African Union would be an
expression of solidarity with the entire African
community and, indeed, solidarity with the
Zimbabwean people.

