Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Kai Eide, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing, his excellent leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and his cooperation with the EU Special
Representative, Mr. Sequi. I would like to also extend
my thanks to Ambassador Tanin, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his contribution to
today's debate.

The EU commends the Secretary-General for his
recent comprehensive report on the UNAMA mission
in Afghanistan and the identification of priorities
(S/2009/135). The EU endorses the recommendations
on UNAMA and the strengthening of its central role in
coordinating the overall international efforts in close
cooperation with other partners, including the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
EU.

The EU also welcomes the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General will be submitted every three
months. Additionally, the EU fully supports the crucial

coordinating role of UNAMA and its head, Mr. Kai
Eide. In this regard, and due to the forthcoming
presidential and provincial elections, the EU supports
the extension of the UNAMA mandate for a further 12
months, as suggested by the Secretary-General in his
report.

The year 2009 will be crucial for Afghanistan and
for the engagement of the international community.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
challenging, with insurgents increasingly employing
asymmetric tactics and targeting civilians, Government
institutions, international aid organizations and non-
governmental organizations. Despite these challenges,
some important progress has been made, and the EU
reiterates its long-term commitment to working
towards a better future for Afghanistan and its people.

In this regard, we support efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan to reach out across the
political spectrum to build a broad-based political
settlement. Politically led solutions based on dialogue
and settlement are key to achieving a durable solution
in Afghanistan. The EU welcomes efforts by the
Government to bring disaffected Afghans into society's
mainstream.

Over the past year, we have seen progress in the
strengthening of the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police, the launch of the Afghan
National Development Strategy and positive
developments regarding economic and social
development. Nevertheless, the international
community needs to devote greater efforts to ensuring
better and more effective coordination of development
and reconstruction activities throughout the whole of
Afghanistan. Coordinated and effective support to the
build-up of the Afghan national security forces is a key
element. It is also of crucial importance to strengthen
Government institutions and actively combat
corruption. Even a legitimate Government will face
challenges with a weak State and poor governance.
There is no stability without sustainable governance.

While the narcotics trade still poses a continuing
cause for concern, the EU welcomes the fact that, after
reaching another record level in 2007, poppy
cultivation was in decline this past year and a further
decrease is expected in 2009. The prognosis of a 20 to
30 per cent decrease in opium production indicates a
potential increase in the number of poppy-free
provinces to 22. Also, the reinforced international
cooperation in controlling the chemical precursor
needed to produce heroin contributes to the fight
against drug trafficking. The EU also encourages the
Afghan Government, with the assistance of the
international community, to accelerate the
implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy,
including through alternative livelihood programmes.

The main challenges Afghanistan will face over
the next year are the forthcoming elections, which are
essential to further political development. It is
important that the elections reaffirm the Afghan
people's faith in their future. In this regard, we support
efforts by the Afghan Government to reach out across
the political spectrum to build a broad-based political
settlement.

The EU attaches the greatest importance to the
holding of free and inclusive elections in Afghanistan
and welcomes the confirmation of the date of
presidential and provincial elections by the
Independent Electoral Commission. It is now up to the
Afghan authorities, all the political parties and other
stakeholders to work for transparent, fair and credible
elections in order to ensure the legitimacy of the next
Government and provide it with a strong mandate.

EU Special Representative Sequi will continue to
monitor political and security developments, and the
EU is willing to work alongside the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and ISAF to support
elections across the country, including by providing
substantial financial assistance and, subject to security
and other conditions being met, through the
deployment of an electoral observation mission.
During the period from 22 May to the inauguration of
the next presidential term, stability, security and a
functioning Government must be ensured.

On behalf of the EU, I would like to underline its
continued engagement in Afghanistan, including
through the bilateral cooperation programmes of EU
member States and the European Commission
assistance strategy. The EU is looking urgently at how
to enhance and improve its engagement. The EU is the
second largest financial contributor. The collective
pledged contribution of the EU amounts to €8 billion
for reconstruction during the period 2001-2010. The
European Commission has pledged €700 million for
Afghanistan from 2007 to 2010, and member States
currently provide approximately half of ISAF troops.

The EU is strongly committed to the
improvement of Afghan State structures and has
channelled approximately 30 per cent of its assistance
budget through multi-donor trust funds, such as the
Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund and the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, which essentially
contribute to the reconstruction of the Afghan police
forces.

In the framework of its comprehensive approach
towards Afghanistan, the EU launched an EU police
mission in Afghanistan in mid-June 2007. The mission
includes contributions from non-member States
Norway, Canada, New Zealand and Croatia. The
mission aims at contributing to the establishment of
sustainable and effective civilian policing
arrangements under Afghan ownership and in
accordance with international standards. More
particularly, the mission monitors, mentors, advises
and trains at the level of the Afghan Ministry of
Interior, regions and provinces. The area of deployment
includes Kabul and some 15 provinces of Afghanistan.

The EU would like to reaffirm its long-term
commitment to contribute to peace, security and
development in line with its mandate, supporting the
development of the Afghan police under local
ownership. In this regard, it decided to significantly and
progressively increase the number of mission personnel
starting in December 2008, which will enable the
mission, on the basis of a renewed mandate, to
reinforce its activities in support of the Afghan National
Police and contribute to its reform. However, this will
require additional resources from contributing States.

The European Union is committed to the
improvement of governance and the rule of law in
Afghanistan and reiterates its commitment to capacity-
building in the justice and rule of law sectors. The fight
against corruption, impunity and human rights
violations, especially violence against women, is
central to good governance, and the European Union
looks to the Afghan authorities to uphold the
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of
Afghanistan and under international law. In this regard,
the European Union encourages UNAMA to pursue its
monitoring mandate, in particular with regard to the
human rights situation of women.

Regarding the grave humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan, the European Union welcomes the
strengthened presence of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan in
order to further improve humanitarian coordination.
The European Union underlines the importance of
freedom of expression and diverse media in
Afghanistan and, in this regard, calls upon the Afghan
Government to pass the media law approved by the
lower house of the parliament.

It is certain that stability and security in
Afghanistan are closely linked to overall regional
stability. The European Union strongly supports the
development of a coordinated approach at the regional
level and enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours against threats such as terrorism and
drug trafficking. The European Union calls upon the
neighbouring countries to constructively work together
to ensure sustainable development embedded in a
stable region.

Fostering stability in Afghanistan is in the interest
of all countries in the region and the wider
international community. In this respect, the European
Union welcomes the upcoming Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, to be held in
Islamabad, and the Outreach Session of the Ministerial
Meeting of the Group of Eight (G-8), to be held in
Trieste on 26 and 27 June 2009. The European Union
also welcomes the conference entitled "International
Conference on Afghanistan: a Comprehensive Strategy
in a Regional Context", to take place in The Hague on
31 March.

In closing my remarks, I would like to assure the
Council that the European Union will continue to play
an active role in supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation and coordination with other international
actors on the ground, including the United Nations.

