Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The
draft resolution before us does not deal with the Afghan
question or with political settlement in Afghanistan, but
rather with the question of the terrorism that stems from
the Afghan crisis. My delegation awaits with interest the
earliest possible discussion of this important question in
all its aspects because of its adverse effects on
international peace and security and, above all, due to the
fact that there is more than one State harbouring
individual terrorists or terrorist groups.

The presence of a few terrorists on Afghan territory
and the use of Afghanistan as a training centre for
terrorist acts is the responsibility of all Afghan factions,
albeit to differing degrees. If those factions were to be
convinced of the fact that there can be no military
solution to the war raging Afghanistan, then the war
would come to an end and peace and stability would be
restored. The rule of law would prevail and Afghanistan
would again be an active State member of the
international community.

In addition to the Afghan factions, States that
influence the internal situation in Afghanistan bear a great
responsibility for the continuation of the war and its
repercussions. Those States that provide assistance and
arms to the various Afghan factions have largely
contributed to the fuelling of this war and to its
escalation. They should have halted the flow of weaponry
to Afghanistan in order to avoid giving the false
impression that the Security Council has a double
standard in dealing with Afghanistan, particularly with
regard to the application of sanctions. Those States should
also have convinced the Afghan factions to disarm and to
turn to dialogue as the only way to resolve their
problems.

One of the repercussions of the continuing war in
Afghanistan is the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, which has been worsened by recent natural
disasters in that country. This is why we have to examine
the draft resolution before us very carefully due to certain
apprehensions regarding its possible negative effects on
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, at a time when
we certainly need to alleviate the suffering of the Afghan
people.

 

We have therefore worked together with other
delegations to ensure that this would not be the case in the
future. In this regard, we would like to thank the sponsors
of the draft resolution for having taking into account the
amendments submitted by Bahrain. Furthermore, we would
like to make sure that sanctions do not work to the
detriment of religious duties and rituals such as the Hajj
and the umra.

It is for these reasons that Bahrain will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.

