Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania align themselves
with this statement.

At the outset, like other speakers, I would like
to welcome my friend High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and to reassure him of our
continued support.

We are following developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with keen interest. We look forward to a
new spirit of engagement after the recent elections. I
must be frank in saying that a number of challenges
remain and that progress in political and economic
reforms has been too weak for too long. More needs
to be done to ensure that a united, stable, viable,
multi-ethnic and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina
can irreversibly move forward towards the European
Union. Fostering good-neighbourly relations with all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's neighbours and other
countries of the region is of vital importance in that
regard.

In that respect, a clear European Union perspective
is important. I would like to reiterate that today, in
particular after what we heard earlier. It is a strong and
unifying factor that is broadly shared among Bosnia and
Herzegovina's citizens and political forces, irrespective
of their ethnic or religious background. Ambassador
Colakovie underlined in her statement the importance
of that perspective for her country.

That perspective motivates reforms and provides
key incentives to achieving progress in the areas of
concern, as also repeatedly called for by the Council.
The European Union perspective is also part of the
broader international engagement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We therefore encourage Council members
to inspire Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leadership
to overcome internal divisions, ensure functionality
at all state levels and to undertake without delay the
reforms necessary to moving the country forward on its
European Union path.

On 12 October, Bosnia and Herzegovina held
presidential and general elections. We note the
good conduct of those elections. Now it is of utmost
importance that the country's institutions and
Governments at various levels be established as early
as possible and that they quickly begin their work
addressing the country's numerous challenges. As a
matter of particular priority, the leadership of Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs to focus on the social and
economic agenda. The urgency in that regard was
further increased in the aftermath to the devastating
floods that struck Bosnia and Herzegovina and other
countries of the region this year.

As also shown by the sudden and Violent public
protests earlier in 2014, a deteriorating socioeconomic
situation has the potential to undermine efforts in other
areas of engagement with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That is why we believe that the implementation of
measures outlined in the Compact For Growth and Jobs
initiative of the European Union, in close cooperation
with international financial institutions and partners,
would be a crucial step forward in that regard.

This brings me to another point. A gradual and far-
reaching improvement in the functionality of Bosnia and
Herzegovina institutions needs to move to the centre of
attention of the country's political leadership. A move
away from the current stalemate is a condition sine qua
non for ensuring the long-term stability and prosperity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Functionality is also key to
ensuring the compatibility of the country's institutional
set-up with the requirements of the European Union.

The EU High Representative and Vice-President of
the European Commission,FedericaMogherini,together
with Commissioner for European Neighbourhood,
Policy and Enlargement Negotiations Johannes Hahn,
in close collaboration with European Union member
Statea, will continue their broad and deep engagement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We shall also work closely
with international partners in those endeavours. The
European Union will seek real dedication to reforms
from the newly elected political leadership in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Since September 2011, the European Union has
strengthened its political presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to facilitate progress towards
European integration. The single European Union
presence on the ground in the person of the EU Special
Representative - who is at the same time the Head of
our delegation there - is fully engaged in supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina in all EU related matters. The
EU increased its regional presence in 2012, opening
new offices in Mostar and Brcko and a larger office in
Banja Luka. The Head of Delegation/European Union
Special Representative is also offering the European
Union Force Commander political guidance on military
issues with a local political dimension, in particular
concerning sensitive operations and relations with local
authorities and with the local media.

The European Union also continues to accompany
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in the security
field. Despite the social protests in February 2014,
the overall security situation has remained calm and
stable; yet stability has not been entrenched. Bosnia
and Herzegovina's authorities have so far proven
capable of dealing with threats to public order and to
a safe and secure environment. The European Union
will therefore maintain the EU-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) Operation Althea, with a focus on capacity-
building and training. However, EUFOR Althea will
retain an executive military role to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina's efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment under a United Nations mandate. It will
thereby remain able to contribute to the deterrence
capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities if
the situation so requires.

In the context of the overall European Union
strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we look forward
to continuing the discussion with the international
community, in the appropriate forum, on the
reconfiguration of the international presence. We
call on the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the outstanding objectives and conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

The EU reiterates its unequivocal commitment to
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
sovereign and united country. We remain ready to once
again give the necessary impulse to restart the reform
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to provide
the necessary assistance to support progress towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina's European integration. In that
context, the European Union, as the direct neighbour of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, presents great opportunities
for the country and all its citizens. That approach will
take the country forward on its reform agenda towards
stability and development on its path to the European
Union.

