I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to address this body on the occasion of today's open debate on children and armed conflict. I would first like to acknowledge the considerable and impactful work that the Security Council has done over the years through its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and to note that much has been achieved. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has long recognized the fact that protecting children in armed conflict is an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict and a key component of durable peace and security. NATO has mainstreamed child protection into its work since the 2012 NATO summit, held in Chicago, with a view towards practical, field-oriented measures to address conflict- related violations against children. This approach was given concrete structure with the adoption by the North Atlantic Council of the Protection of Children in Armed Conflict - the Way Forward policy in 2015, and was reaffirmed by the Alliance in its most recent summit, in Brussels in 2018. NATO is also considering avenues to strengthen its policy framework on children and armed conflict in the near future, in the light of lessons learned. However, a key measure of any successful policy is its impact on the ground in places where children are in harm's way. Crucial to impactful action to protect conflict-affected children are both awareness by our own forces and experts, on the one hand, and the full integration of child protection in our work with partners, on the other hand. Together with the United Nations, we have developed practical, field- oriented measures to address conflict-related violations against children, including adopting standard operating procedures for monitoring the six grave violations and an updated training package for our troops on children and armed conflict, which should be released shortly. In Afghanistan, NATO's Resolute Support Mission, a non-combat mission, is established to train, advise and assist the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. The Mission continues to prioritize child-protection principles in its training and capacity-building and played an active part in the development of the 2017 Afghan National Army child-protection policy. Since 2016, a senior child protection adviser in place in our Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan has undertaken policy advocacy with all Afghan security forces, ensuring that child protection is addressed. NATO officials continue to raise the issue of the protection of children in their political and military engagements with senior officials. While we are proud of what we have achieved, there is still much to do. We continue to reach out to the Afghan security forces and our United Nations and non-governmental organization partners to ensure that training and policy goals to better protect children are maintained and deepened and to reinforce our political commitment. Fifteen years ago this month, also under a French presidency of the Security Council, the world stood up and adopted resolution 1612 (2005), making a choice to protect conflict-affected children around the world not just in statements but in concrete action (see S/PV.5235). NATO stands with the entire international community in recognizing that we all have a collective responsibility in guaranteeing that all children everywhere are protected, not only in word but also in deed.
