Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Mohammed Khaled Khiari, for his
detailed briefing to the Security Council. We also
thank the delegation of the United States for convening
this important and informative meeting.

We note with concern the information provided by
Mr. Khiari, as well as notifications received previously
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) and reports by the world media, on the
latest ballistic missile launches conducted by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea has been harbouring hope for the
process of negotiations and dialogue held in Singapore,
in Viet Nam and, finally, on the border between the two
Koreas. We have always been quick to congratulate
the United States, North Korea and South Korea on
the detente process. However, in recent months it has
unfortunately come to a standstill. From May onwards,
the stalemate has led the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to resume its ballistic missile tests after a
pause of over a year and a half.

In the light of the escalating nature of rhetoric
among the actors directly involved in this issue as a
result of the that impasse, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea calls on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We also call on the United States to ensure
that both countries resume the process of dialogue
as soon as possible and ease tensions in the current
situation with a view to achieving peace on the Korean
peninsula.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea supports and recognizes the diplomatic efforts
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Government has undertaken thus far towards the
peaceful denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
therefore encourage the country's authorities to return
to the path of dialogue and reconciliation between the
two Koreas and with the international community,
primarily for the good of all Koreans - both from
the North and the South - and to ensure peace on the
Korean peninsula. None of the parties to the conflict
should renounce dialogue, nor must they deprive the
citizens of the Korean peninsula of the dream that,
sooner rather than later, their situation of constant
worry and concern will finally be resolved. One day,
they will be able to sleep soundly, knowing that they
will wake up free from the fear of a North-South war
or nuclear extermination. Each party should recall
its commitments to humankind and rectify the minor
obstacles preventing the advancement of the process
through dialogue towards a better world and a peaceful
Korean peninsula.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, given its
traditional position regarding the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, condemns any State
that may possess, produce, stockpile or carry out
tests on such weapons. We therefore condemn the
ballistic missile tests carried out in recent months by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In that
connection, we wish to reiterate the imperative need for
the authorities of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to refrain from further ballistic missile tests and
return to the negotiating table, which the Government in
Malabo would gladly host, should there be an interest.

Finally, we wish to draw the attention of the
international community to the need to support
the Government and the people of North Korea in
addressing their urgent humanitarian needs.

