Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Peruvian presidency for
convening today's meeting.

I would like to begin by saying that we absolutely
agree with the fact that protecting and promoting the
language of a titular nation is the responsibility of
all States, including Ukraine. We do not object to the
Ukrainian language, which, incidentally, is understood,
loved and respected in Russia. However, we speak in
defence of the Russian language. The biased Ukrainian
authorities have adopted draconian medieval methods
to eradicate it. They have banned communication in
Russian in the majority of public spaces, which is at
variance with all conventions protecting the interests
of national minorities and basic human rights. It defies
common sense and the basic norms of civilized conduct.

Let us take an example from an interview with
Mr. Mykyta Poturaev, a candidate for the Verkhovna
Rada and adviser to the President of Ukraine on
political issues. In it, he proposes that the Russian
language be renamed "Rossian" and that Russia be
renamed "Moskovia". He also proposed that the Russian
language be used as a weapon against our country.

In anticipation of the question we will certainly
hear today, how is the language issue relevant to the
Security Council's agenda? It is directly related to its
agenda. The document signed by former President
Poroshenko on 15 May is a direct violation of the letter
and spirit of the package of measures for the fulfilment
of the Minsk agreements, approved by resolution 2202
(2015). We should all therefore provide a principled
and impartial assessment of the of the new Ukrainian
law. I hope that all of our colleagues can resist the
temptation to shield Kyiv from the warranted criticism
resulting from the adoption of that law and devote
our meeting with other topics. Let us recall that the
main provisions of the document, which provides for
the most brutal forced Ukrainization of all spheres of
public life and gradually introduces fines for failing
to use the Ukrainian language, enter into force today.
The Russian-speaking citizens of the country will be
stripped of an opportunity to be educated in their native
language, including in universities and schools.

I will not repeat myself today and give specific
examples from the text of the law. I already did so on
20 May (see S/PV.8529). Since then neither we nor the
Russian-speaking residents ofthe country have had any
reason to adopt a different approach to it. The issue is not

an internal matter in Ukraine. We categorically reject
that interpretation. For those who genuinely understand
recent Ukrainian history, it is clear that the issue of
linguistic and cultural identity lies at the heart of the
tragic fracture that the country has endured since the
Maidan coup d'etat of 2014. The threat to ban Russian
as an official language in the south-east was voiced by
the Maidan representatives who seized power. That,
in turn, led to internal divisions and confrontations,
which have resulted in the current ongoing crisis and
territorial division.

Accordingly, if there is no resolution to the problem
in the spirit of public consensus and harmony, there
can be no genuine progress towards cohesion and, as
a consequence, there can be no end to the domestic
fratricidal conflict in eastern Ukraine. Those who
attempt to defend the actions of the Maidan authorities
claim that such action is geared towards supporting the
State language as it pertains to the issue of languages
of national minorities. That also includes Russian-
speaking Ukrainians. It might appear logical but any
objective expert on Ukraine would confirm that in that
country such an approach is hardly applicable. The
Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine are not a national
minority in the traditional sense of the term. In spite of
official Maidan statistics, according to which the Russian
language is allegedly no longer spoken in Ukraine, all
other sources and surveys show that Russian remains
the native or preferred language of communication for
the majority of Ukraine's population.

According to the American analytics company
Gallup, in the late 2000s 83 per cent of respondents in
Ukraine said that Russian was their preferred language
and an extremely important subject taught to children
in school. Google search engine results revealed in
2014 that more than 90 per cent of search queries from
Ukraine were made in the Russian language. Even the
staunchest Maidan propagandists are forced to admit
that, for at least 25 per cent of Ukrainian residents,
Russian is the native language. Do those statistics not
make it clear that restrictive and punitive measures
against the Russian language in that country, at the
very least, stoke divisions and social confrontation?
Incidentally, the new Ukrainian authorities, which
received support from 75 per cent of Ukrainians during
the most recent presidential elections, from the very
beginning expressed doubts about the rectitude of the
policy ofthe forced Ukrainization ofthe country and the
formation of what is virtually a language inquisition.
The new President, Volodymyr Zelenskyi, and his team
repeatedly made it clear that after the formation of a
new Ukrainian Parliament they intended to scrutinize
the ineligibility of the law on Ukraine's State language.

The Parliament of Ukraine - the Verkhovna
Rada - also has several questions about the law. On
21 June, parliamentarians registered a petition with
the Constitutional Court of Ukraine with respect to
the law on Ukraine's State language, as it is at odds
with the Constitution, violates the right of citizens to
use their native language and, consequently, creates
an atmosphere of intolerance in the society. And just
today, in the Verkhovna Rada, a bill was registered to
repeal the language law, which violates the Council of
Europe's Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities and European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages.

Under those circumstances, a great deal today
depends upon us. Council members can either play into
the hands of the Maidan politicians, who have discredited
themselves, headed by former President Poroshenko,
and pretend that the law on the State language should be
adopted quietly and without criticism, or they can send
a clear message that the struggle for the preservation
of national and cultural identity should not devolve
into the violation of the rights of the Russian-speaking
population in Ukraine. In particular, former President
Poroshenko recently stated that so long as Mr. Zelenskyi
speaks Russian, the country is in danger. Threats to him
in that regard were repeatedly made by other so-called
nationalist Maidan activists. There is no consensus on
the language issue in Ukraine. The adoption of the law
on language was a purely political decision that failed
to reflect the opinion of the Ukrainian population, the
current situation in the country and the unique features
of the multinational Ukrainian society.

In order not to fuel such a distorted and dangerous
mindset for Ukraine, we propose that we send a clear
message today about the Council's support for unity
and cohesion among Ukrainians, instead of divisions.
That is the only way that we, together, not in words but
in deed, can demonstrate our shared commitment to the
Minsk agreements, with which Ukraine categorically
refuses to comply.

