Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
endorse the comments of the representative of the United
States in asking the Secretariat, like so many others, to do
what it envisaged. That is not a reminder for Mr. Miyet;
it simply means that we are interested in his soon-to-be-
issued conclusions on the concept of operations and his
clarifications. I like that word, "clarifications". It fits with
the objective of having the kind of operation that is
capable of being implemented. In our view, as the
Council knows, it should also be applied to other United

 

Nations endeavours with regard to other delicate situations
in other regions of the world.

A consensus has been emerging with respect to the
desirability and the possibility of mounting a peacekeeping
operation - I believe that now it is clear that there is a
consensus - and on the urgent desire of all of us to move
ahead swiftly. In addition to that consensus, it seems to me
that another idea has received vigorous backing - the idea
of an international conference on the Great Lakes to be
jointly sponsored by the Organization of African Unity and
the United Nations.

In this regard, I listened carefully to the conclusions
of the President of the Council and to the comments that
were made by the representative of the Russian Federation.
That is important, because, at the outset, support for this
idea did not have so much conviction. It is well known that
at some stage we will have to bring the leaders of these
countries around the table to speak about their problems -
issues of border security and the protection of minorities,
which are interrelated. Otherwise, the sources of conflict
and discord will remain.

We believe that such an international conference must
also be an overarching objective in the work of our
Council. In this regard, I would like ask the representative
of the Secretariat to invite the next President of the
Council, who will have a great deal of work to do next
month and will have to evince his continued interest in the
subject, to call for consideration of the subject of an
international conference. We will have to ensure that during
that upcoming presidency, building on the work done this
month under the presidency of the United Kingdom, the
Security Council will manage to make tangible progress on
the ground and undertake a genuine diplomatic enterprise
leading to an overall political and diplomatic settlement of
the problem.

I believe that it would be a positive development if,
through the various open debates that are envisaged under
the presidency of the United States, the idea of holding an
international conference on the Great Lakes were given real
impetus. That will mean work in the future for other
Presidents, because the discussion of Africa will not be
limited to one month. There will be no need for statements
to the press. I believe that the issue of Africa, like other
issues that are capable of giving rise to crises, must be
considered by the Council on a permanent basis. It must be
on the agenda of Council in February, March and April.
These issues and questions will remain on the agenda of the
Council. I very much hope that the objective of convening
an international conference will begin to take shape under
the upcoming presidency of the United States.

