The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand
and Uruguay, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to take this opportunity to welcome the fact that there
is some much interest in participating in the debate on
this issue, which is of particular importance for the
international community.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ann Veneman,
2
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/ 158, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

In my capacity as President, I should like to say
how very honoured I am to be here today. My presence
is an indication of the importance that Mexico attaches
to the work of the Security Council and to its
presidency. It also provides me an opportunity to thank
all members for the support they have provided to
Mexico's presidency throughout this month.

I would also like to point out that, as everyone is
aware, Mexico is currently experiencing a very
complex situation as a result of the emergence of swine
flu, which has now begun to spread to other parts of
the world. I would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize that the Mexican Government has acted
with complete transparency and a sense of
responsibility - not just towards Mexican citizens but
also towards all of the world's inhabitants. In that
regard, I should like to reassure everyone that Mexico
will continue to act in that same spirit of responsibility
and transparency in the face of a situation that poses a
challenge not only for Mexico but for humankind as a
whole. We will do so in order to build the necessary
bridges and establish cooperation with each and every
member of the international community to confront
that challenge.

I also wish to point to the manner in which we
have been working with the World Health
Organization. That once again illustrates the
importance of international multilateral institutions in
ensuring well-being, peace and security throughout the
world.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude for the many and varied
expressions of solidarity and support from many
friendly countries. I should like to assure them that the
Government and people of Mexico are deeply
appreciative. We shall utilize that assistance in a
responsible and efficient manner to benefit not only
09-31649
Mexico but also, as I said earlier, the entire
international community.

I am particularly pleased at the presence at this
meeting of His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, on whom I now call.


