Mr. Tuomioja (Finland): Finland aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union.

The situation in Afghanistan is at a turning point.
Afghanistan is going through multiple transition
processes at the same time. Those processes are
interlinked and equally important. The Afghan
National Security Forces will soon be fully responsible
for security in the whole country.

The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
crucial reforms in governance. There is still a lot of
work to be done in that sector, and Afghanistan should
not be left alone during these critical years. Finland is
fully committed to supporting Afghanistan when the
country embarks on the transformation decade.

Afghanistan has become one of Finland's largest
development partners. Our total official development
assistance to Afghanistan between 2013 and 2017 is
scheduled to be almost $200 million.

International aid is needed to build on the gains
that the Afghan Government has achieved in the past
years. Good governance, democracy and the rule of
law are some of the most important areas that we need
to support in the coming years. At the same time, we
expect the Afghan Government to fulfil its obligations
under the mutual commitments made, including the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

Human rights, particularly women's rights, are the
cornerstone of Afghanistan's development. To that end,
Finland will continue its cooperation with Afghanistan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security.

Ever since the overthrow of the Taliban, there have
been important gains in strengthening human rights and
the rule of law. Nevertheless, a lot remains to be done,
and no backsliding can be allowed. Afghan citizens, in
particular women, still face insecurity in public spaces
and at home, as well as a lack of access to an effective
and fair justice system and legal representation.

It is of vital importance for Afghanistan's
development that there be a strong international civilian
presence, under Afghan leadership, in the country after
the withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force. UNAMA has a central role in supporting
Afghanistan's development efforts, providing good
offices for the peace process, promoting and protecting
human rights and coordinating international aid efforts.

We are extremely concerned about the budget cuts
that UNAMA is facing. If fully implemented, those
cuts would seriously hamper the Mission's ability to
maintain a meaningful presence across the country.
It is imperative that UNAMA be granted adequate
resources to fully perform its mandated tasks. I would
respectfully urge the Security Council to do everything
in its power to ensure that UNAMA is granted adequate
resources to fulfil its important mandate. We owe that
to the people of Afghanistan.

