Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you to the
President's chair, Mr. Minister.

The theme of today's discussion is relevant in the
context of the activities of the Security Council.
Experience has shown us that the attainment of lasting
peace and the resolution of regional conflicts are possible
only on the basis of a comprehensive approach.

United Nations peacekeeping activities are
becoming increasingly complex and multidimensional.
The Organization has made considerable progress in

resolving a number of complex conflicts. In every case,
success was due in large part to the effective
combination of the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tools of the United Nations and the close coordination
of the military, political, civilian, reconstruction and
humanitarian components of operations.

Each crisis situation is unique in its own way;
there is no one-size-fits-all model of peacekeeping that
can be applied to all conflicts. Each case requires
selecting the optimal set of peacekeeping
instruments - be they United Nations, coalition or
regional operations. Such an effort must be structured
in strict accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which clearly sets out the political role of the
Security Council in all stages of a peacekeeping
operation, from drafting the mandate to the transition
to peacebuilding. The Charter and international legal
standards give the Council the ability to act on behalf
of the international community and to take appropriate
measures to prevent or end genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other massive abuses of
human rights that pose a threat to international peace
and security.

Russia is prepared to cooperate closely with all
interested international partners to strengthen the
leading role of the United Nations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and humanitarian crises, as
well as to enhance the effectiveness of the activities of
the United Nations in the interest of building lasting
global security and stability.

The Russian delegation supports the draft
presidential statement that has been prepared by the
Greek delegation and which has been agreed by all
members of the Council.

