Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
(AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security for sharing
their thoughts on further advancing the strategic
partnership between the two organizations with a focus
on peacekeeping operations.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered

earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We continue to underscore the primacy of Africa's
leading role in resolving its own peace and security
issues. It is critical that the political peace processes
spearheaded by the African regional and subregional
organizations be duly factored into the mandate, design
and delivery of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations concerned. The positive impact of United
Nations-AU joint analyses of conflicts and early-
warning assessments, supported by joint visits and
statements, has been evident in both policymaking and
implementation. The issue of financing United Nations-
authorized African peace support operations has been
addressed in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Resolution 2378
(2017) reaffirmed the need for considering practical
steps for partly financing AU peace support operations
through United Nations assessed contributions on a
case-by-case basis.

It is imperative that the Secretary-General's
constructive suggestions for United Nations-AU joint
action and funding be given due consideration at the
relevant legislative bodies, especially against the
backdrop of sustained resource mobilization for the
AU Peace Fund by African countries themselves. We
agree with the Secretary General that, in the case of
complex peacekeeping theatres in Mali, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan, the traditional structures of
peacekeeping operations need to be revisited through
a multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approach.
The threats posed by various non-State actors in those
contexts require further interface and coordination
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
and subregional entities deployed on the ground.

Bangladesh values its association with Africa and
cherishes a number ofinstances in which its engagement
has played an instrumental role in achieving sustainable
peace on the ground. We reaffirm our readiness to
further cooperate with the AU, preferably through the
United Nations and in full respect for the AU's ownership
ofits mandated operations. In that connection, we wish
to make the following points.

First, the continued fatalities and casualties suffered
by United Nations peacekeepers in certain African
peacekeeping theatres remains a critical area ofconcern.
Unwarranted yet targeted attacks against United
Nations peacekeepers are tantamount to war crimes,
and there should be no impunity for perpetrators. It is
critical that further investment be made in improving
the capacity of the host States concerned in bringing
those responsible for such heinous crimes to justice.

Secondly, we maintain that it would be self-
defeating to engage United Nations peacekeepers in
direct counter-terrorism operations. In certain African
theatres, the United Nations peacekeeping mission may
provide support to the relevant State in strengthening
its counter-terrorism strategies and capabilities.

Thirdly, we attach importance to peacebuilding
support for the host States as part of peacekeeping
mandates in order to facilitate the smooth transition from
peacekeeping operations. The role of peacekeepers in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace is well recognized
and should be supported through needs-based, context-
specific priorities identified through consultation with
the host States in an inclusive manner.

Fourthly, sharing best practices with and training
interested African troop- and police-contributing
countries have always been one of Bangladesh's
priorities, building on its three decades' experience
of peacekeeping. We maintain our offer to organize
customized training programmes for African
peacekeepers, including female peacekeepers, in our
dedicated training institutes.

The meeting rose at 4.20pm.
