Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): On behalf of my
delegation, I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for July 2002. In
particular, I thank you for your warm words welcoming
the creation of the African Union. As custodians of the
African Union for the upcoming year we hope to work
very closely with you. As members know, the African
Union was formed late yesterday, and among its first
items of business was to discuss the matter before the
Council today. We are not in a position to make a
submission right now but we will present a submission
on behalf of the African Union in the coming days.

We come before the Council to register our
concern at a critical time when the Security Council's
credibility is seriously threatened. The Security
Council, entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security, is now being asked to
question the authority of an international body, the
International Criminal Court. We believe that the
Council's mandate leaves no room either to reinterpret
or even to amend treaties that have been negotiated and
agreed by the rest of the United Nations membership.
An action by one permanent member has cast a shadow
over the operation of the International Criminal Court
and indeed over the application of international law in
general. In that regard, South Africa supports the
concerns voiced by the Secretary-General in his letter
dated 3 July 2002 transmitted to the President of the
Council, about the implications of such an action.

For several years, the United Nations has assisted
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to rebuild their
war-shattered Government institutions and work
towards the establishment of effective and credible
police and border control services. Moreover, the
United Nations presence in the Balkans has, until now,
sent a powerful message that the international
community is firmly committed to assisting the peoples
of South-East Europe to fully recover from the
devastating effects of war. These achievements are now
threatened by one permanent member of the Security
Council in its misunderstanding and its unfounded
fears concerning the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court which came into force just 10 days ago.
This action by one member of this Council affects
peace and stability in the entire Balkans and has
implications for all United Nations peacekeeping
operations throughout the world.

As the Council is aware, most conflicts are
currently in Africa, and if this draft resolution were
passed, peace would be set back in our continent for a
long time. The fact that any permanent member can
unilaterally decide to exercise its veto privilege to
defeat the efforts of the other 14 members to extend the
mandate of an agreed United Nations peacekeeping
mission holds disturbing implications for the other 174
Members of the United Nations and for the entire
world in general. It is indeed worrisome that there is a
possibility other United Nations missions may suffer
the same fate. That fear becomes real when we
consider that in the month of July 2002 alone, the
mandates of the United Nations missions in Western
Sahara, Lebanon, Georgia and Prevlaka are due for
renewal.

The creation of the International Criminal Court
is evidence of an emerging norm in international law in
favour of ensuring that those accused of the most
serious crimes are either prosecuted by competent
national authorities or handed over for prosecution by a
duly instituted international court. We hope the
Security Council will actively promote this emerging
norm in international law.

We urge the Security Council to stand firm and
protect the peace mission in the Balkans, while
reinforcing - certainly not jeopardizing - the
International Criminal Court and the norms of
international law it has established. The Security
Council cannot fail the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because if it did so, it would have failed
people everywhere.

