Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Pakistan on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January.
I would also like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your leadership in convening this
debate. I would also like to express our gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative presentation this morning.

In order to prevent and eliminate international
terrorism, the enforcement of more comprehensive
responses is crucial. It is necessary that not only the
States where terrorism threats are real, but also the
international community as a whole tackle international
terrorism.

Although individual State circumstances with
regard to terrorism conditions, counter-terrorism
capacities and the available capacity for international
contributions differ, each State should take actions as
a responsible member of the international community.
What measures are available to States facing
difficulty in raising resources and in enhancing capacity
to take meaningful action? We believe that even those
States can make efforts, such as by tackling outstanding
socioeconomic issues that can promote extremism and
by conducting dialogues with neighbouring countries
and civil society. On the other hand, States that have
been successful in achieving advanced results can share
their experiences widely with other States to contribute
to enhancing their capacity.

In addition to enhancing our own capacity,
Japan has been conducting bilateral and multilateral
dialogues and consultations. We have been making full
use of our own know-how and lessons learned through
such activities. We have also been making international
contributions by dispatching experts and holding
seminars, especially in South-East Asia, focusing
on areas such as immigration control, aviation and
maritime security, law enforcement cooperation and
the counter-financing of terrorism. It is our firm belief
that each State must embrace counter-terrorism as its
own policy agenda ifwe are to succeed in implementing
international counter-terrorism efforts.

Let me now touch on our ongoing effort to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. At the
debate on the situation in Afghanistan in the Security
Council last month (see S/PV.6896), we agreed on
the importance of international cooperation with
Afghanistan for the purpose of establishing its self-
reliance and of not again allowing the conditions that
spread terrorism. We can interpret such a commitment
not to allow those conditions to continue any longer
as an important part of our international counter-
terrorism efforts. I believe that all Member States
should participate in such efforts more actively.

In that regard, Japan hosted the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan last July in order to commit to international
efforts not to make Afghanistan a hotbed for terrorism
again. We are conducting follow-up support. We have
also been engaged for a long time in efforts to move
closer to a final agreement in the Mindanao peace
process, where a framework agreement was signed last
October. In that way, we have contributed to several
measures to eliminate the conditions that spread
terrorism in several regions.

Since one of the priorities with regard to
international counter-terrorism must be the issue of
terrorist financing, it is necessary for the international
community to make more efforts to address the issue.
Japan welcomes the fact that a special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on preventing and
suppressing terrorist financing was held last November
in order for all United Nations States Members and the
relevant organizations to have an opportunity to engage
and to exchange experiences and challenges. Japan
is making positive progress, especially in its efforts
to update the measures against terrorist financing
discussed at the meeting.

January starts the beginning of a new year. In
order to make 2013 truly meaningful in terms of
international counter-terrorism, this open debate is a
good opportunity to review past efforts and to reaffirm
the international counter-terrorism objectives and
measures in the future. I hope that today's debate may
provide a springboard for all Member States to reaffirm
the importance of a comprehensive approach and to
take further positive steps on international counter-
terrorism.

Japan Will continue to take all possible measures
in support of international counter-terrorism, as well
as to cooperate positively in the efforts of the Security
Council and the relevant United Nations entities.

