Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Thank you, Sir, for
convening today's meeting.

Japan has consistently sought a peaceful solution
to the problem of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
through international coordination and has exerted its
own diplomatic efforts, including the dispatch of the
Prime Minister's Special Envoy to Iraq.

Weapons of mass destruction are terrible weapons
that indiscriminately kill and maim civilians in large
numbers. We must seriously consider the situation in
which such inhumane weapons are in the hands of a
dictator who represses his own people. In today's
world, the question of whether or not one possesses
weapons of mass destruction is not something that can
be left unanswered.

Japan has stressed that the Security Council must
act in unity and fulfil its responsibility for the peace
and security of the world. It is regrettable that the
Security Council ultimately could not reach a common
view and thus failed to stand united.

However, we could not leave this problem
unresolved forever. That is because, in the course of 12
years, Iraq has time and again violated 17 Security
Council resolutions. Although the international
community gave it repeated opportunities for a
peaceful solution, Iraq made no effort to seize such
opportunities and repeatedly violated Security Council
resolutions. It also failed to take the final opportunity
afforded by resolution 1441 (2002) and, to the very
end, refused to respond to the earnest efforts of the
international community. Although it was clear that
Iraq alone held the key to peace, it closed the way to
peace through its own actions. Iraq did not demonstrate
that it was fundamentally changing its attitude.
In no situation is it easy to make a decision to
support the use of force. It goes without saying that the
best way would be for weapons of mass destruction to
be dismantled without armed conflict. However, in a
situation where that is impossible, Japan has come to
the conclusion that, as a responsible member of the
international community, it supports the actions taken
by the United States and its coalition partners.

It is Japan's heartfelt hope that the combat will be
concluded at the earliest possible time, with the
minimum casualties, and that the threat posed by Iraq
to the international community will be removed. We
also find it essential that Iraq be rebuilt as soon as
possible and that its people be enabled to live
peacefully in a free and prosperous society. Toward
that end, it is important that the international
community cooperates in supporting the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Iraq. Japan, for its part, will
address that issue actively.

Japan is deeply aware that anxiety about the
future of the Middle East is mounting because of the
military actions being taken against Iraq. Now is the
time for Japan to undertake further efforts on behalf of
peace and stability in the region.

In accordance with that basic policy, Japan has
decided to provide humanitarian assistance, including
aid for refugees and assistance for neighbouring
countries, totalling approximately $112.53 million.
Specifically, it has announced assistance to be provided
through international organizations, at $5.03 million;
assistance through Japanese non-governmental
organizations, at $3.3 million; assistance through the
Japan International Cooperation Agency aimed at
strengthening the emergency medical care system; and
humanitarian emergency personnel and material
assistance based on Japan's international peace
cooperation law. Japan has also decided to extend $100
million in grant aid to Jordan and $4.2 million in food
aid to Palestinian refugees through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. Moreover, Japan will strengthen its efforts
to achieve peace in the Middle East and will promote
measures such as dialogue and exchanges with the
Islamic world.

Japan strongly hopes that the international
community will focus on the tasks that lie ahead and
that the United Nations, including the Security
Council, will be united in its efforts to restore peace
and stability in Iraq and the surrounding region. Japan,
for its part, will contribute actively to ensuring that the
United Nations carries out the primary functions
expected of it so that solutions can be found to the
various challenges facing the international community.

