Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The attempts by
Armenia to disguise its aggression, and thereby to assert
its innocence with regard to the crimes committed
against Azerbaijani civilians, are unlikely to be taken
seriously given the incontrovertible evidence, which
testifies to the diametrically opposite situation.

The arguments of the Armenian side are particularly
astonishing as they are voiced in the Security Council,

which in 1993 adopted fourresolutions. Those resolutions
condemned the use of force against Azerbaijan and the
occupation of its territories by the Armenian forces,
reaffirmed respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Azerbaijan and the inviolability of its
international borders and demanded the immediate, full
and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces
from all occupied territories (resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993)). The resolutions also
made specific reference to violations of international
humanitarian law, including the displacement of a large
number of civilians in Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians
and the bombardment of inhabited areas.

While trying to accuse Azerbaijan of alleged
anti-Armenian propaganda and referring to ambiguous,
politically motivated and groundless interpretations of
the Khojaly massacre, the representative of Armenia at
the same time not only refrained from commenting on
the views expressed by the European Court of Human
Rights, authoritative international non-governmental
organizations and eyewitnesses of the tragedy. He also
neglected to clarify the revelations of his country's
high-ranking officials and the direct participants in
the crime, who, in turn, unequivocally admitted their
responsibility for the extermination of the inhabitants
and defenders of Khojaly.

Armenia's widespread, deliberate and systematic
policy of aggression and hatred is clearly reflected in
the famous interview of 15 December 2000 with the
then Defence Minister, now the incumbent President
of Armenia. Responding to the question as to whether
things could have happened differently and whether he
had any regrets about the deaths of thousands of people
as a result of the Armenian attacks against Azerbaijani
civilians, he said frankly, "I have absolutely no regrets,
since such upheavals are necessary even if thousands
have to die".

No further comments are needed here to explain
the logic and the attitude of the Armenian leadership
towards the issue of civilian protection and the peaceful
settlement of the conflict.

