Mr. Morris: I thank Council members for their
comments, their questions and their guidance. I shall
try to comment briefly on the issues that have been
raised. We will also answer thoroughly, in writing, each
of the questions that have been raised, and we will
share a complete response to each question with each
member in the next three or four weeks. Each question
deserves a voluminous answer, and I am sure that that
is not what members want at this late hour.

With regard to the United Kingdom's question as
to whether those who need food really receive it: yes, I
believe so. We place a heavy premium on
accountability, and we have elaborate, sophisticated
systems to monitor, measure and evaluate our work.
That is more difficult in some places than in others, but
it is a top priority and the key to our having the trust of
our donors, and I can assure the Council that it
happens. We work well with the other United Nations
agencies. I pay tribute to the United Nations Children's
Fund, to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and to the World
Health Organization (WHO). We work together all the
time. Our people in the field work superbly together,
and that is really where harmony is most important -
on the ground. We work well together in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, even though
we have a huge operation there and the other
operations are small.

On the question about Government policies as
they relate to incentives, to open markets, to support
for communal and commercial agriculture, to
distribution systems and to markets: the world knows
what the ingredients of a successful economy are.
Clearly, investment in infrastructure, in sophisticated
agricultural technology and in research is important.

The issue of genetically modified (GM) foods,
raised by Mauritius, is very important. It will also be a
very important issue for the United Nations going
forward, because the amount of food produced via
genetically modified technology, or biotechnology, will
grow exponentially in the coming years. There will be
more GM. food in the future, and it will be available
around the world. Our policy is to ask a Government
that gives us food or sells us food to certify that it
meets the health and safety standards for consumption
by its own citizens. Once we have that certification, we
go to the FAO and the WHO and test it against
something called the Codex Alimentarius, which talks
about food safety standards from their perspectives.
Once we are certain that those standards have been
met, we make representations to that effect to recipient
countries. Each country is sovereign and is entitled to
make a decision in the context of its own situation.

Until the current situation, virtually no one ever
rejected GM. food. I think the world is absolutely
certain that there are no health and safety issues
associated with human consumption of GM. food. There
are other issues that people are concerned about, such
as the pollination issue. I have to remind folks that,
first and foremost, a huge number of people are at risk
of starvation. In the beginning, 75 per cent of the food
we had to work with had a biotech component, whether
we bought it in Argentina, the United States, Canada or
parts of Africa, including South Africa.

I think the issue of human safety is resolved. We
are in the business of providing food for people to eat.
We are not in the business of providing animal food
and we are not in the business of providing food via
seeds to be planted. Our focus is on keeping people
alive, alleviating their suffering and ultimately offering
them some hope. As the Council knows, the FAO, the
WHO and the WFP have issued statements - as has
the Secretary-General - affirming their confidence in
GM. food.

On the issue of sustainability, clearly there is a
paradox, given the surpluses that exist around the
world and the number of people who are starving.
There are a lot of issues here. The good new is that
many countries that were recipient countries of ours at
one time are now donor countries, because they have
agricultural surpluses. China is a perfect example.
China is becoming a very good donor. The success of
China's agricultural economy is extraordinary. The
same can be said now of India and the Russian
Federation.

At the end of the day, however, African countries
need the ability to produce and export their own food.
Clearly, issues of tariffs, the use of surpluses and trade
need to be developed in such a way that developing
countries are encouraged to produce and export.

The United States asked questions relating to
food import policies, Government distribution policies
and theft and corruption policies. Clearly, all of these
affect the agricultural viability and food security of a
country. All that is pretty easy to understand.

Ireland asked about investment in agricultural
systems. I should tell you about Malawi, which has
thought through an agricultural strategy according to
which a $77 million investment in irrigation
technology in that country would make it self-sufficient
with water forever. The FAO and the WFP have
experimented in Malawi with conservation
technology - a new way of farming in which a very
modest $100,000 investment seeds produced $7 million
worth of product, with new technology.

Clearly, the issue of long-term programmes is one
of the key things that we need to keep our eye on. Soil
degradation is an important issue. Our work in
reforestation and our food-for-work programmes that
rebuild the soil are important. But this is an issue of
technology, talent and the sharing of research around
the world - and that is clearly available.

On the issue of the level of support and long-term
development, the trend has been against long-term
development and in favour of short-term emergency
investments. My own view is that an investment in
short-term emergency work can become a very
powerful long-term investment. If you are feeding
people who are in a crisis in such a way that children
can go to school, or if you are feeding people in such a
way that their health or nutrition is dramatically
improved, these become very important long-term
development goals - they are the basis of the United
Nations Millennium Development Goals.

With regard to the question about agricultural
inputs, I am afraid we may be a couple of weeks late.
The FAO did a very good job in Zambia in helping that
country to gather agricultural inputs. But the fact of the
matter is that in the six countries that I have been most
focused on, donor support for agricultural inputs,
health, water, sanitation and education has been less
than 25 per cent. The support for food is now close to
80 per cent. We missed a huge opportunity because
either we did not have seeds and fertilizer and
implements, or, where the seeds were available, people
did not have the cash to buy them. And I am terribly
worried that we missed a planning opportunity to begin
to get the process back on its feet. The amount of
money that the FAO was seeking for agricultural inputs
was very modest compared with the food, but the
donors did not focus on it. So I would beg you, as you
look at these sorts of issues, to consider helping to

provide resources for seeds and fertilizer so that you
can begin the planning process.

Bulgaria made a point about early-warning
systems and information technology. We make huge
investments in information technology. We provide
what we call a vulnerability assessment map of every
country in the world, which we make available to
everyone at no cost. It uses the best information
technology in the world and enables us to target our
work in just the way that it ought to be done.

The world needs to focus on early-warning
systems and assessment mechanisms. Beyond
agriculture, the six countries of southern Africa
desperately need assessment mechanisms for health
issues. The infrastructure for health is even weaker
than the infrastructure for agriculture. So many health
professionals have lost their lives to AIDS, and so
many doctors, nurses and pharmacists have left the
region to go to work in South Africa or the United
Kingdom, that the professional community is largely
depleted.

We work closely with the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and with Stephen
Lewis, the Secretary-General's Special Representative.
Once we realized the impact of AIDS, we changed the
nature of our food basket. A person who has AIDS
needs 500 extra calories a day, and a person who is
vulnerable also needs extra calories every day. People
in that same category need much more protein. We
have changed our food basket to respond to that.

I appreciated the question from the representative
of Cameroon - a country that has provided
extraordinary leadership for the World Food
Programme. He asked what can be done to reduce
dependency on a few donors. We have 15 or 16
significant donors. There are 20 more countries that
can help us in a substantial way, and many of them are
represented around this table. We are working very
hard to make the case for substantial support from
countries such as China, Russia, India, Pakistan,
Thailand, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, Saudi
Arabia, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Chile -
countries that have the wherewithal to help us. My own
goal is for every one of the 191 Members of the United
Nations to make a voluntary contribution to the World
Food Programme - even if symbolic - every year,
because we all have responsibility for those beyond our
borders, even if we have the most difficult
circumstances imaginable.

I am working nearly full-time raising money. I do
not mind that; I like that. But we need people to help
us. The magnitude of the task is enormous.

I appreciated the question from the representative
of Guinea about the Millennium Development Goals
and the safety of our workers. More people doing
humanitarian work for the United Nations have lost
their lives than have people doing peacekeeping work.
We have lost two people in the last two months. We
have a wonderful memorial in our building honouring
those who have lost their lives in the service of the
World Food Programme.

The representative of Guinea also spoke of the
role of women. Indeed, the role of women is extremely
important in feeding people, and that is why we are
heavily focused on the role of women in Afghanistan.
Even when the Taliban was in charge, we operated 206
bakeries, which were essentially all operated by
women, and half of them were owned by women. They
have made all the difference in the world.

Syria asked a question related to school feeding
and other awareness programmes that can be pursued
through school once the children are there. I believe
that the best way to attack the Millennium
Development Goal of halving poverty and hunger is to
feed the 300 million children who are hungry, half of
whom do not go to school. For 19 cents a day, we can
feed a schoolchild. The leverage on that investment -
economically, socially, politically or from a
humanitarian point of View - is enormous.

I appreciated the question posed by the Russian
Federation about resolving key problems in Africa for
the long term. Working with the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), WHO, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and FAQ, we are
able to focus on long-term health issues. UNICEF does
a superb job focusing on water, sanitation and nutrition
issues.

The issues of education also are paramount. I
think that the United Nations operating agencies do a
pretty good job with the resources we have to work
with in tackling these very difficult issues.

In closing, let me say that we will respond to the
Council in some greater detail and share with it our
information. I would ask members of the Council to
please support us financially and to make the case to
their Governments as to the importance of what we do
in terms of the peace and security agenda. I would ask
them also to take the longer view about investment in
development and to think about school feeding in that
context. The Millennium Development Goals of
halving hunger and poverty, reducing infant mortality,
eradicating HIV/AIDS, enrolling children in school and
improving maternal health are powerful things and
areas in which the world ought to make substantial
progress with the wealth we have today.

I am grateful for this opportunity. I could go
around the table and thank each country for what it has
done for us. Norway did the most brilliant thing this
year. The Norwegian Red Cross gave us 250 trucks in
southern Africa -four-wheel-drive, 30-ton trucks that
can go through the mud. It was the most brilliant gift
we have received all year. Many of those here have
done comparable things for us, and we are incredibly
grateful.

