Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like other delegations, we too are glad to
welcome the new Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones Parry.
We would like to thank the Chairman of the
Committee, Ambassador Mufioz, for the semi-annual
report submitted pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003)
regarding the work done by the Committee and the
Monitoring Group regarding sanctions against the
Taliban and Al Qaeda.

Russia knows first-hand of the danger that
terrorism poses and how difficult it is to combat this
scourge. The latest series of terrorist acts in Russia and
a number of other States once again clearly indicates
that terrorism knows no borders and that we must
combat terrorism together.

We commend the practical work done by the
Committee in drawing up and constantly updating the
sanctions lists of persons and organizations engaged in
terrorist activities. The ongoing additions to this list
demonstrate the consistency of the measures adopted
by the Committee vis-a-Vis persons implicated in
terrorism. The steps taken to draw up this list represent
an important means of dealing with terrorism, its
ideologues and its financial sponsors, which try to
evade accountability.

For its part, Russia will continue to provide
timely information to the Committee on persons
suspected of having ties with Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. We believe that this list is a mandatory
document for States Members of the United Nations,
which must take steps, pursuant to the list, to extradite
such persons from their territory.

Particular attention should be given to the timely
and full implementation of paragraph 6 of resolution
1455 (2003). States' reports on the measures they have
taken to implement the Council's sanctions
requirements should become the basis for a serious
analysis, which is primarily intended to bring to the
attention of the Committee the practical problems that
exist in the functioning of the sanctions regimes.

In this context, we take note of the importance of
the appeal to Member States that have not yet done so
to submit their reports as soon as possible. We are
extremely concerned to hear that a significant number
of States on whose territory the Al Qaeda network is
presumed to be operating have not submitted their
reports, as required by the resolution. In this context,
we believe that there should be closer cooperation
between the Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established by the Security Council.

We commend the work done by the Monitoring
Group, chaired by Ambassador Chandler. We look
forward to a concrete and practical outcome of the
intensive regional visits planned by the head of the
Group in order to shed light on the situation in the
field, collect and analyse information on the activities
of the Taliban and Al Qaeda, and provide the necessary
consultative assistance to those countries that require
it.

We share the concern mentioned by Ambassador
Munoz regarding the growing threat of narcotics
trafficking from Afghanistan and its direct link with the
financing of terrorist operations. We strongly support
increased concrete efforts by the international
community in this area, including through stepped-up
cooperation with countries neighbouring Afghanistan,
in order to create effective mechanisms to stanch the
flow of drugs from that country.

Russia supports the intensive efforts of the
members of the Security Council in the context of the
Committee. We are sure that in the next six months it
will be possible to prepare a detailed analysis on the
basis of States' reports with respect to meeting the
requirements of resolution 1455 (2003) and to
elaborate practical recommendations on measures to
combat terrorism.

We view today's Council meeting as we did the
one that took place a week ago on the report of the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee: as real
confirmation of the need for a further consolidation of
efforts in order to build a genuinely universal anti-
terrorist front, with the United Nations and its Security
Council playing a coordinating role.

I should like to note that today at the United
Nations there another important meeting is taking
place: the meeting between the leaders of the
Secretariat and regional organizations, focusing also on
counter-terrorism. We agree that there is a need further
to utilize the potential of regional organizations in
resolving the questions that are being discussed today
in the Security Council.

The Russian Federation intends to continue
actively to enhance the effectiveness of the activities of
the Committee in order to achieve further successes in
the combat against terrorism.

