Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Sir, our delegation welcomes the presence of
your Minister for Foreign Affairs at this morning's debate.
The item under discussion today in the Security Council,
"Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations", is timely indeed. We are
reminded of the old saying, "Better late than never".

Since its creation in 1950 by the General Assembly,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has been striving to provide
international protection to refugees and others in conflict
situations in order to find a lasting solution to this problem.
This Herculean effort to ease the sufferings of thousands of
people, sometimes in hazardous conditions, deserves our
full appreciation and respect. My country, Guinea-Bissau,
would like here to pay tribute to all those men and women
who, moved by a spirit of humanism, have given their lives
while providing humanitarian assistance to hundreds of
thousands of human beings in distress.

Statistics given by the UNHCR show a positive trend
in the situation in many parts of the world, due above all to
a reduction in the categories of internally displaced persons
and returnees. We welcome this development. Nevertheless,
the picture remains grim as far as Africa is concerned.

The 1980s were the darkest years, the most disastrous
in the history of refugees and displaced persons. The
pictures - transmitted throughout the world - that came
to us from the Horn of Africa are still fresh in our minds.
We had thought that the tragedy that struck those
abandoned people would be enough to prick the conscience
of international public opinion and that the necessary steps
would be taken to see to it that the same causes would
never again produce the same effects.

Unfortunately, the events that have taken place since
1994 in the Great Lakes region have shown the opposite to
be true. One thing is certain: as long as there are conflicts
and international humanitarian law is violated, the
international community will have to deal for a long time
to come with the problem of the mass exodus of human
beings.

This problem has many causes. Events have moved at
a faster pace since the end of the cold war, with violence
fuelled by an exacerbation of national, ethnic and tribal
sentiments as well as by massive violations of human
rights resulting from power struggles. But above all, the
devastation caused by war has condemned thousands of
human beings to abandonment and despair, searching for
supposedly safer ground inside and outside certain
countries.

This tragic situation throughout the world is all the
more alarming since it calls for a coordinated and
sustained action on the part of the international
community, which must mobilize to find appropriate
solutions not just to the phenomenon itself but to its
principal causes.

Today, millions of people throughout the world are
the responsibility of the UNHCR. In spite of the
praiseworthy efforts it has been making and the results it
has achieved, we believe that the UNHCR and
humanitarian agencies as a whole should continue to
benefit from the unanimous and unconditional support of
the Security Council in order successfully to discharge
their mandates.

The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and its 1967 Protocol give a clear definition of
the rights and obligations of refugees. In this connection,
we would like to inquire once again into the whereabouts
of the thousands of people who are reported to have
disappeared in eastern Zaire.

We agree that existing international law, as a whole,
provides good protection for refugees and displaced
persons, even though some specific aspects should be
better defined, such as the right of return in safety and the
issue of the restitution of property. In this regard, we
believe that the countries of origin should create
conditions that are conducive to the voluntary repatriation
of refugees and the return of displaced persons to their
homes in complete safety and dignity, because these may
constitute one of the lasting solutions to this question.

There is no doubt of that preventive measures are
the most effective steps. They must be implemented at the
first indications of events that could signal mass,
uncontrolled movements of people. In this regard, I
should like to follow in the footsteps of the Ambassador
of France - who spoke so aptly and eloquently - in
expressing once again, on behalf of the delegation of
Guinea-Bissau, our deepest regret at the circumstances
that have prevented the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1080 (1996). That resolution was to
have, inter alia, set up a multinational force to protect the
 

delivery of humanitarian assistance and facilitate the return
of refugees to eastern Zaire.

My delegation believes that that force, which
unfortunately never came into being, might, had it been
deployed, have helped to relieve the sufferings of thousands
of people and saved the lives of hundreds of innocent
victims.

It is for that reason that we ask whether there exists a
double standard in the application of international
humanitarian law. Should not respect for human rights and
for international humanitarian law be the same throughout
the world? Is it not time for some soul-searching regarding
all of these tragic events, and time to find adequate and
lasting solutions for the good of all humankind?

In tackling this issue today, the Council should study
with greater determination and political will the major
causes of the flows of refugees and others in conflict
situations. We believe that the creation of a sound socio-
economic and political environment, as well as the
establishment of effective human rights regimes -
especially institutions that would support the principle of
the primacy of law, justice and responsibility - are
essential prerequisites for reducing the mass exodus of
human beings.

The international community as a whole, and the
Security Council in particular, should play a much more
active role in this area so as to prevent disasters of the kind
that have been very much in the news in recent years. We
hope that by the end of this debate, we will have made
clear, in a firm and determined manner, the need to protect
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations, as well as the personnel of humanitarian
agencies, pursuant to existing legal instruments. To this
end, the Council is called upon, now more than ever, to
speak out strongly and in unison so that, above all, the
parties to conflicts will be compelled to comply with
international humanitarian law and grant humanitarian
organizations unfettered access to victims in all possible
safety.

In View of the new dimension of the problem of
refugees, we hope that henceforth the Security Council will
consider its solution to be an essential element for the
maintenance of international peace and security. A solution
to the problems of refugees in a strictly humanitarian
framework should not in any way usurp the role of the
Security Council, especially when international peace and
security are threatened.

The time has come for the international community
to shoulder its responsibility vis-a-vis the hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children who, through no
choice of their own, find themselves in such a situation in
order to find necessary and lasting solutions to this
tragedy. Our country, Guinea-Bissau, is prepared to make
its modest contribution.

In conclusion, we would like to ask the
representatives of UNHCR to be so kind as to convey to
Mrs. Ogata our well-deserved tribute for her courage and
dedication in the service of hundreds of thousands of
people in distress. Our appreciation also goes to all those
humanitarian organizations that have been working for so
long towards the same goal.

