Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
thank His Excellency the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the current situation in Mali.
Likewise, we welcome the insightful remarks made
by you, Mr. President, as the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs of France, as well as the remarks made
by the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of C6te d'lvoire, the
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs of the
United States of America and the Minister of State for
the Commonwealth and the United Nations of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. I also
extend a special welcome to His Excellency the Prime
Minister of Mali, Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif. I thank them for hosting
us on our recent visit to Mali.

Allow me to join other members of the Security
Council in expressing our deep concern about the current
security situation in Mali following the massacres in
the villages of Ogossagou and Welingara, in the Mopti
region of central Mali, during the visit of the Council,
which resulted in the killing of at least 160 people,
including women and children. My delegation wishes
to condemn in the strongest terms those shameful
attacks on innocent and defenceless civilians. We urge
the Council, MINUSMA and the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to help prevent further bloodshed
and the systematic maiming of innocent civilians, as
well as the increasing transnational organized crime,
which may reverse the gains made in advancing the
political process.

South Africa is pleased with the political
developments and progress made so far in the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We are particularly encouraged
by the active involvement of the Prime Minister of Mali
and President Keita in spearheading the implementation
of the agreement- a clear demonstration of political will
in resolving the situation in the country. South Africa
therefore calls on Malian stakeholders to continue to
make significant strides towards the implementation of
the agreement with a view to bringing about peace and
stability and preserving the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Mali. It is the responsibility
of all Malian parties to ensure the successful, effective
and inclusive implementation of the agreement in
order for Mali to usher in a period of lasting peace,
stability and prosperity. In that regard, we welcome the
establishment of a committee of experts and a national
consultation framework on constitutional reform, which
will contribute to a political atmosphere conducive to a
successful constitutional referendum - the first of its
kind since 1992.

TheCouncilhasthearduousresponsibility-together
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union - to support the
Government of Mali and Malians in general on the
path towards sustainable peace and stability. Stability
in Mali is critical for that country to realize Agenda
2063 of the African Union: The Africa We Want. In that
regard, we wish to commend the concerted efforts of
MINUSMA in continuing to discharge its political and
security-related mandate in Mali under the leadership
of Special Representative Annadif. The significant
progress made so far on the political track gives credence
to the Secretary-General's decision to streamline the
coordination of priorities between MINUSMA and
the United Nations country team through the United
Nations integrated strategic framework. It is against
that backdrop that South Africa wishes to express its
strong condemnation of all terrorist attacks against
civilians, peacekeepers and Malian security forces, as
evidenced by the recent attacks perpetrated on 1, 20 and
25 January, 22 February as well as 16 and 17 March. We
call on the Malian authorities to hold to account the
perpetrators of those heinous crimes.

It is our considered view in South Africa that
it is important to achieve sustainable peace while
pursuing the objectives of reconciliation and peace.
We welcome the progress made by the Prime Minister
towards the operationalization of the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission. More attention should be
paid to post-conflict reconstruction and development
activities and the rights of women and children. As
such, South Africa agrees with the observations made
by the Secretary-General that the challenge in the
implementation of the Agreement is that

"[it] is not taking place in a post-conflict context,
as initially hoped for upon its signature, but in a
context of continued crises, terrorism and extremist
violence." (S/2019/207, para. 57).

Those activities have the potential of eroding trust
among the conflicting parties. The Council should
therefore continue to support the Malian Government
in dealing with this crisis.

It is ofvital importance to address those conditions,
given the increase in terrorism and violent extremism,
and to take the necessary measures to address them
so as to discontinue the vicious cycle of conflict on
the continent as a whole. That would also contribute
to ensuring the safety, protection and well-being of
the population in the neighbourhood of Mali as well
as sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. We underline the
importance of regional and international coordination
in fighting the scourge of terrorism and violent
extremism because the geographical reach of terrorist
groups is growing, constituting a serious threat to the
peace and security of not only Mali but the entire Sahel
region. In that context, we express our appreciation of
the French Operation Barkhane.

South Africa calls for enhanced efforts on cross-
border cooperation among neighbouring countries
in order to strengthen mechanisms for the effective
sharing of information, as well as close cooperation
and coordination between MINUSMA, the G-5 Sahel
and ECOWAS in bringing together efforts to address
the situation in Mali and the Sahel.

My delegation would like to emphasize three things.
First, we support increased assistance to MINUSMA
and the G-5 Sahel. Secondly, we reiterate the request
made by the G-5 Sahel to be allowed to carry out
cross-border operations into neighbouring countries to
neutralize armed groups in those countries. Thirdly, we
support all efforts by the Malian authorities to extend
their administration across the entire Malian territory,
especially in the north of Mali. The cooperation
between MINUSMA and other security presences on
the ground, including the Malian defence and security
forces, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, the French
forces and the European Union Training Mission in
Mali has had a positive impact on the security situation
in the region.

Mali is shouldering a huge responsibility and
making huge sacrifices for most of us across the rest
of Africa. I therefore urge the Council to stand by Mali
and its people.

