Mr. Santos (Mozambique): We share the message
of condolence just conveyed by the Chairman of the
African Group on the tragic death of Mr. Blondin Beye.

Allow me at the outset to join the speakers who
preceded me in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and
on the brilliant manner in which you have been
conducting the affairs of the Council during the month of
June. It gives us special pleasure to see Portugal preside
over the deliberations of the Council on this important
topic.

I would also like to pay special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for the

 

exemplary manner in which he guided the work of the
Council last month.

I wish to seize this opportunity to express once again
our profound appreciation to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for their relentless efforts and
dedication and for bringing the issue of children in armed
conflict to the centre of the international peace and security,
human rights and development concerns of the entire world.
Indeed, today's discussion in the Security Council
represents one of the occasions of highest priority given to
children in armed conflict on the individual and collective
agendas of member States, regional organizations and the
international community as a whole.

In 1996, Graca Machel, a distinguished daughter of
Mozambique, after two years of a laborious investigation as
the Expert of the Secretary-General on the Impact of
Armed Conflict on Children, presented a comprehensive
report on the plight of children when they are brutalized
and abused in the context of armed conflicts.

While presenting a global assessment of the present
reality and prevailing trends, the report searched for cures,
as well as ways and means to prevent a recurrence of
similar situations. In this regard, a wide range of
recommendations for action in several areas were presented
in the report, including, among others, landmines, child
soldiers, refugees and displaced children, health and
nutrition, psychological recovery and social integration,
education, reconstruction and the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. These
recommendations were subsequently endorsed by all
Member States of our Organization.

On the occasion of the presentation of the
recommendations and the study, my delegation affirmed
that the key to the success of this study lay in the follow-up
actions and appropriate mechanisms to implement the
agreed recommendations. Therefore, the appointment of
Mr. Olara Otunnu to the post of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General constitutes a major step towards the
common objective of putting an end to the violation of
children's rights in armed conflicts. We strongly believe
that Mr. Otunnu's demonstrated capabilities and the work
he has done so far constitute fundamental factors for the
attainment of our final and common goal.

As we speak today, in many armed conflicts
throughout the world the security and well-being of children
are being constantly endangered, regardless of the
international instruments and local and traditional norms
and values that provide for the rights, protection and
welfare of children, even in situations of active violence.

In this regard, it is the collective responsibility of
Governments, the international community and civil
society to join efforts in order to maintain international
peace and security worldwide through the promotion of
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts, the
protection of children during armed conflict and the
provision of the necessary assistance for rehabilitation in
post-conflict situations.

This goal can be achieved only through the
observance by all of relevant international and local
norms and by coordinated assistance to mitigate the
suffering of children during conflict and in post-conflict
situations.

We also believe that the needs and rights of children
must guide all actions aimed at resolving conflicts,
including those by peacekeepers mandated by the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Offices of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
as they have a vital role to play in ensuring that
children's rights are not violated by anyone.

A prolonged armed conflict in Mozambique
produced more than 4 million refugees and internally
displaced people, of whom more than half were children.
Furthermore, over 2 million landmines were planted
throughout the country, claiming even today more
innocent lives, mostly those of children.

As we face the daunting task of national
reconstruction today, dealing with the threat of landmines
and small arms and the need to assist the rehabilitation
and resettlement of displaced people, it is my
Government's belief that the present and future stability
of the country lies to a great extent in the development,
protection and education of tomorrow's men and women:
today's children.

An immediate task before the Government and the
entire Mozambican society in the post-conflict period has
been to identify, rehabilitate and integrate
instrumentalized and traumatized children who fell victim
to the war. Considerable progress has been achieved in
this regard.

The existence of landmines continues to be a major
impediment to the smooth resettlement of population and

 

the development of productive activities. Children are in
greater danger because they are unaware of the threat posed
by anti-personnel landmines. Therefore, awareness
campaigns are as important for children as demining itself.
An extensive demining programme is under way in
Mozambique, with the valuable support of the international
community. In a clear demonstration of its commitment, my
country has already ratified the Ottawa Convention on
landmines, adopted last December.

Mozambique remains committed to the promotion and
protection of children's rights and to the implementation of
the goals of the World Summit for Children, as well as to
abiding by all relevant international legal instruments
promoting and protecting children's rights.

In our subregion, southern Africa, efforts are being
made to curb conflicts through the establishment of the
Southern African Development Community organ on
defence and security for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. Regional efforts are equally being
carried out to harmonize policies and coordinate actions
relating to children. This represents our common pledge to
put children at the centre of our national, regional and
international agendas. We sincerely hope that the Council
will do more in defence of the rights of children,
particularly those affected by armed conflict.

