I have the honour to brief the members of the Security Council for the first time in my capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 concerning South Sudan, and since the previous briefing by my predecessor, on 17 December 2019 (see S/PV.8688). In my statement, I intend to provide a brief overview of developments in the Committee since the beginning of 2020. As with the Panel of Experts, whose members have been unable to travel to South Sudan since my mandate began, the work of the Committee has been equally affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with most of our meetings held on a video-teleconference platform. However, despite that, the Committee has continued to conduct its work with efficiency and fulfil its mandate. To date, the Committee has met on one occasion in person and four times in a closed video-teleconference. On 7 February, the Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan in a meeting in Conference Room 7 that was open to all Member States, concerning the Panel's interim report (see S/2019/897), which was submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2471 (2019). In April 2020, the Committee received a presentation by the Panel of Experts on South Sudan concerning the Panel's final report (see S/2020/342), submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2471 (2019), and discussed its recommendations through a written format. On 25 June, during a closed video-teleconference, the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts in a meeting open to regional Member States neighbouring South Sudan concerning the Panel's final report, and heard a briefing by the Permanent Representative of the Sudan, in his capacity as Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), on IGAD's most recent efforts to support the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. On 7 August, during a closed video-teleconference, the Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the work plan of the Panel, the mandate of which was renewed pursuant to resolution 2521 (2020). On 16 October, again during a closed video-teleconference, the Committee received a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. Finally, during the closed video-teleconference held on 20 November, the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts on the Panel's interim report, which was submitted pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 2521 (2020), and discussed its recommendations. Since the beginning of the year the Committee has received three exemption requests with regard to the arms embargo, two of which have been granted. In addition, four exemption requests, all of which were granted, were received concerning the travel ban and asset-freeze measures. Lastly, I would like to thank Member States, including those that are neighbours of South Sudan, for their engagement with the Committee and participation in meetings of the Committee this year. I encourage Member States to continue strengthening their cooperation with the Panel of Experts and the Committee.
