Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I too thank United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay and Under-
Secretary-General Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide Dieng for their
briefings.

Nigeria followed with keen interest the visit of
High commissioner Pillay and Special Adviser Dieng
to South Sudan. We welcome the engagement of the
United Nations with the Government of South Sudan,
as well as the opposition. What began as intraparty
political dispute last December, which could have
been and, indeed, should have been resolved through
dialogue, has degenerated to the point where the very
future of South Sudan is now severly threatened.

Four months into the conflict, we are now seeing
events that have all the hallmarks of mass atrocity
crimes. Nigeria strongly condemns those crimes. High
Commissioner Pillay has rightly described the situation
in South Sudan as a

"deadly mix of recrimination, hate speech and
revenge killings that has developed relentlessly
over the past four and a half months and is now
reaching a boiling point".

The situation is looking dangerously similar to that
which preceeded the genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, which took place 20 years ago. The world has
collectively said "Never again" to genocide. It is time
for us to stand firmly by that solemn pledge.

As the body charged with maintaining international
peace and security, we see the need for strong deterrent
action by the Council to put a stop to the slaughter of
innocent civilians on the basis of ethnicity, religion
or whatever consideration. We call for the arrest and
prosecution of the perpetrators and instigators of the
mass killings in Bentiu and Bor in order to discourage
impunity.

On another note, we welcome the resumption
of peace talks this week by the Government and
opposition and commend the mediation role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
that regard. We reiterate Nigeria's position that there
cannot be a military solution to the conflict. We urge
both parties to the conflict to embrace dialogue as the
only path to sustainable peace, security and stability in
South Sudan.
With thousands killed and millions displaced,
ending the conflict in South Sudan is a matter of extreme
urgency. The millions of displaced South Sudanese
cannot wait while the politicians dither - enough of the
bloodshed, enough of the hardship. The time for peace
is now and the Council, as well as the international
community, must continue to take all necessary steps
to support South Sudan in that regard.

