Let me begin by thanking the Dominican Republic for bringing the youth, peace and security agenda forward, even at this difficult moment. I wish a happy Freedom Day to South Africa and would like to say to Jerry, in batik, he is truly free. We also thank the Secretary-General and all briefers - Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth; Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf; and Mr. Gatwal Gatkuoth - for updating us on the important progress made on and the gaps pertaining to the youth, peace and security agenda. I would like to highlight the importance of unity, solidarity and renewed multilateral cooperation in addressing the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic. This crisis requires the active participation of multi-stakeholders, including youth. We commend all young persons who work courageously as health workers, refugee workers, young citizens and Samaritans on the front lines to fight the pandemic. Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) both clearly highlight the invaluable role of young people in preventing conflicts and sustaining peace. Unfortunately, violence has wrecked the future of a quarter of the global youth population. We believe that their aspirations should be heard, particularly in the context of a series of dialogues, so as to strengthen their meaningful participation. Young people should not simply be subjects but also decision-makers. Youth from Taiz, Yemen, to Juba, South Sudan, and from all parts of the world should be supported by the international community. In that regard, allow me to highlight several pertinent points on this matter. First, the participation of young people can increase the legitimacy and sustainability of peace efforts. Their voices matter in promoting mutual trust and understanding. Leaving them out of the equation leads to an imbalanced approach to peace and may create a perception of injustice and deepen existing challenges to peace. A greater role in sustaining peace gives them a sense of belonging and a place to engage in a constructive manner. Secondly, it will enhance their social awareness and opportunities. Indonesia's current democratic system would have never been possible without youth participation and movements. Youth drive our social progress and inspire political changes in a democratic direction. Many members of our national Parliament for the period 2019- 2024 are under the age of 30. Last year the President of Indonesia also appointed several young people to prominent positions within the Government to provide fresh and innovative ideas as well as sound advice. They are not only the beneficiaries of development but also movers, influencers and drivers of development in Indonesia. When they are provided with opportunities, capacity-building and quality education, youth can become an engine for powerful social changes and peace. Thirdly, youth can be agents of change in their local communities. Engaging youth within their communities is vital in building sustainable peace and countering violent extremist narratives that may incite terrorist acts. In 2019, we hosted a regional workshop on establishing youth ambassadors for peace against terrorism and violent extremism so as to build networks and spread positive messages through social media. The more engaged young people are, the less vulnerable they are to extremism. Thus, we believe in the importance of meaningful dialogue between youth and local religious leaders. Last year Indonesia organized Santri for Peace, which brought together young religious actors to promote dialogue and foster understanding in a diverse community. We would like to echo the Secretary-General's call for action on youth, peace and security, on the need to do more for youth and on the need to invest in and take into account the human rights perspective. For the sake of peace, we cannot afford to exclude youth, now or in future. Together with youth, we will find a way to make great strides towards future advancement. By engaging youth, including young women, we can better understand the situation on the ground and gain their trust, and we will be stronger in terms of preventing conflict and more likely to find solutions with a view to sustaining peace. Lastly, in this time of COVID-19, the need for young people to be involved in the development process has become more apparent and pertinent, since they, too, will be severely affected. Data reported by the United Nations Population Fund in March 2020 show that more than 860 million children and young people are affected by COVID-19 globally. And, as youth will inherit the world, it is their right and solemn duty to be part and parcel of creating a new world post-COVID-19. By investing in youth, we will have peace, we will have development and we will rebound from COVID-19 hand in hand with our youth. They are not only influencers but actors in shaping the future. I should like to close with a famous quote by the first President of Indonesia, Sukarno: "Give me 1,000 old men, I will undoubtedly rip Mount Semeru from its roots; give me 10 youths, I will undoubtedly shake the world."
