Mr. Wiltzer (France) (spoke in French): May I
first thank you, Mr. Minister, and, through you, Benin,
for having taken the initiative to convene this debate
on children and armed conflict. As the Council is
aware, France has for a number of years been deeply
involved in this question at the United Nations and
with its European Union partners, and fully supports
you, Sir, in this initiative.

All over the world, wars continue to bring death
and suffering to vast numbers of children. The
staggering numbers referred to by Mr. Otunnu and
Ms. Rima Salah - both of whom I would like to
thank - make clear this unacceptable reality. The
suffering of a child caught up in the storm of an adult
war is always revolting, but for a child to be exploited
and used in such a war is a scandal that the
international community must not tolerate.

That is why our debate today must be action-
oriented. It must enlighten us as to the urgent and
necessary measures that must be taken to put an end to
this situation.

As the Secretary-General's latest report rightly
notes, we are confronted today with a cruel dichotomy.
On the one hand, clear and rigorous standards have
been adopted at the international level to ensure the
protection of children in armed conflict. On the other,
however, atrocities continue to be perpetrated on the
ground, and those who commit them enjoy almost total
impunity.

That failure to implement the standards it has
decreed must be a matter of concern to the
international community. More particularly, it is a
matter of concern to us, the members of the Security
Council. Indeed, since 1999, the Council has adopted
five resolutions demanding an immediate end to child
recruitment and progressively stepping up pressure on
the armed groups responsible. Two of those resolutions
illustrate that progression clearly: first, resolution 1379
(2001), adopted on 20 November 2001, requested the
Secretary-General to submit to the Council a
"blacklist" of parties to an armed conflict that recruit
or use child soldiers in violation of international
norms, and for the first time envisioned targeted
sanctions; and, secondly, resolution 1539 (2004),
adopted last year, demanded that the parties identified
in the blacklists halt any practices in violation of
international law and established a graduated, concrete
regime on the ground providing - in the absence of
progress and as a last resort - for sanctions against the
parties concerned.

However, that resolution, like resolution 1379
(2001), has not been implemented in terms of its main
provisions.

France, the author of both those texts, which it
submitted to and negotiated in the Council, deems this
situation unacceptable. Accordingly, we subscribe fully
to the recommendation of the Secretary-General, who,
in his most recent report, reiterates the request he made
last year to the Security Council, that is, to agree on
specific, targeted measures in the absence of progress
on the ground. Those measures are necessary. They are
explicitly envisaged in the last three resolutions
adopted by the Council on this matter. We must now
move from consideration to action.

We are well aware that the decision to impose
targeted sanctions raises many questions. One of those
questions relates to the fact that groups identified in the
black lists are involved in conflicts well beyond the
range of situations on the Council's agenda. We will
also have to take into account the fact that some of
those groups are already subject to sanctions regimes.
Lastly, we will have to keep in mind the fact that
recruitment itself is part of a whole spectrum of very
serious violations, particularly those linked to sexual
violence.

All those questions will naturally have to be
studied and discussed in detail.

At the same time, we must avoid concentrating
exclusively on the issue of sanctions. Those measures,
while certainly necessary, must be part of a
comprehensive mechanism of monitoring and
reporting, as well as follow-up, with respect to
demobilized children. Let me briefly touch on those
mechanisms.

The first element is a monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Its purpose is to provide for the systematic
and rapid gathering of objective, accurate and reliable
information on violations against children in situations
of armed conflict. This information is absolutely
necessary if we want to move to action. The Secretary-
General, in his recent report, proposes an action plan
for setting up such a mechanism, involving a broad
range of actors, including, naturally, his Special
Representative, Olara Otunnu, and UNICEF. The
Council should approve the plan and request that it be
implemented as quickly as possible. The role of non-
governmental organizations within this system will
have to be clearly identified.

The second key element is the reintegration of
child soldiers. Denied the right to education and their
chances for balanced development - in short, cheated
of their future - these children are victims above all.
But we must also prevent them, deprived of family and
social guidance, from becoming a potential factor for
the recurrence of crises. Any country emerging from
war takes a risk by leaving its young people on the
sidelines, without prospects and knowing only the
culture of violence. Programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of combatants
must take into account the specific needs of children -
in particular those of girls, as just mentioned, who are
often even more severely affected than boys, and
whose reintegration is even more difficult.

Experience shows - and this is particularly true
in West Africa and the Great Lakes region - that
recruits are often re-enlisting: having been
demobilized, but lacking adequate care, children are
enrolled again in the ranks of armed groups. The
reintegration segments are often the poor relations in
DDR programmes for want of the necessary financing,
and also for the lack of proper coordination among all
the actors involved on the ground. In this regard, it is
important and urgent to appoint a leader to ensure the
coherence of all actions undertaken on the ground.

My final point - one that is of particular concern
to us - is the proven link between small arms
trafficking and child recruitments. Last week's debate
in the Council (see S/PV.5127) cast light on that link. It
is intolerable that parties identified in the black lists of
child recruiters continue to be supplied with light arms,
which are easily used by children. It seems to us
therefore that the Council should send a strong
message in that regard.

Ultimately, effectively stopping child recruitment
and fighting against the many violations on the ground
require us all to mobilize - States, United Nations
bodies and agencies, international financial
institutions, non-governmental organizations, regional
and subregional organizations and civil society. Each
one must come face to face with its responsibilities.

At the beginning of my remarks I expressed the
hope that our debate today would be action-oriented.
The draft resolution presented by the Benin presidency
endeavours to respond with ambition and
determination to the various points I have just raised.
That is why we fully support it. I hope that our debate
today will strengthen Benin in its determination, and
that agreement can be reached quickly on the text that
has been presented.

