Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Five years ago,
fighting broke out in South Sudan. Over the past five
years, nearly 400,000 people have been killed. Lives
have been lost and futures have ended. But in 2018 we
have seen significant progress. A year ago, the peace
process was stalled. In September, the parties signed the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. We have consistently
welcomed that as an important step towards bringing
peace to South Sudan. We also welcome the efforts
made by the region, the parties to the conflict and our
colleagues in the United Nations for their contribution
to securing this important progress.

We have been encouraged by the drop in the
overall levels of Violence in South Sudan as a sign that
the Agreement is beginning to make life better for the
people of South Sudan, although we are concerned by
the continuing outbreaks of fighting and breaches of
the ceasefire. In addition, although progress has been
slow, we are also encouraged by the progress made
by the parties in establishing some of the technical
committees and processes required to implement the
agreement.

Our sincere hope is that 2019 will see this progress
sustained and built upon, but we should be under no
illusion that this will be easy. We must not divert
our attention from South Sudan. More than ever, the
unified action ofthe Council to support peace is needed
to translate hope into real change.

The Council has made clear its revulsion at the acts
of rape and brutalization of women and girls reported
near Bentiu last month and set out so movingly by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
in this Chamber today. This is, sadly, not unprecedented
in South Sudan, as seen by the reports that 900 civilians
were abducted in Western Equatoria between April
and August, included for sexual slavery. The sexual
Violence against girls as young as 8 near Bentiu was
truly horrendous and was committed while the parties
claimed to be implementing peace. The victims deserve
accountability for the crimes committed against them.
Full and thorough investigations must be carried out,
support provided to survivors and those responsible
held to account. Like Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Patten, we urge that the hybrid court
be established as soon as possible.

The Council, for its part, should continue to
maintain the pressure on those who act against peace
in South Sudan and end the culture of impunity that
has endured for too long. All Member States should
uphold in full the sanctions in place already as a clear
message that those who work against peace will not
succeed. In that light, I welcome the briefing delivered
by Ambassador Wronecka and her activism over the
past year.

Despite the commitments made in the 12 September
peace deal, humanitarian workers continue to face
obstruction to the delivery of aid by all sides. The
2019 humanitarian response plan released last week
highlights the fact that 7.1 million people will need
humanitarian assistance in 2019. It is absolutely vital
that free and unhindered access be granted. However,
restrictions continue. A total of 52 access incidents were
reported in November; 39 per cent of these involved
violence against humanitarian personnel and assets,
more than a third caused by State groups. We call on the
leaders of South Sudan to allow humanitarian work to
proceed unencumbered by threat or hindrance in 2019.

Our partners in the region have been key to
the progress seen in 2018. We applaud the role of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and its members in this respect and urge continued
engagement, as it is essential to helping ensure that this
latest Agreement delivers a lasting peace. We reiterate
our call on the region to engage fully with the United
Nations and the members of the Security Council on any
proposal to deploy troops in support of the Agreement.

I would echo the comments made by the Secretary-

General in his report (S/2018/1103) that any deployment
of troops by the region in support of the deal cannot
compensate for the lack of political action by the South
Sudanese on security issues. We support the comments
made by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix during our
most recent meeting (see S/PV.8403) that any forces
deployed to support would need to be under a unified
United Nations chain of command and comply with
United Nations peacekeeping standards.

In conclusion, I hope that we can look to 2019
with optimism for the people of South Sudan. To make
a reality of their hopes for peace and progress, their
leaders will need to demonstrate their commitment and
will to implement the agreement. This includes putting
the mechanisms for peace in place, including finalizing
the transitional security arrangements and forming
the revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity, as highlighted by the Secretary-General. It must
also include putting an end to the fighting completely;
prioritizing protection from violence, including sexual
violence, for the people of South Sudan; pursuing
accountability for those that commit violations;
and enabling unhindered access to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance for all those in need and for
human rights and Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism monitors, who
were blocked several times in November. If we make
progress on these fronts, the people of South Sudan
may begin to believe that their hopes can be realized.

