Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I join my
colleagues in expressing the sincere condolences of
the Italian Government to the victims' families and the
concerned Government over the loss of 14 Tanzanian
Blue Helmets in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Italy welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2391 (2017). At the outset, I wish to thank the
French delegation for its tireless efforts which enabled
the Council to achieve this significant outcome.

Throughout this year in this Chamber, Italy has
stressed on numerous occasions that the Sahel is a
region facing serious challenges to its development and
security, such as terrorism, illegal trafficking of human
beings and other forms of trafficking and transnational
organized crime. This is a complex situation, which
the Council itself witnessed during its recent visit in
October and which was highlighted in the open debate
of 30 October held during the French presidency (see S/PV.8080). During our presidency in November, in
keeping with the French presidency, we evoked the
connection between the challenges in the Sahel and the
instability in the Mediterranean region. In doing so,
we hope to have contributed to the debate on the Sahel
region - a debate which, with this resolution, has been
enhanced by another important step.

There are four issues that Italy has always identified
as priorities to ensure that the Joint Force ofthe Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) contributes to peace and
stability in the Sahel. First, there must be coordination
and cooperation between the G-5 Sahel Force and
the initiatives already under way in the region, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the missions of the
European Union. Secondly, a clear political strategy,
such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, is essential to addressing the multifaceted
problems of the region. Thirdly, all operations carried
out by the G-5 Force or in support of it must take
place within an effective framework of respect for
human rights. Finally, the United Nations must support
African peace operations at the political and financial
levels. These four elements are in this text and form the
basis of our support for the resolution. They are four
elements that the Council has the obligation to continue
developing in the coming months.

With this resolution, we recognize once again
the efforts of the G-5 countries and encourage the
international community to support their commitment.
Italy will continue to do so bilaterally and multilaterally
as part of our work at the United Nations, in coordination
with the African Union and within the European Union.
In this respect, we recognize the role that the resolution
assigns to the European Union, and we are ready to do
our part to ensure that the discussions we will have

in Brussels with other Member States on the ways to
implement that role take the aspirations of the countries
of the region and the G-5 countries into account.

