Archbishop Auza: The Holy See sincerely thanks
China's presidency for placing this extremely important
topic in open debate before the Security Council.

Today's debate comes at a time when we face
the dehumanizing impact of terrorism fuelled by
violent extremism. The ongoing, and in some regions,
escalating use of terror is a reminder that this challenge
requires a shared commitment from all nations and
people of good will. Indeed, terrorism represents a
fundamental threat to our common humankind. This
institution was founded in the wake of an era in which
a similar nihilistic view of human dignity sought to
destroy and divide our world.

Violent extremism knows no border. Recent terror
activities in many parts of the world and in many
countries illustrate that fundamentalist terror is a
transnational phenomenon. They also demonstrate a
total disregard for civilian immunity as extremists
kill and maim women, children, the elderly and the
handicapped and commit unspeakable crimes against
women and girls. Religious and ethnic minority groups
are bearing the brunt of their ruthlessness. The utter
barbarity of their behaviour and crimes leaves us
dismayed and asking how the human heart can plan and
carry out such horrible acts.

Another indicator of the transnational nature
of terrorism is the presence of some 30,000 foreign
terrorist fighters coming from 100 Member States, who
enter areas controlled by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant across national boundaries. Once trained and
completely indoctrinated in the most warped and violent
ideologies, they travel to sow terror in other countries.

The internationalization of terror can be countered
only by a collective international response. This
response must also address the root causes upon
which international terrorism feeds. In fact, the
present terrorist challenge has a strong sociocultural
component. Young people travelling abroad to join
the ranks of terrorist organizations are disillusioned
by what they experience as a situation of exclusion
and by the lack of integration and values in certain
societies. Together with the legal tools and resources
to prevent citizens from becoming foreign terrorist
fighters, Governments should engage with civil society
to address the problems of communities most at risk
of radicalization and recruitment and to achieve their
satisfactory social integration.

Moreover, the borderless nature of the terrorist
groups requires the international community to control
cyber technologies that violent groups use to recruit new
adherents, finance their activities and coordinate terror
attacks. Their access to cyberspace must be denied.
Their access to funding must be cut off. No country,
no company and no individual must be permitted to
do business with terror groups, in particular in arms
and ammunitions. Collaboration with terror groups,
whether for profit or for ideological complicity, must be
outlawed. Member States that abet violent extremism or
shelter terror groups must be vigorously challenged by
the Council. Violations of international humanitarian
law and all crimes against humanity committed by
terror groups must be vigorously pursued.

Any lasting solution to defeat violent extremism
and fundamentalist terror must consider the centrality
of the inviolable dignity and rights of the human
person, regardless of race, religion, political belief and
difference. Too many individual citizens and groups
have suffered and continue to suffer death and all
forms of violence and discrimination because of their
religion, ethnicity or political beliefs. In the Middle
East, in particular, terrorists must never be allowed to
destroy centuries of peaceful coexistence of Muslims
and Christians in the region.

The mendacity and blasphemy of terrorist groups
that claim to kill and oppress in the name of religion
must be openly denounced in the strongest possible
terms. Religious leaders, in particular, have a grave
responsibility to condemn co-believers who seek to
instrumentalize their religion as a justification for
violence. No one of whatever religion or culture must
be allowed to carry out acts of violence and oppression
in the name of that religion or culture or under
whatever pretext.

No matter how grave the threats that terrorism
poses to our collective security, any effective lasting
response cannot be achieved solely by military
coercion, but rather through a culture of dialogue and
encounter that breeds mutual acceptance and promotes
inclusive societies. That is the only way to lasting peace
and security.

