Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): We are meeting here once again in very
difficult circumstances. I should like to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for having
responded to the appeal of the Arab Group to hold this
open meeting of the Security Council to deal with the
serious and deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab
territories. This meeting is a further example of the
importance of implementing resolutions of
international legitimacy, including Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002).

It is regrettable that the Council should have to
hold successive meetings in order to reaffirm once
again the provisions of earlier resolutions or to adopt
additional resolutions that would be unnecessary if its
earlier resolutions had been implemented.

The current situation threatens to destroy all the
advances that have been made on the path of peace,
and it is therefore our duty to try to stop the backward
movement and continue the peace process. The Council
should therefore order an immediate end to the siege
imposed on President Arafat and a withdrawal from
Palestinian Authority lands, a halt to the destruction of
the institutions of the Palestinian Authority and an end
to putting the blame on President Arafat, a Nobel
Laureate who is deserving of that accolade.
Security Council resolutions have not been
implemented and serious humanitarian developments
have resulted - since the Palestinian people face a
certain humanitarian tragedy unless there is urgent
intervention to provide protection for them. These are
elements that in fact test the Council's credibility and
require it to shoulder its responsibilities, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is an utmost priority that the Council ensure
the implementation of the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 in order to enable
humanitarian agencies and organizations to freely
provide assistance to the brotherly Palestinian people.

We in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania once
again reaffirm our full solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people and with its legitimate leader, Yasser
Arafat (Abu Amar). We call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities in the light of the gravity
of the situation, which does not allow any form of
procrastination, and to adopt the draft resolution
submitted to it for consideration.

