Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his briefing. We also thank him
for his unstinting efforts to keep the Council informed
of the humanitarian situation in Africa and in other
parts of the world and to address the practical problems
in a very aggressive and constructive manner.

First, with regard to the situation in Darfur, we
are seriously concerned about the continuation of the
conflict and the deteriorating humanitarian situation, as
reported in detail by Mr. Egeland. Attacks on innocent
civilians continue, and serious violations of
international humanitarian law abound. We strongly
urge all parties to ensure the protection of civilians. In
order to ensure this, it is all the more vital to
implement steadily, without delay, the principally
agreed assistance to the African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS) by the United Nations and others.

We recognize that the Addis Ababa meeting of 16
November 2006 marked an important step forward in
building a cooperative relationship between the
Government of Sudan and the international community,
and we hope an agreement on the strengthened
peacekeeping activity in Darfur will be reached
through constructive dialogue soon. In this regard, we
hope that the Peace and Security Council meeting to be
held later this month will result in further advancing a
political solution in Darfur.

We are also concerned about casualties and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) newly generated by
the intensifying conflict in Darfur. In order to manage
this situation, we cannot accept the current situation, in
which humanitarian assistance is being denied or
access is being severely limited. The safety of the
humanitarian personnel, as well access to the affected
areas, should be secured.

Ensuring security is the first step for effective
humanitarian assistance. The efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation cannot be separated from the
efforts on the political front - namely, securing a
prompt cessation of hostilities, developing the political
process, and putting in place effective peacekeeping
activity. Also, it is vitally important for non-signatories
to accede to the Darfur Peace Agreement that the
Government of Sudan and the relevant countries are
promoting. We strongly urge all the non-signatories to
participate in this process.

For its part, Japan has worked with the
Government of Sudan diplomatically through the
dispatch in October of a special envoy of the Foreign
Minister and also through the visit to Japan this month
of Foreign Minister Lam Akol Ajawin. We will
continue in our own efforts to work with the
Government of Sudan to help bring about prompt
political agreement and thereby improve the
humanitarian situation in Darfur and consolidate peace.
Japan will also consider positively further
humanitarian assistance to the affected populations in
Darfur.

With regard to northern Uganda, we commend
the Emergency Relief Coordinator for his vigorous

endeavours in assisting the peace talks in Uganda by
meeting with President Museveni and the Lord's
Resistance Army commander, Joseph Kony.
Withdrawal of the Uganda Peoples Defence Force from
the assembly points is a concrete outcome of these
efforts, and we hope that such a withdrawal facilitates
the implementation of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement between the Government and the
Lord's Resistance Army.

Although the progress of consultations is slow,
we commend the persistent mediation efforts of the
Government authorities of southern Sudan, and we
hope that the Cessation of Hostilities Monitoring Team
will continue to oversee closely the implementation of
the Agreement.

Although it is difficult to be optimistic, bearing in
mind past experience, we need to continue to work
towards the success of these consultations in order not
to miss the opportunity for peace. The Security Council
adopted a presidential statement on 16 November
(S/PRST/2006/45), and we need to continue to pay
close attention to the situation.

In northern Uganda, Japan has also provided
humanitarian assistance bilaterally and through
international organizations, including the World Food
Programme and UNICEF. It is encouraging to hear that
the security situation in northern Uganda has
drastically improved in recent months and that the
return of IDPs has accelerated. We intend to consider
further assistance in order to push this constructive
movement forward.

We wish also to encourage the United Nations,
which has a presence in northern Uganda, to strengthen
its support to activate the Joint Monitoring
Commission and also provide detailed and continuous
information on the situation - here in New York and
on the ground in Uganda.

In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and in particular those of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Egeland, in aggressively
dealing with the critical humanitarian situation in
Africa and elsewhere in the world.
