Mr. Koumura (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; interpretation furnished by the delegation): First of all, on
behalf of the Government of Japan, I should like to
express my appreciation to Her Excellency Ms. Hjelm-
Wallen, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, who, in
her capacity as President, has convened this meeting of
the Council. It is of great significance that today, under
her leadership, the international community is meeting
once again to devote its attention to consideration of the
problems confronting Africa.

Today, with the globalization of economic activities
and in the midst of world social integration in terms of,
for example, the environment and human rights, the world
is about to enter into a completely new era for
humankind, requiring that we respond as a global
community to problems arising in the political, economic
and social fields. What role will Africa, which embraces
more than a quarter of the Member States of the United
Nations and accounts for 13.1 per cent of the world's
population, play in the world of the twenty-first century?
This is a question requiring the urgent attention of the
United Nations as it stands at the threshold of the new
century. African conflicts represent 70 per cent of the
items on the Security Council's agenda. In 1996, of the
53 countries in Africa, 14 were affected by conflict and
more than 8 million of its people had become refugees.
Therefore, if we are to realize peace and prosperity
throughout the world we cannot neglect this situation.
Addressing African problems is indeed an urgent task for
the international community.

Recognizing the urgency and importance of this
situation, last year the Security Council convened a

 

meeting at the ministerial level. As requested by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General has analysed the
sources of African conflicts and, on that basis, has made
broad recommendations of policies for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts as well as policies for durable peace
and sustainable development. We now have the opportunity
to enunciate our own commitment to Africa and engage in
an earnest debate, again at the ministerial level, on the
various issues presented in the Secretary-General's report
and on how the Security Council, as well as the United
Nations as a whole, should deal with them.

The issues of conflict prevention and development in
Africa are inextricably related. Thus, I should like to stress
that in the presidential statement it will issue today, the
Security Council must make clear its determination that in
considering conflict prevention and post-conflict economic
and social development, it will return to an analysis of the
root causes of the conflicts and address the situation in
Africa from a comprehensive approach that encompasses
the political, economic and social fields. At the same time,
I should also point out that coping with these African
problems will entail a long process, of which today's
meeting of the Security Council is but one step.

Based on the initiatives of the African countries
themselves, it is essential, first of all, that we work for the
solution of economic and social problems which are the
root causes of conflicts; secondly, when conflicts do
unfortunately break out, that we promptly promote the
political peace process; and, thirdly, that we prepare the
foundation for post-conflict social integration and economic
development. It is hoped that the international community
as a whole will cooperate, spiritually as well as materially,
as partners in devising a framework to ensure that the
efforts of the African countries are effective. Thus, what is
expected of us today is that we draw up concrete proposals
containing the necessary strategic framework by which the
United Nations, including the Security Council, can address
that goal over the long term.
I am confident that a bright future awaits Africa. With
an awareness of the problems which I have just mentioned,
but also with an optimistic outlook for the future of Africa,
Japan has been taking initiatives since the beginning of this
decade to promote a new development strategy which takes
into consideration the inseparability of conflict and
development. In this connection, Japan has sought to realize
South-South cooperation based on this new development
strategy since 1993, when it hosted the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD), and in
convening two Asia-Africa forums, in Bandung in 1994 and
in Bangkok in 1997. Moreover, it is working in various
African countries, including the Ivory Coast, Zimbabwe
and Burkina Faso, to arrange cooperation between those
countries and other donor countries towards the
application of the new development strategy on that
continent. Building on the results of these efforts, Japan
will next month host the Second Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD II).

Most recently, in January, we hosted the Tokyo
International Conference on Preventive Strategy to devise
a comprehensive strategy for conflict prevention, bearing
in mind the situation in Africa.

At the January Tokyo Conference, seven specific
policy proposals were put forward. For example, it was
suggested that a conceptual framework for a preventive
strategy encompassing the United Nations, regional
organizations, Member States and civil society should be
elaborated. It was also proposed that importance be
placed on efforts to construct democratic communities
with full respect for human rights, and to eradicate
poverty, based on the recognition that economic and
social development and the well-being of people are
prerequisites for conflict prevention. Moreover, the report
of the Tokyo Conference recommended measures which
the United Nations and regional organizations might take
immediately, including those relating to the enhancement
of Africa's preventive capacity, especially its early-
warning capability, and the effective monitoring of the
accumulation and transfer of small arms into conflict
areas.

In view of the fact that approximately 20 African
countries have now attained annual economic growth rates
of more than 5 per cent, it is anticipated that a plan of
action will be adopted at the second Tokyo Conference in
order to apply the new development strategy to Africa.
Along with social and economic development, that plan
of action should point out the importance of conflict
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction in securing the
stability which is the very foundation of development.
Mentioned as measures to be taken towards that end are
those that aim at ensuring a shift from emergency
assistance extended in the midst of a conflict to assistance
for rehabilitation and for the safety of refugees. Moreover,
in addition to vocational training and the social
reintegration of demobilized combatants and refugees, we
expect the international community to recognize the
importance of actions aimed at restricting the illegal
transfer of small arms, which, particularly in Africa, poses

 

one of the greatest obstacles to the maintenance of social
stability in pre-conflict as well as in post-conflict situations.

Japan believes it is important for African countries to
draw up such new strategies for addressing development
and conflict issues in the form of specific national plans,
and to move ahead with their implementation. For that
purpose, Japan would like to further its efforts, in
cooperation with those Governments, as well as with other
donors and the United Nations, to crystallize those
strategies, taking into account the views spontaneously
offered by countries that have become model cases. Japan
considers its cooperation for Africa to be part of a
comprehensive strategy to address the problems of conflicts
and development which we are discussing today in the
Security Council. It hopes that its own initiatives will play
a role as catalyst in actualizing this strategy, which in turn
will solidify a strategic and ongoing partnership among the
countries of Africa, the international community and the
various bodies of the United Nations.

With this awareness of the present situation
surrounding African issues, Japan will work to ensure that
they are addressed comprehensively by the United Nations.
But it also intends to serve as a catalyst as the international
community, and particularly the United Nations, deals with
them. Japan is determined to continue its efforts in
cooperation with other like-minded countries.

Finally, with the permission of the representative of
China, who is present here today, I would like to introduce
a proverb of Mencius, that great Chinese sage of the third
century BC. His message, freely translated, was that
natural advantages are more valuable than heaven-sent
opportunities, but even more valuable than natural
advantages are unity and cooperation among people. In
relating this proverb to the African challenges confronting
us today, I would say that now is the time for Member
States, including African countries, African regional
organizations and the United Nations system as a whole to
gather all their strength and cooperate to achieve genuine
progress. Thus, I will conclude my remarks with an appeal
to the international community to join together and take up
the historic challenge that is before us, namely the
achievement of peace and development in Africa.
