Mr. Cisse (Senegal) (interpretation from French): I
must first offer my regrets for not arriving in the Chamber
earlier. I was in consultation along with the other members
of the African delegation.

I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Legwaila on his assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank him for his efforts in
conducting the Council's affairs this month.

Allow me also to express my delegation's appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Emilio Cardenas, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Argentina, for the talent and
devotion he displayed in presiding over the Council's work
in the month of January.

The international community welcomed the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol, on 20 November 1994, by the
Angolan Government and UNITA. That agreement, which
was the culmination of a long and complicated negotiating
process, was a crucial turning point in the fratricidal
conflict that has ravaged Angola for so long.

I wish to pay tribute to the efforts made throughout
this process by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, His Excellency Maitre Alioune Blondin
Beye, by the three observer States - the United States of
America, Portugal and the Russian Federation - and by
the countries of the region, particularly Zambia and its
leaders, that made an invaluable contribution to the
successful outcome of the Lusaka talks. It is now up to the
Angolan leaders to break with the past and resolutely set
out on the road to peace, national reconciliation and the
construction of a better future for all the sons and daughters
of Angola.

In this regard, the statement made this morning before
the Council by His Excellency Mr. Venancio de Moura,
Minister of External Relations of Angola, shed some light
on the situation prevailing in his country since the
establishment of the cease-fire and gives us grounds for
optimism. By the same token, the Secretary-General, in his
report of 1 February 1995, notes encouraging and revealing
signs of the parties' will to respect the cease-fire and carry
the Lusaka peace process to a successful conclusion.

It has always been our view that frank and sincere
dialogue - based on respect for commitments entered into
in the framework of the Bicesse Accords, for the choice
made by the Angolan electorate in the September 1992
elections and for the recent Lusaka Protocol - is the best
way to guarantee the establishment of the peace to which
the Angolan people so deeply aspire. The example of
Mozambique is proof that, with a genuine desire to forge
ahead, there is no obstacle to peace and national
reconciliation that cannot be surmounted.

Taking advantage of the impetus created by the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol, the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), meeting in
Addis Ababa from 23 to 27 January 1995, decided to
send a ministerial delegation to attend this meeting of the
Security Council and reaffirm full support of the Council
of Ministers for the peace process in Angola, based on
the "Acordos de Paz", the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the results of the first multi-party
elections.

On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Moustapha Niasse,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Senegal - whom I have
the honour to represent in the OAU delegation - I
should like to associate myself with the statement made
by His Excellency Mr. E. C. I. Bwanali, the Minister of
External Affairs of Malawi, as chairman of the OAU
delegation.

We believe that deploying the third phase of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), as provided for in the draft resolution now before the
Council, will contribute to helping the parties re-establish
peace and achieve national reconciliation in Angola. None
the less, the will and renewed commitment of the
international community will not in themselves be enough
to restore peace in Angola. It is essential that the Angolan
leaders demonstrate their unwavering desire to settle the
conflict and restore peace in their country by peaceful
means.

Alongside the efforts at the political and military
levels, it is just as urgent for the necessary conditions to
be created for launching the new United Nations
humanitarian programme, which must be put into effect
if peace in that country is to be consolidated.

Allow me to take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community to contribute generously to the
inter-agency programme for Angola that has been set up
by the Secretariat's Department of Humanitarian Affairs.

For its part, my country will spare no effort to
continue participating in the restoration of civil peace and
national harmony in Angola.

 

In conclusion, I should like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the courageous and dedicated United Nations
personnel, particularly those in the Unit for Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance, who risk their lives every day in
the course of the tremendous efforts they make to carry out
their mission.

