Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The recent events in south-east Ukraine
are of great concern. On 13 April, having convened
an emergency meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.7154), the Russian delegation has insistently
called upon a number of members of the Council to use
all tools available to them to prevent the use of force in
the crisis in the eastern regions of Ukraine. In response,
we have heard a number of ambiguous statements, with
some delegations expressing their understanding for the
plans of the Ukrainian authorities to use force against
their fellow countrymen. The result is obvious.

Those who usurped power in Kyiv through a violent
Government coup have now taken the route of ignoring
the legitimate demands of the inhabitants of south-
eastern Ukraine and exercising the unconstitutional use
of military force in order to pacify their own people,
whom they blasphemously call bandits and terrorists.
Such reckless steps are fraught with the potential to
unleash a real civil war in Ukraine. The first blood has
already been shed. The citizens of the south-east have
repeatedly warned the authorities that they are ready to
act as human shields. In a number of areas regular units
of the Ukrainian army and internal forces have openly
refused to shoot at their fellow countrymen. There
have been cases where soldiers have gone over to the
side of the people. Is that not why the self-proclaimed
leaders of Kyiv are deploying the right-wing militants
and other illegal militias behind whose bayonets
they actually came to power? For example, people
in black uniforms - not belonging to the Ukrainian
Ministry of Defence or internal troops - were sent
into Kramatorsk. Who do those elements answer to?
Of course, it is hardly likely that anyone can have any
illusions about the independence of Kyiv's actions. And
that raises the question that perhaps the coup scenario
for Kyiv was suggested by the countries whose senior
emissaries are constantly whispering things in the ears
of the Ukrainian leaders they sponsor.

The recipe for a way out of the massive internal
political crisis afflicting Ukraine is both simple and
complicated. The Ukrainians must launch a dialogue,
provided that it is inclusive and comprehensive. Every
region and political force in the country, without
exception, should participate in it on equal terms and
with the same right to decisions on the pressing issues.
All of that should be reflected in a thoroughly reformed
Constitution that Ukraine's multiethnic society would
perceive as trustworthy, based on a foundation of a
legitimate Government with a long-term perspective.
Without that, it will be difficult for Ukraine to remain
unified or resolve its current tangle ofurgent problems.
The plan is to make this subject the main topic at the
Geneva meeting, which for now is still on the agenda,
and it should be the basic task of the international
community when it expresses its concern about what
is happening in Ukraine. It must be made to begin
genuine constitutional reform, not a cosmetic version.

Right now it is vital that we receive accurate
information about what is happening in Ukraine. If
the internationalists want to justify their presence in
the country, they should assess the evolving situation
objectively and impartially. Unfortunately, the
report published yesterday by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights suggests the opposite.
The document is one-sided and biased. Its drafters
preferred not to notice that the current authorities in
Ukraine acquired that status through an armed coup, not
civilized democratic elections. Attacks by illegal armed
security groups and the pillaging of administrative
buildings by radicals miraculously qualify in the
report as peaceful protests, while demonstrations by
Ukrainian citizens in the country's eastern regions are
declared to be illegal acts. The report states credulously
that the Ukrainian Government is apparently firmly
committed to breaking with past injustices and
elaborating a new vision for Ukraine's future. It omits
inconvenient facts that testify to the fact that from day
one this Government's activities have been carried out
in an atmosphere of violence and lawlessness that it has
itself created.

The report gives no attention whatever to the
highly dangerous trend towards the uncontrolled
growth of aggressive nationalism and neo-Nazism.
In fact, the term "neo-Nazism" is delicately not used
at all. The raging chauvinism in western and central
Ukraine whipped up by right-wing and other far-right
groups is presented only in the characterization the
right of minorities to participate in political life is not
fully taken into account. Nothing is said of the public
calls to incite national hatred and even destroy the
Russian population. The pronouncements of the leader
of the parliamentary Freedom party refer to liberating
Ukraine from the so-called Moskal'sko-Zhidovskaia
mafia - for those who have not heard this gangster
slang before, it means Russians and Jews. I would like
to recall that this individual, according to the Simon
Wiesenthal Center, appears in fifth place on the list of
the most rabid anti-Semites in Europe. For all practical
purposes, this party is now in charge of the military and
other forces in Kyiv.

Those who foment incitement to murder and
violence based on ethnicity are criminals. They
should be promptly arrested and brought to justice in
compliance with Ukraine's international obligations,
including in the area of human rights, not acting as
the backbone of the National Guard and the current
ruling elite. Despite the fact that the report rightly calls
Ukrainian society bilingual, the true position of the
Russian-speaking population is not reflected in it at all.
We should remember that at different times they are
referred to as non-natives, a minority, aliens, invaders.
The Russian language is gradually being pushed out of
circulation.

There have been numerous cases of harassment
and of Ukrainian nationalists and radicals' use of
physical violence against representatives of the former
authorities as well as those who simply disagree with
the current regime. In recent examples, on 7 April
participants in a congress ofjustices were mocked and
insulted. On the night of 15 April the headquarters
of the Communist Party of Ukraine in Sumy was
destroyed. Unfortunately, the authors of the report
preferred to ignore this scandalous evidence of the
lawless acts of supporters of the current regime in
Kyiv. Instead, it is packed with references to the
testimony of various anonymous witnesses who saw or
heard something, somewhere. The report's assessment
of the situation as it relates to freedom of speech
and the press does not stand up to scrutiny. As if the
Ukrainian authorities' continued attempts to hinder
objective coverage of the situation, their threats against
and intimidation of journalists, their refusal to allow
representatives of foreign media into the country
did not exist. Concern about this situation has been
expressed not only by credible non-governmental
organizations such as Reporters without Borders and
the Committee to Protect Journalists, but also by the
European Commission. How can we possibly talk about
respect for human rights and the rule of law if even
presidential candidates in Ukraine - Oleg Tsarev and
Mikhail Dobkin - are being attacked, and Ukraine's
Parliament has finally been turned into a type of might-
makes-right democracy?

With regard to the OHCHR report and today's
baseless fabrications by Mr. Simonovie about the
situation in Crimea, that region has declared itself a
subject of the Russian Federation and therefore cannot
in principle be an object of the discussion in today's
meeting on the situation in Ukraine, and would not serve
the purposes of that discussion. We get the impression
that the report was fabricated based on conclusions
formulated in advance whose political orientation
Mr. Simonovic' expressed in a statement about the results
of his first visit to Ukraine in March. In general, we
are obliged to conclude that the report undermines the
credibility of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights as an impartial defender of human
rights. We will continue to closely monitor the work
of the mission. Let us see how its future reports reflect
the violence being unleashed on the south-east of the
country thanks to the Kyiv authorities.

We advise all who champion human rights in this
country through deeds rather than words to pay special
attention to the actions of Kyiv's self-proclaimed
authorities, who threaten the east and south-east
with enforced pacification, inflicting brutal, massive
violations of human rights, especially on the Russian

and Russian-speaking populations of those regions.
