Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Jamaica is pleased that
Mauritius has convened this open debate on the
situation in Africa. The fact that you, Mr. Foreign
Minister, are presiding over this meeting is a further
demonstration of your country's commitment to
promoting peace in Africa. I also wish to commend
Ambassador Koonjul and his team for the excellent
leadership provided to the Security Council during this
month.

The participation in this debate of the Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity and
several Government Ministers - from members and
non-members of the Security Council - as well as
President of the Economic and Social Council, is
testimony to the importance that the international
community attaches to African issues.

Deputy Secretary-General Louise Frechette's
outline of the practical steps taken by the United
Nations in implementing the report of the Secretary-
General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
confirms the role of the United Nations and the
commitment of the Secretary-General to the cause of
peace in Africa. The Secretary-General of the OAU,
His Excellency Amara Essy, has given us his
perspective on how the Security Council, in partnership
with the OAU, can best assist in bringing about peace
on the continent. This debate once again underscores
the need for closer collaboration between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations -
a matter of continuing interest to the Security Council
in fulfilling its mandate for the preservation of
international peace and security.

We believe that the practical steps outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict in Africa could enhance the relationship
between the United Nations and the OAU. To this end,
Jamaica supports a call for the further strengthening of
the United Nations office to the OAU in Addis Ababa.

We also support the suggestion made yesterday
that the Council should explore ways of involving the
OAU in the planning of its missions to areas of
conflict. Further, the United Nations must provide
assistance to African countries in examining ways in
which regional and subregional integration
organizations can be used to support economic
discipline and sound economic policy, and in
facilitating the establishment of solid institutional and
confidence-building links between neighbouring
countries. In this regard, we appreciate the steps taken
to establish the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and hope that the
Office will soon be fully operational.

While my delegation agrees that an integrated,
holistic strategy involving Governments, the United
Nations system and regional and subregional
organizations is critical if we are to attain a sustained
and lasting solution to the problems in Africa, equal
emphasis must be placed on establishing an effective
intergovernmental mechanism within the United
Nations system which will help prevent the further
emergence of conflicts, restore peace and security and
promote economic and social development. It is in this
context that Jamaica continues to stress the need for
closer collaboration between the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council.

The international community must redouble its
efforts to address the root causes that often underlie
socio-economic and development constraints. It is
increasingly evident that there is an intrinsic link
between the proliferation of conflict, the persistent
economic problems, the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons and the flow of refugees and internally
displaced in the continent. The United Nations system,
including the funds, programmes and agencies, and the
Bretton Woods institutions must work with the OAU
and its successor, the African Union, and subregional
organizations in addressing these concerns.

We also see as a complementary strategy the New
Partnership for African Development (NEPAD), whose
goal is to create conditions for the economic and social
development of the continent.

In the past two years we have seen significant
progress towards resolving a number of conflicts in
Africa, particularly in Sierra Leone, Ethiopia/Eritrea
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council has also given its full support to the
regional initiative on Burundi. On the other hand, we
still need to determine how to address more effectively
other, intractable conflicts, including the situations in
Angola and Somalia.

It must also be emphasized that development
assistance to countries for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
including child soldiers, is critical to the success of
various peace processes. In this context, ongoing
rehabilitation and reconstruction processes, such as
those in Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, must be given the necessary resources to
prevent the re-emergence of conflict.

The role of civil society, particularly that of
women's organizations, in conflict prevention and
peace-building has been pivotal in initiating dialogue
in many war-torn societies in Africa, for example, in
the Mano River Union and Great Lakes regions. This
positive dynamic must be encouraged by tangible
support from the international community. We must see
conflicts anywhere in Africa as affecting the future of
the whole continent in realizing its potential for human
security, economic development and lasting peace.

As we focus attention on resolving current
conflicts - and while there have been some notable
successes - the international community must
recommit to devoting adequate resources to preventing
the emergence of conflict in the first instance. There
remains no lack of agreement on the root causes of
conflict. Economic and social deprivation and abject
poverty have been identified as primary causes. Last
year, the Secretary-General, in his report on the
prevention of armed conflict, offered a number of
recommendations for action by the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the United Nations funds, programmes and
agencies. We must ensure that these recommendations,
which have been endorsed by all concerned, are
implemented.

The Security Council, including through this
debate, has taken a lead role in advancing this agenda.
We must move forward in full partnership with the
Economic and Social Council, which has significant
responsibilities in this area. We trust that the
participation of the President of the Economic and
Social Council in this debate is a precursor to a closer
relationship and cooperation between these two organs.

Our efforts to address conflict prevention and
sustainable peace in Africa must not be defined merely
by this debate. The commitment of the developed
world must be demonstrated in tangible ways. The
upcoming Monterrey summit on financing for
development provides an opportunity for the developed
world to commit to preventing armed conflict and
sustaining peace in Africa and elsewhere. Commitment
to sustainable development and poverty reduction must
be the first step in eliminating the causes of conflict.

We recognize that the needs have dramatically
increased in the last decade, while available resources
are frozen in time. Resources once tied to the
ideological battle of the cold-war era must now be
freed for human development.

Minister O'Donnell of Ireland made the point
early in this debate that the 2015 international
development goals will not be achieved without ethical
political leadership from developed countries. My
delegation is gratified that Ireland and others are
demonstrating such leadership in a tangible way.

The global community has demonstrated the
political will necessary to deal with certain issues, not
the least of which is the scourge of international
terrorism. Our reaction to international terrorism in the
past few months has been unprecedented. The
international community must equally commit to
removing the causes of conflict such as poverty and
underdevelopment - proven breeding grounds for
terrorism. Baroness Amos of the United Kingdom quite
rightly made the linkages between conflict and
terrorism.

It is beyond doubt that violent conflict in Africa
is a threat to global security, providing opportunities
for international criminal and terrorist activities. The
Ministers of Ireland and Norway emphasized the
importance of tackling the illicit flow of small arms
and light weapons and the need to implement the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Small Arms and Light Weapons.

Jamaica fully supports the cause of peace in
Africa. It is our hope that this meeting will have sown
the seeds for further cooperation, leading to lasting
peace and sustainable development in Africa and to the
creation of a better world for all.

