Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretariat for its most useful briefing on
the situation in East Timor.

For many years, Norway has attached great
interest to East Timor, both at the political level and
within Norwegian civil society. Norway is now in the
process of planning our long-term engagement in East
Timor. As part of that process, and as a manifestation
of the close relationship between Norway and East
Timor, Norway's Minister of International
Development paid a visit to East Timor last month.
During her Visit, the Minister discussed with the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and the East Timorese leadership how
Norway could best contribute during the period leading
up to independence and how we could assist in dealing
with the many challenges the new country will face
following its independence.

In line with the contents of those talks, we have
adopted a long-term development perspective in our
East Timor policy. We will contribute to ensuring that
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank, among others, are given sufficient
resources to fulfil their mandatory tasks within the
transitional period. Subsequently, we are committed to
support the continued presence of the agents of those
agencies following East Timorese independence.
During the Minister's recent visit, she announced a
pledge of $1 million to the World Bank Trust Fund for
East Timor. That grant has already been disbursed.

To support a vulnerable peace agreement in a
post-conflict area like East Timor, a comprehensive
peace-building strategy is indeed required. In line with
that, we would stress the need for an integrated
approach with regard to political and development
planning. The development agencies should work
closely with UNTAET during the remaining part of its
mandatory period. Subsequently, the agencies should
be given a central role in the United Nations presence
following independence.

For its part, Norway is encouraged by the active
engagement among the East Timorese population to
achieve independence by the end of 2001. It is
therefore important that we, the Member nations
support the work done by UNTAET so that it can fulfil
its mandate by the end of this year. In that regard,
Norway would like to underline the importance of
Timorese participation in the Transitional
Administration. We welcome the further progress in
delegation of authority to the East Timorese leadership.

Moreover, Norway welcomes the achievements
with regard to criminal proceedings in the wake of the
serious crimes committed in 1999, and reiterates the
crucial impact that such proceedings have on
permanent peace and reconciliation in the area. In that
regard, we would also welcome any further steps to
strengthen the judicial system and the rule of law as a
fundamental principle of governance in the future State
of East Timor.

A question of particular interest in that regard is
the election to be held on 30 August 2001. Norway
recently discussed with UNTAET and the East
Timorese leadership the issue of regulations pertaining
to the election of a constituent assembly, focusing in
particular on the participation of women in political
parties and throughout all stages of the electoral and
constitutional process. It is our hope that the
preambular paragraph in the regulation encouraging the
equal participation of women and men will have the
intended impact.

We would also like to underline the importance
of the elections being free and fair. It is crucial that
East Timorese citizens living in Indonesia - especially
those in refugee camps in West Timor - are enabled to
exercise their right to vote. We therefore remain deeply
concerned about the slow progress in obtaining a
durable solution to the issue of refugees. It is of crucial
importance that all refugees wanting to participate in
the forthcoming elections are enabled to repatriate
under conditions of safety and dignity before the
closing date for civil registration, set for 20 June 2001.
In line with that, Norway continues to be seriously
concerned about the security situation on the border
with Indonesia and within the refugee camps in West
Timor. We therefore again urge the Indonesian
Government to take the necessary steps to fulfil
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000).

The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of UNTAET's mandate, and his
recommendations pertaining to a continued
international presence in East Timor, are due this
spring. Norway looks forward to receiving that report
and to participating in the subsequent debates, the
outcome of which will be instrumental for the success
of the peace-building operation in East Timor.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to UNTAET,
and especially to Sergio Vieira de Mello for
undertaking this most difficult task.

