Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of the
Russian Federation's presidency of the Security Council
this month, I will try to say the following in Russian:

(spoke in Russian)
Thank you very much, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)

I thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely and
important debate. The Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

We pay homage to those fallen in peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the renewed attention to the
commemoration of fallen peacekeepers on 29 May, and
we express the hope that further enhancements to the
commemoration ceremony will be agreed upon in the
coming year. Our common aim is to improve mission
effectiveness, protect civilians and mission personnel,
and facilitate transition after the end of conflict. To
realize those aims, four dimensions are, in our view,
fundamental: innovation, integration, instruction and
information.

With respect to innovation, the circumstances in
which peacekeeping operations are taking place have
changed fundamentally in recent years. Nowadays,
non-State actors, rapidly changing environments,
various challenges that are at the same time military,
political and socioeconomic, and new threats call
for innovation in our peacekeeping missions. Key
elements in our view of innovation are the use of new
technical possibilities, enhanced robustness and the
need for guaranteed escalation dominance. As our
contribution to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the Netherlands has therefore deployed cutting-edge
equipment and technology. The more effective we can
make peacekeeping operations, the sooner transition to
the post-conflict phase can take place.

Secondly, on integration, the new challenges also
call for better integration of our efforts. Peacekeeping
operations cannot function in isolation. In conflict
situations, peace, justice and development issues are
closely interlinked. Peacekeeping operations must
therefore integrate diplomacy, defence and development,
which we call the 3-D approach. Civil-military
cooperation and coordination at the country level are
also fundamental to effective mandate implementation.
In order to improve integrated mission planning and
execution, we encourage the strengthening of the
planning capabilities at the United Nations Secretariat
and at the mission management level.

Thirdly, on instruction, when addressing the new
challenges, we should further improve the instruction
and training of peacekeepers. The most valuable asset
ofthe United Nations is naturally its personnel. Our men
and women serve in dangerous locations where they
can find themselves in harm's way while upholding the
ideals of the Charter and the international community's
responsibility to protect. Solid instruction and training
for military and police personnel are thus of key
importance. It prepares them for their difficult task and
directly contributes to the effectiveness of the mission.
Predeployment training for peacekeepers is therefore
crucial, and in that training, special attention should be
given to gender and child protection, as well as to the
role of women in conflict prevention, peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes.

We should reinforce the capacity of regional
organizations to conduct the training and instruction of
peacekeepers. I am proud to say that the Netherlands, in
partnership with various countries, is actively engaged
in regional training programmes aimed at enhancing
the capabilities of peacekeepers.

Finally, information and information gathering,
collating and sharing are crucial for peacekeeping
operations. In order to make balanced decisions, around-
the-clock situational awareness is fundamental. We, the
Netherlands, have deployed an all-sources information
fusion unit to MINUSMA in Mali to contribute to such
awareness. Such units also contribute to the Rights up
Front initiative through early warning with respect to
human rights violations and the protection of civilians.
We encourage the introduction of similar units into
other missions in need of better situational awareness.

In conclusion, in applying innovation, integration
and instruction and in improving information
processes, peacekeeping missions will be more
effective in realizing the mandates given to them by
the Security Council. As said before, it is the ambition
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to be a partner for
peace, justice and development. We will continue to
be a partner with other Member States and the United
Nations system as whole in cooperatively making
peacekeeping missions more effective.

