Let me begin by thanking High Representative Valentin Inzko and Ms. Irena Hasic for their important briefings. We learned from the report (S/2020/345, annex) that there has been no significant progress on the ground. On the contrary, we have even seen roll back rhetoric on one substantive issue. We cannot let the memory of Srebrenica fade away by glorifying the criminals. Such confusing and divisive rhetoric is unnecessary, irresponsible and unacceptable. In that context, I would like to highlight three points. The first issue is support for the State-level institutions. Political divisions only perpetuate strife. Intensified harsh and divisive rhetoric cannot bring Bosnia and Herzegovina together. Indonesia calls on the parties to respect the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, existing legislation and the integrity of State-level institutions. In that regard, we would like to emphasize our view, expressed at every meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina, that the rule of law should be respected so that the basic structure of democracy is maintained and can be further strengthened. We support the High Representative's view with regard to the necessity for the authorities at all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina to live up to their commitment to a peaceful State. In that regard, let us think for a moment about the younger generation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who are still looking for the true meaning of peace. The younger generation, born after the war, may wonder why the conflict, the division and the segregation continue and are so important. Can we answer that question for the younger generation of Bosnia and Herzegovina? While echoing Ms. Hasi¢'s concern, I would like to emphasize that investing in young people is tantamount to investing in the future, which also means investing in peace. The second issue is the need for innovative solutions. As we are all aware, and as also emphasized by the latest report, there has been no substantial progress in implementing the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina since it was signed in 1995. We also share the High Representative's concerns about political elites who practise a policy of blocking all decision-making at the State level. That includes the blockage of the State budget, the appointment of the Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, before finally being settled, and many other State-level legislation processes. Year after year, there is no significant progress on the five objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. The approach needs to be changed. The system needs to be evaluated. The strategy needs to be revised. Having said that, we urge the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina to seek innovative solutions to address the stalled progress in the country. As long as there is no innovation, progress remains distant. It may be timely to consider all measures for further advancing the peace process. We also invite the High Representative to consider imposing the Bonn powers to address local parties that seem unable, or unwilling, to cooperate. My third and last point is responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. We highly appreciate the sincere and swift cooperation and coordination that have been demonstrated by the political and institutional leaders in Bosnia andHerzegovina in addressing the global pandemic, especially during the early stage of COVID-19. We believe that this pandemic will teach us a very important lesson. It is that political identity and divisions cannot save humanity. Solidarity is the key. We hope that this crucial turning point will endure far after the pandemic passes and that no accommodation will be left for selfishness, ego and hatred. I would like to conclude by expressing Indonesia's long-standing support for a peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country that is strong and united by putting the interests and voices of the people first, particularly the voice of its younger generation.
