Mr. Jayanama (Thailand): I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to express our views on an
issue of great importance both to the Security Council
and to all of us in the United Nations. Our appreciation
also goes to you personally, Mr. President, and to the
Netherlands for preparing the thought-provoking paper
(S/2000/1072, annex) on the theme "no exit without
strategy", which forms the basis of today's debate. The
fact that the Security Council has already, two days
ago, adopted a resolution on the report (S/2000/809) of
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations chaired
by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi does not mean that the
question of a clear and achievable mandate for United
Nations peacekeeping has been resolved. Today's
debate will further clarify this ongoing issue, and will
meet one of the important objectives of the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters related to the
Security Council, namely the improvement of the
working methods of the Security Council.

We find the paper refreshing, stimulating and, for
those of us who cannot always follow the work of the
Security Council on a regular basis, even revealing.
The paper advocates that exit strategies be linked to
peacekeeping-mission objectives, and that, once
realistic mission objectives are agreed upon, resources
be made available and follow-up activities take place.
We agree with that consistent position. The paper also
raises questions which made clear that this proposition
has not always been handled in an effective way. At the
same time, the paper recognizes that, in some cases, the
prolonged presence of peacekeeping may not be
beneficial. The paper thus expresses the belief that the
United Nations does not have to be engaged every time
and everywhere.

We particularly agree that frank and honest
debates produce realistic objectives for peacekeeping
missions. We should like to add that to produce good
exit strategies, in addition to debates of that character,
all parties concerned, including troop-contributing
countries, should be consulted.

But we are sceptical about the paper's advocacy
of an exit strategy based on the successful fulfilment of
a mission mandate as signified by the achievement of a
lasting peace.

Nevertheless, we admire the paper's theoretical
consistency and target-oriented perspective. Like that
of Boutros Boutros-Ghali's "An Agenda for Peace"
(S/24111) of 1992, this perspective is somewhat
idealistic and therefore difficult to completely
implement successfully due to very practical reasons
such as lack of human and financial resources and of
an appropriate political environment. After all,
sustainable peace can be achieved only by the national
conflicting parties themselves. Peacekeeping can help,
but it is not a panacea that will cure more deep-seated
national conflicts.

In view of the overstretched resources for
peacekeeping and of political constraints, maybe it is
time to ask ourselves whether it is necessary for the
United Nations to intervene in every conflict situation.
By advocating more frankness, honesty, transparency
and objectivity in making peacekeeping decisions, the
paper implicitly asks that type of question. We think
that some situations may indeed be ripe for United
Nations action, while in others, regional organizations
could play their part under Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The United Nations can also propose or approve
coalitions of the willing or other practical options.

Of course, it is better still not to have conflict -
or, realistically, to have as little conflict as possible.
And here we support strongly the Secretary-General's
initiative to replace the prevailing culture of reaction
with a culture of prevention, which we believe is a
highly preferable and more effective means to address
the possible outbreak of conflict. Prevention is better
than cure, as the old saying goes. Therefore, the United
Nations should do more work on preventive diplomacy,
which, after all, is one of the many components of
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's "An Agenda for Peace".

