Mr. Bockel (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank all those who have made statements. In
particular, I would like to welcome the presence of the
Minister of Burkina Faso, Mr. Bassole, and tell him
that I listened carefully to his very illuminating
presentation of the peace process.

I will also take advantage of this opportunity to
congratulate Burkina Faso on its election to the
Security Council for the 2008-2009 period. I have no
doubt that Burkina Faso will fully play its role there in
the continuing peace efforts that it has conducted in
recent years in its subregion.

In this respect, I wish to pay tribute to President
Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, who fosters on a
daily basis the sensitive dialogue between the Ivorian
parties. It is very important that a senior representative
of his country has come today to present its vision to
the Security Council and, through the Council, to the
entire international community. This debate is an
opportunity to show once again our full support for the
Facilitator and the Ouagadougou process. The Security
Council has endorsed the political agreement
concluded among the Ivorians and has referred to it on
a constant basis. But we need to forcefully reiterate
this support; this agreement is a real chance for Cote
d'Ivoire to emerge from the crisis. There is quite
simply no alternative to it today.

The process formalized between 4 and 6 March
2007 by the signing of the Ouagadougou political
Agreement and the supplementary agreement have led
to initial progress, the most visible of which, after the
deployment of the 6 mixed units of the two parties
defence and security forces, is probably the
dismantling of the zone of confidence, which the
Minister has mentioned, and its replacement by a series
of United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
observation posts. Also, significant symbolic gestures
have been made by the Ivorian parties to mark the
launch of the mobile courts, the start of disarming
militias, the restoration of State authority throughout
the country and the establishment of an integrated
command centre so that the formerly competing
security forces can be better coordinated.

But this progress is not enough. As Minister
Bassole indicated frankly a moment ago, and as the
Secretary-General notes in his latest report, which
Mr. Abou Moussa just presented to us very clearly, the
parties have fallen seriously behind in the
implementation of the Agreement. This is worrying.
Admittedly, no date is set in stone, but there has to be a
clear and irreversible prospect of open, free, fair and
transparent presidential and legislative elections, in
accordance with international standards. This objective
presupposes that the Ivorian parties abide by their
commitments and establish a new timetable that will
lead Cote d'Ivoire towards an emergence from the
cr1s1s.

In the face of a long and complex crisis, we need,
as the Secretary-General has noted: to resolve the
thorny question of ranks, which is paralysing any real
integration of the defence forces; to ensure an effective
disarmament of militias, which is a prerequisite for
their dismantling; to combat arms proliferation,
without which there is no security; and, at the same
time, to ensure greater respect for the rule of law.

In the very short term, however, as the Minister
has observed, priority must be given to the process of
population identification. I stress this point because of
the specific role of the United Nations in this regard.
Indeed, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General must certify all stages of the electoral process,

on which the return to civilian peace is based. In this
respect, I should like to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Choi as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and I pay tribute to Mr. Abou
Moussa for his interim work, which he has discharged
with competence and determination.

I stress the crucial nature of the task of
certification which the Council has entrusted to the
Special Representative in resolution 1765 (2007). Each
of the stages in the electoral process is important.
Without proper identification, how can we ensure
inclusion of all the citizens who wish to appear on the
electoral rolls, and thus how can we ensure the
credibility of the subsequent stages in the electoral
process? I do not underestimate the real difficulties of
this process, which is extremely sensitive, but which is
the way to resolve this crisis. Cote d'Ivoire does,
however, have in the Ouagadougou Agreement an
effective tool: the mobile court hearings. It is urgent
that the parties, as the Facilitator has stated, make rapid
progress in the large-scale deployment of these mobile
court hearings, which must have the personnel agreed
on and receive the necessary protection.

What can the Security Council do, and, more
generally speaking, what can the United Nations do? It
is not the Council's role to state, here in New York,
how the many questions that the Facilitator is trying to
untangle can be resolved in all their details; the road
map was set out by the Ivorians themselves in
Ouagadougou. But it is certainly the responsibility of
the Security Council, through its support for the
Facilitator's efforts, to ensure that both parties fulfil
their commitments and see that the process is
successfully completed.

It is essential that the Security Council maintains
its support for Cote d'Ivoire in this transition period.
France, for its part, will continue to act to this end, as it
has done all along. Like the Secretary-General, France
considers it necessary to preserve the mandate of the
impartial forces and the level of UNOCI troops, as
defined in July. This mandate, while adapting their
role, makes it possible for them to maintain their
capacity to react promptly in case of an attack on the
peace process.

My delegation has presented a draft press
statement along these lines, and we hope that the
Council will be able to adopt it today.

The Ivorian peace process has a chance of
succeeding. We must seize this opportunity fully by
supporting the Facilitator's actions and by showing
ourselves to be vigilant in terms of the commitments
that the Ivorian parties assumed in his presence. A
fresh impetus, as called for by the Secretary-General, is
essential today. It is not out of reach. The Ivorians can
count on the Security Council and, allow me to say so
here, on France to support their efforts to this end.

