Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, we wish to thank
the Chadian presidency for organizing today's timely
open debate.

Turkey has long emphasized the link between
terrorism and such transnational organized crime as
drug trafficking, money laundering, human trafficking
and migrant smuggling. Today, terrorist organizations
continue to benefit and depend mainly upon such
crimes, which are cross-border in nature, as a source
of financing.

In that regard, Turkey supports United Nations
efforts to counter organized crime. Turkey is party to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its three Protocols. We are
implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and cooperating the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
and other United Nations entities. All the relevant
Security Council resolutions dealing with counter-
terrorism have been swiftly implemented in Turkey.
We welcomed resolution 2170 (2014) and co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014), which underlines the importance
of international cooperation in countering the foreign
terrorist fighters threat.

With regard to the threat emanating from Daesh
and the Al-Nusra Front, Turkey has been taking every
measure at our borders to counter increased attempts at
smuggling and, as appropriate, to deal with the changing
nature of the smuggling networks on the Syrian side.
However, I would emphasize that the threat from
Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front cannot be eliminated
with counter-financing measures alone. These terrorist
organizations have been able to strengthen and seize
territory because of the crisis in Syria, which has
become a magnet for foreign terrorist fighters, with
the regime continuing to target its own people and
taking advantage of the inaction of the international
community.

In that vein, we also welcome the initiative to focus
on foreign terrorist fighters in Africa. However, the
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon in Africa cannot
be taken into account in isolation. It is also pertinent
to focus on foreign terrorist fighters travelling from
North Africa to join Daesh. Foreign terrorist fighters
pose a serious threat to source, destination and transit
countries. The threat of foreign terrorist fighters starts
the moment these individuals depart from their source
countries.

In developing countries, especially in Africa,
where Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab have gained ground, one of the key
aspects to tackling terrorism bred by transborder crime
is capacity-building, given the increasingly complex
and evolving nature of the threat. That is why, as a
major contributor to capacity-building efforts in the
security sector around the world, Turkey welcomes
the resolution adopted today (resolution 2195 (2014)),
which stresses the need for more capacity-building.

Since 2008, nearly 4,500 participants from
14 African countries have taken part in training
programmes organized by the Turkish police. Our
relevant authorities regularly provide capacity-building
training programmes to countries of the Horn of Africa.
The Turkish International Academy against Drugs and
Organized Crime, established in cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has been
playing an important role in boosting regional efforts to
combat drug trafficking and organized crime.

We also support United Nations bodies' capacity-
building efforts to counter cross-border crime in the
framework of the fight against terrorism. Some of our
aforementioned programmes have been implemented
in partnership with the CTITF and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, and we welcome and
are ready to contribute to Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism projects in the Sahel region.

Given the nexus between development and security
and peace, and our commitment to assisting countries
in need of assistance and our belief that international
cooperation is crucial to effectively tackling terrorism
and transnational crime, our efforts geared at bridging
the gap in capacity-building will continue. At the second
Africa-Turkey summit held in Malabo in November
2014, we reiterated our desire to continue collaboration
in all areas of peace and security.

In conclusion, I would reiterate once again that
all terrorist organizations should be combated with
equal determination. Terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations must be condemned. As we strive to
counter terrorist and related crimes, we need to uphold
the respect for human rights for all and the rule of law
as fundamental bases for our endeavours.

