Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the African Group. I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on such an important issue. I
would also like to congratulate the Belgian presidency
of the Security Council for having chosen to highlight
the link between natural resources and conflict. This
issue is, in fact, at the crossroads of international peace
and security, development and protection of the
environment. Those themes are intimately linked and
must be tackled together.

Even though no country is safe from this scourge,
developing countries are generally the most affected by
the consequences of illegal exploitation of natural
resources. We should recall that the 1992 Rio
Conference on Environment and Development raised
awareness about the fragility of our natural resources.
This was reaffirmed at the Johannesburg World
Summit on Sustainable Development of 2002, where a
call was made to improve the quality of life for the
world population without increased utilization of
natural resources beyond our planet's limits.

The Security Council is certainly not the only
body focusing on this issue. In that regard, it is
important to remember that since 1988 the General
Assembly has been considering the causes of conflict
in Africa and stressing the complexity of the
multidimensional and interdependent problems of our
continent.

Africa has long been aware of the importance of
natural resources to its development and stability; in
1968 it adopted the Algiers Convention on
conservation, which was revised in 2003. Since its
creation in 2002, the African Union has demonstrated
its authority by addressing the numerous challenges
facing the African continent. Among these, the quest
for peace and security is undoubtedly the most
pressing. Indeed, during the last few years, the number
of violent conflicts has diminished considerably, and
significant progress has been achieved thanks to the
determination and collective efforts of African
countries. The situations in countries including Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are examples of this encouraging
tendency. However, too many African countries are
still affected by the pernicious cycle of conflicts and
their destructive consequences.

The underlying causes of conflicts in Africa were
determined in the former Secretary-General's report
published in 1998 (S/1998/3l8) in which he tried to set
out the dynamics of conflict by distinguishing between
facilitating factors, mobilizing factors, triggering
factors and deep-rooted causes. In this picture, the
illegal exploitation of natural resources appears both as
a cause of conflicts and as an exacerbating factor in
ongoing conflicts. Hence the complexity of the
problem and the difficulty to understand it, especially
if more effective action is to be undertaken to prevent
conflict and restore peace.

Aware of the link between conflict and natural
resources, African countries and their international
partners are making increasing efforts to break this
link, in order to achieve peace and development on the
continent. By arousing greed or by financing military
operations, natural resources have played a negative
role in several wars in different parts of the world,
mainly in Africa, with its unlimited natural wealth.
This is a fundamental challenge, the consequences of
which have an impact on peace, security and
sustainable development in affected countries.

Conflict diamonds are probably the best-known
symbol of the link between resources and conflict. In
this regard, we would like to express our appreciation
for the interest that the United Nations has consistently
shown in the problem of conflict diamonds. In
December 2000, the General Assembly launched an
international certification programme for rough
diamonds - the Kimberley Process - aimed at
tightening control of the diamonds trade and
preventing the marketing of war diamonds. Initiated by
several African countries, mainly those affected by the
illicit trade of diamonds, the Kimberley Process is the
main international initiative to formulate practical
measures to deal with this issue.

Other national and regional initiatives aimed at
restricting the illicit trade in other natural resources
have also been put in place. This normative process
began thanks in part to the efforts of a number of States
and regional groups, particularly in Africa. All these
efforts should reinforce national and international
control measures aimed at preventing natural resources
being used to finance warmakers.
The situation of African countries emerging from
conflict deserves particular attention. Mechanisms
must be set up to assist the countries concerned in
promoting the responsible management of resources
and in ensuring the equitable distribution of wealth
among all stakeholders in order to minimize the
likelihood of the resumption of conflict. In paragraph
55 of his report on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/61/213), the Secretary-
General notes that:

"Inadequate global economic and financial
regulations, high profit margins and weak
administrative and technical capacity in a number
of African countries make managing the natural
resource sector particularly difficult."

In conclusion, an important prerequisite for
conflict prevention is mobilization on the part of
international community to assist developing countries
in their efforts to manage their natural resources in a
sustainable manner in order to promote their
development processes. Bilateral cooperation
institutions, donor organizations and other international
bodies should provide greater assistance to African
countries in order to strengthen their management
capacities in the area of natural resources. Such
assistance could involve helping to enhance national
capacities and structures in the economic,
administrative and customs-related areas and
establishing new follow-up mechanisms for the
extraction industries.

The international community must act
collectively to ensure that natural resources are no
longer a threat to peace but an asset to development.

