Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for the quality of her briefing on the situation in that
country. We also thank Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, civil
society representative, for her informative briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction the generally
stable socio-political and security environment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo two months after
the presidential, legislative and provincial elections.
We welcome that positive dynamic, which will
undoubtedly be reinforced by the measures taken by
President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, in particular the
release of nearly 700 detainees, which will contribute
to a peaceful atmosphere and the establishment of a
socio-political environment conducive to consolidating
peace; the intensification of diplomatic efforts to
restore confidence and strengthen cooperation between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, neighbouring
countries and the international community; and
the resumption of dialogue with national and
international actors.

In that regard, my country urges the international
community, in particular the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community, to continue their support to
the Congolese people and the new authorities, with a
View to consolidating peace and stability in the country.

The post-electoral stability in the Democratic
Republic of Congo suggests that improving the
security situation in the east of the country remains
possible. My country calls on the armed groups
operating on Congolese territory, particularly those
in the Kasai region and the provinces of Tanganyika
and Ituri, to definitively join the peace process, cease
all destabilizing activity and engage resolutely in the
ongoing process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We also call for increased cooperation
between MONUSCO and the Forces armees de la
Republique Democratique du Congo, as well as the
continuation of joint military operations by the two
forces, which is essential for the neutralization of the
armed groups.

Despite progress on the socio-political and
security fronts, my country notes with concern the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
east of the country. According to the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), about 260,000 children in
the Kasai region suffer from severe acute malnutrition
and need life-saving treatment. That situation is
exacerbated by the return of at least 300,000 Congolese
from Angola, which puts additional pressure on health
centres, schools and other basic social services. My
country therefore calls on the international community
to support UNICEF's efforts to improve the living
conditions of the people.

My delegation is of the opinion that MONUSCO
should proceed with the redeployment of its troops and
assets, with a view to better focusing on the hotbeds
of violence and continuing the stabilization process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To that end,
Cote d'Ivoire fully supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General for the renewal of the
MONUSCO mandate.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
continued commitment of Ms. Zerrougi and all
MONUSCO staff, as well as on the part of United
Nations agencies, for strengthening peace, security and
stability throughout Congolese territory.

