The President: I want to welcome especially, and
introduce to my colleagues in the Security Council, some
high school and college students who have come from all
over the United States today to observe the discussion on
refugees. We have college students from Hamline
University and the University of Saint Thomas in Saint
Paul, Minnesota; Clarkstown High School in New City,
New York; and the Adolfo Camarillo High School in
Camarillo, California. I think they all took the "red eye", so
if they fall asleep up there, they are excused. The
Presbyterian Church has assisted, too. I am delighted they
are here.

When I was a high school student, I, too, came to this
body and watched it, as did so many other people who are
now in public service. I am delighted they are here today
to watch the Security Council in action, in this historic
Chamber where so many important events have happened
over the past 50 years.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Promoting peace and security: humanitarian assistance
to refugees in Africa

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it
that the Security Council decides to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mrs.
Sadako Ogata, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

There being no objection, it is so decided.


The President: We welcome you warmly to the
Security Council, Mrs. Ogata, and invite you to take a seat
at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. We will begin with a briefing by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata, She
is well known to the world, has one of the most difficult
jobs in the world and has come here to join us today in the
month which we are devoting to Africa in order to address
us in the middle of a very busy schedule. After her
briefing we will have an open discussion on these issues.

I thank Mrs. Ogata for coming and invite her to
make her statement.


