Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We are grateful to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain for convening
today's important high-level open debate and for his
statement. We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the other briefers for theirs.

Indonesia, as a party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Convention
on Chemical Weapons and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as a member of the Southeast Asian
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, and as a party that has
ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
welcomes today's focus on countering the threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
by non-State actors. In that regard, Indonesia would
like to thank the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for its presentation of its first
five-year comprehensive report, covering the period
from 25 April 2011 to 24 April 2016. We are grateful
to the Committee's successive Chairs, Vice-Chairs and
other support staff for their hard work in producing the
detailed report.

While we are still reviewing its contents, some
trends seem clear. The report acknowledges that
States' reporting has increased and that most States
have enhanced their measures prohibiting activities
by non-State actors relating to nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery.
Indonesia stresses, and the report itself underlines,
that the 1540 Committee plays a vital role in
facilitating matchmaking, particularly in view of
the discrepancies between countries' economic and
industrial capabilities. The report's recommendations
for improving the delivery of tailor-made assistance are
very important. We would therefore appreciate hearing
from the Committee about the factors that resulted in
a drop in the total number of requests submitted for
assistance in the period under review by comparison to
those submitted before 2011.

We also note the Committee's observation that
funds in the United Nations Trust Fund for Global
and Regional Disarmament, managed by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, have been
used mainly for outreach activities, including those
related to visits to countries, and less for projects more
directly linked to implementation. It would be useful
to hear the Committee's views on how it and other
relevant entities can further assist countries in need of
support for preparing project proposals. Meanwhile,
we reiterate our call for the immediate establishment
of a fund dedicated to supporting Member States in
implementing their obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). We believe it is extremely important to have
intensified support from the Committee and its Group
of Experts, including through close cooperation with
national points of contact for resolution 1540 (2004),
along with adequate support from other relevant parts
of the United Nations system.

The Committee's report and the concept note (see S/2016/1013, annex) for today's debate point out that
the threat of WMD proliferation by non-State actors is
likely to be exacerbated by the rapid advances in science,
technology and international commerce that could
make the risk of their misuse more probable. While it
is right and important that States should take robust
measures to counter any WMD activities by non-State
groups in this environment, Indonesia believes that
what is of the essence is the fundamental question of
whether States have sufficient capacity to ensure that
their authority will prevail in every area throughout
their territory. Only when States are in proper control
of all their regions can national authorities ensure that
WMD, criminal and terrorist activity by non-State
actors is dealt with and effectively deterred. Therefore,
countries requiring assistance in building enforcement
capacity in their territories need to receive full support.

As my delegation has stressed in various United
Nations forums, it is crucial that the Security Council
and other relevant United Nations system entities
step up their principled prevention, credible political
solutions, and dialogue and mediation in order to
help resolve conflicts peacefully. Lasting peace and
stability will go a long way towards bolstering conflict-
affected countries' focus and energies in thwarting all
WMD activity by non-State elements in their countries
and regions.

Indonesia also stresses the importance of the
peaceful use of nuclear energy for development and the
need for robust international support to that end. The
1540 Committee's observation that there is a positive
correlation between the use of nuclear energy and
implementation rates of 1540 obligations is noteworthy.
Indonesia fully supports the aims of resolution 1540
(2004), but it also believes that the issue of WMD
acquisition by non-State groups must be considered by
all States Members ofthe United Nations in an inclusive
manner. Our actions should flow from multilaterally
negotiated instruments.
At the formal open consultations in June, Indonesia
outlined in detail many of its actions in the context of
its implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Suffice it
to say that Indonesia's deep commitment to the issue is
demonstrated by its vigorous adherence to, inter alia,
the treaties and instruments that I mentioned previously.
Through various national laws and programmes, we
have instituted comprehensive measures to counter the
development, acquisition, manufacture, possession,
transportation, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems.
Regionally, Indonesia is actively participating in
various Association of Southeast Asian Nations forums
on export controls and non-proliferation.

In closing, Indonesia would like to underscore
that, as long as a single nuclear or other weapon of
mass destruction exists, the threat to humankind of
its use, by design or accident, will persist. Just as we
are seeing detailed reports and matrices on progress in
non-proliferation, it is imperative that there be the same
emphasis on nuclear-disarmament obligations. The
lackluster approach on the latter and the flawed notion
of nuclear haves and have-nots is morally indefensible
and unsustainable. It negates the delegitimization of
these weapons and invites proliferation.

All countries must exercise their responsibilities to
make the world safe and peaceful for all. To that end,
Indonesia calls on nuclear-weapon States in particular
to show political will and contribute constructively
to ensuring that negotiations advance toward the
realization of a universal and legally binding instrument
for the prohibition of nuclear and other WMD, leading
to their total elimination.

