Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important debate.
I also welcome the Council's adoption this morning of
presidential statement S/PRST/20l6/6 on the subject. I
condemn all terrorist attacks, including the recent and
horrible attacks in Iraq, in which so many have been
killed. I would like to offer my condolences to all those
affected.

Terrorism poses a major threat to peaceful,
democratic and open societies, as previous speakers
today have said so eloquently. It tears apart the fabric
of society. Here I would like to recall a story about one
young man who was tempted to go and fight for Da'esh
but was told by his imam that rather than dying as a
martyr he would drown in his mother's tears.
While I align myself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union, I
would like to underscore the following. First, our
response must be collective. The threat of terrorism is
transnational, as we all know, and our response must
therefore also be multilateral. The United Nations has
unique and important assets enabling it to contribute to
providing counters to the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. Going beyond measures aimed at enhancing
security, it should focus on implementing the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), which Sweden strongly supports.

Regional cooperation and regional organizations
play a key role. The United Nations can use its

convening power to bring together relevant regional
and intergovernmental organizations and mechanisms.
It can also support and facilitate their work in other
ways. The African Union, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the European
Union, the Alliance of Civilizations and the Union for
the Mediterranean all bring clear added-value to global
efforts through established programmes, networks,
counselling and cooperation. In the context of today's
debate, I would like to highlight the priority that such
organizations give to issues related to the media, young
people, education and migration, and the United Nations
should continue to provide support to those efforts.

My second point is that we need more and different
actors. Governments and multilateral organizations
will not suffice. We need to team up with civil society,
the media, religious and community leaders, social
workers, faith-based organizations and business.
Through them, we can safeguard a culture of peaceful
exchange and dialogue - a multitude of actors
creating resilience through inclusive dialogue aimed at
promoting diversity and tolerance. That will contribute
to the loss of the appeal of the destructive discourses.

However, we must recognize that more research is
needed into the psychology of violent extremism. The
narratives - as abhorrent, violent and inhumane as
they are - are attractive to some. Our understanding
of radicalization processes is still too limited. The key
to success will involve reaching out to young people,
as we heard the representative of the Netherlands say.
Sweden therefore fully supports resolution 2250 (2015)
and the work of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
on Youth, Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi. At home, Sweden
has appointed a national coordinator to strengthen the
resilience of democracy against violent extremism. We
see clear and early benefits of that office, including at
the municipal level where many possible preventive
interventions can be made.

My third point is that we must target the root causes.
Destructive narratives sometimes fester because of an
abetting context. Terrorism and violent extremism feed
on grievances, which they do not solve, but nurture.
That is the logic of the instrumentalization that terrorist
and extremist organizations employ. Economic and
social disenfranchisement, lack of dignity, corruption,
democratic deficiencies and human rights violations
are sometimes part of the radicalization context. In that

regard, we must tackle those challenges resolutely, not
least by implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).

But other threats that underpin the ideologies
of terrorism and violent extremism must also be
addressed forcefully. That includes racism, hatred, and
acts of Violence based on Islamophobia, anti-Semitism
and Afrophobia. We must refrain from all forms of
scapegoating and fear-mongering. Targeting a certain
religion, region, nationality or ethnic group plays right
into the hands of the terrorist ideology that we seek
to counter. Interfaith dialogue and education play a
critical role in reducing such tendencies.

Terrorists seek to divide us and spread fear.
Our response - our counter-narrative and our
actions - must be one of inclusiveness, unity and
trust. Real dialogue, based on the equality and dignity
of all persons, is certainly the best antidote to racism,
xenophobia and Islamophobia. Therefore, the United
Nations - as the guardian of global dialogue among
nations and peoples - can and must be at the heart
of our global efforts to prevent violent extremism and
counter terrorism.

