Mr. Lee Moon Hee (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing today's open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.

Bearing in mind the President's guidelines for
today's debate, I would like to focus on, among others,
three topics of particular interest to my delegation.
These are related but not limited to sections IV, VI, VII,
VIII and XI of the annex to S/2010/507.

First, efforts to improve the working methods of the
Security Council should be undertaken with a view to
enhancing the Council's transparency, accountability,
legitimacy, and efficiency. From the ongoing situations
in Syria, Iraq and South Sudan to nuclear threat of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and emerging
threats of violent extremism, the decisions of the
Security Council must be respected and faithfully
implemented in accordance with the Charter. To that
end, we need the spontaneity of the entire membership.
The paragraphs of note 507, especially those
encouraging active interactions between the Council
and the broader membership, such as paragraphs
42 to 45, could be better utilized in that regard. The
Council could boost the legitimacy of its actions with
more public meetings in lieu of the current practice of
holding informal consultations. Paragraphs 28 and 31
of note 507 are of particular relevance in that context.

Secondly, the working methods of the subsidiary
bodies must be improved. The level of the effectiveness
of sanctions committees is directly related to the
authority of the Security Council's sanctions regime. No
resolution of the Council can be expected to be adhered
to if the Council shows little interest in effectively
implementing its decision through its own subsidiary
body. Even resolution 2270 (2017) - imposing one of
the most comprehensive and robust sanctions regime
ever to be adopted by the Council - must be faithfully
implemented ifit is to accomplish its goals. By refining
paragraphs 46 through 50 of note 507, the Council
could further solidify the working methods of its
subsidiary bodies.

In addition, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations can be instrumental in strengthening
the credibility of Security Council decisions by
contributing to greater support for the mandates of
various peacekeeping missions. We have to remember
that the Report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and
the subsequent report of the Secretary-General also
recommended the revitalization of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations.

Thirdly, better coordination with other relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, such as the
Peacebuidling Commission (PBC) and the Economic
and Social Council, should be promoted. My delegation
made the same point at the open debate on working
methods held in October 2015 (see S/PV.7539). As we
are all aware, the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016)
was a landmark achievement not only of the Council,
but of the United Nations membership in general.
The Republic of Korea, as a current member of both
the Economic and Social Council and the PBC, is
committed to working closely with other Member
States in following through with its implementation.

In this regard, my delegation appreciates the
initiative of Egypt, as a designated coordinator on the
stocktaking exercise on the PBC's advisory function to
the Security Council, to convene a meeting on 14 April.
A number of useful points were raised and discussed,
including the need for closer coordination in terms
of the sequence and the content of messaging and the
potential of dispatching PBC field visits to complement
the Security Council's fact-finding missions. On this
point, my delegation suggests that we incorporate how
PBC's field visits can better complement the Security
Council's field missions by updating relevant paragraphs
of note 507, namely, paragraphs 66 through 69.

Finally, I wish to express my delegation's
appreciation once again to all members of the Security
Council that have organized previous open debates on
working methods for their tireless efforts to make the
much-needed change in how the Council conducts its
day-to-day operations, one step at a time. My delegation
will continue working with them in the process.

The meeting rose at 1.45 pm.
