Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Bolivia, Mr. Sacha Llorentty Soliz, for his briefing
on the work of THE Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We thank the Ambassador
and his entire team for their successful leadership of
that subsidiary body of the Council and their flexibility
and skill in incorporating various points of View in
the preparation of the Committee's documents and
draft decisions.

Combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is one of the Russian Federation's
primary military and political priorities. As is the
case with any critical issue, joint coordinated efforts
are required in this instance. We are interested in
developing common positions with our partners so
as to quickly advance the non-proliferation agenda,
especially since the issues pertaining to that area have
become more acute.

Resolution 1540 (2004) occupies a special place
in the international non-proliferation architecture. It
focuses on establishing a sound legal and enforcement
barrier so as to prevent WMDs from finding their way
into the hands of non-State actors, including terrorists.
The main outcome of the comprehensive review
completed in 2016 reaffirmed the continued relevance of
all the guidelines formulated by the Security Council in
resolution 1540 (2004). It also confirmed the preventive
nature of the resolution and its inherent philosophy of
cooperation. Another important outcome is the need
to maintain positive momentum in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and the need for an overall
approach aimed at a long-term, thorough and, most
importantly, joint work, while taking into account
the long-term nature of the process. The institutional
framework of the resolution fully corresponds to the
tasks that have been defined, especially after resolution
2325 (2016).

We are convinced that, in assessing the work of this
subsidiary body of the Council and the Panel of Experts,
we need to be very careful and restrained. Establishing
additional bureaucratic structures pertaining to the
issues of the 1540 Committee, setting limits on the
duration of the contracts of experts or artificially
promoting radical or insufficiently developed proposals
could lead to the generation of additional obstacles
rather than enhancing the work of the Committee.
Therefore, we should be guided by the principle of "do
no harm".

In light of the ongoing terrorist activities in Syria
and Iraq of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and other terrorist groups, which have mastered the
technology of chemical weapons production and have
been actively using it, collective efforts to prevent
this horrific phenomenon are becoming increasingly
important, and we must act quickly. Reports of non-State
actors gaining access to chemical weapons require a
quick response by the Security Council and a thorough
investigation. This can and should be handled by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.

We believe that the quarterly briefings by the
Chair of the Committee to the Council should contain
information on the status of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by Member States, as well as
information on the work of thematic working groups,
the renewal of matrices, cooperation with national focal
points and updates of lists of donors and beneficiaries.
The specific issues of States should also be taken into
account in implementing the provisions of resolution

1540 (2004) and in preparing reports.
We are convinced that Ambassador Llorentty
Soliz will organize the work of the Committee in strict
respect for the sovereignty of the States that cooperate
with it.

We are interested in strengthening the
non-proliferation regime with regard to weapons of mass
destruction, including in the framework of implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). We are ready to constructively
cooperate with the new Chair ofthe Committee and our
partners. We fully support the programme of joint work
in the area of non-proliferation, which has just been
outlined by the Permanent Representative of China.

