Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting on this very critical issue.

We live in a world bestowed with the largest
youth population in human history. While that is an
asset for building a more prosperous future, it also
presents us with the major challenge of facilitating their
empowerment and of encouraging them to effectively
participate in decision-making processes in all areas. At
the same time, it would enable them to help to build and
sustain peace, including by resisting and denouncing
extreme ideologies.

In the past few years, extreme ideologies and
terrorist groups have been the greatest threats to peace
and security, with youth being their prime victims and
targets for recruitment. Poverty, ignorance, injustice,
apartheid policies, occupation, situations of armed
conflict, marginalization and exclusion are the main
factors that increase the vulnerability of youth and make
them an easy target for radicalization and recruitment.

A recent pervasive xenophobic attitude, which in
some countries borders on racism, is another major
challenge that increases youth alienation throughout our
world, which is interconnected by various means, such
as migration and new communication technologies.
Such tendencies provide breeding grounds for
resentment, dispute and conflict.

To prevent youth marginalization and radicalization,
we have no choice other thanto try to encourage tolerance,
invest in education and awareness-raising, alleviate
poverty, end discrimination, liberate lands under

occupation, in particular Palestinian land in our region,
and effectively address conflict situations. Moreover,
enhanced civic education and dialogue within and
among communities and nations have an important role
to play in raising our younger generation's awareness
of the threat to peace and security and helping to foster
an atmosphere of tolerance and civility. However, such
actions should not to be taken from the top. At both the
national and the international levels, youth need to be
involved and encouraged to meaningfully participate in
every relevant activity.

Safeguarding youth against the threat of
radicalization through the abuse of modern technologies
is also imperative. Online media platforms should
be induced to act responsibly. They should not be a
conduit for spreading extremist views among their
mostly young audience and as a means of recruitment.
The relevant companies should be responsible and
increase their control of the content exchanged through
their platforms. Should they shirk their responsibility,
Governments have to intervene and act promptly to
stop extremist online activities.

The strategy to which I referred would help to
empower the next generation to lead the efforts against
violent and extremist views and prevent it from falling
prey to those who seek only to aggravate such challenges
and cause further devastation and chaos.

In the context of Iran's unquestionable commitment
to combating violent extremism, I am proud to recall
that Iranian youth have been the most immune to the
propaganda and recruitment activities of terrorist and
extremist groups.

Allow me to conclude by recalling the importance
of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at
its seventieth and seventy-second sessions on a world
against violence and violent extremism, based on the
initiative of the Iranian President. Those resolutions
address, inter alia, the imperative of empowering young
people to combat violent extremism.

