Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I should
like to take this opportunity first of all to congratulate
you, Sir, on your exercise of your very important duties
as President of the Security Council for March and to
sincerely wish you every success in your difficult and
very responsible job.

Allow me also to express gratitude for the important
proposals and comments made during this exchange of
views on the report submitted by the Secretary-General
under this agenda item on the situation in Tajikistan.
Every comment and proposal made here is of great value
to us and my Government will certainly study them with
care.

Since the submission in November 1999 of the
previous report of the Secretary-General on Tajikistan,
major political events have taken place in Tajik society.
Decisive steps have been taken to consolidate all the
achievements made during the almost three-year peace
process in my country. For the first time in the history of
newly independent Tajikistan, pluralistic, multiparty
elections were held. For us, this was not just another
routine election campaign. The elections were a very
serious test of the strength of the peace process unfolding
under United Nations auspices and brought it to the
conclusion envisaged in the General Agreement signed in
Moscow in June 1997.
This was a very serious, qualitatively new step
towards the further democratization of our society. We
can say in all certainty that this democratic breakthrough
was truly won by the suffering of the people of
Tajikistan. For the first time in the country's history, six
political parties took part in the establishment of the
representative organs through elections and every mandate
in the various constituencies was contested, on average,
by five candidates; in some, there were as many as 10.
All of this took place not long after the recent civil
conflict in my country.

 

Preparations for and the holding of the elections in a
free, democratic atmosphere were not a victory solely for
our burgeoning Tajik democracy as a whole. We may
candidly and, in our opinion, must attribute it to each
individual participant in this process, from the rank-and-file
voter to the political parties and movements. It is important
to note that the elections took place in accordance with the
law, reflecting the current state of Tajik society. This law
was adopted on the basis of the amendments to the
country's Constitution endorsed in the course of the popular
referendum.

We consider the main achievement of the elections to
be the fact that the T ajik people themselves decided the
direction our society should take in the twenty-first century.
This direction can be characterized by the following central
points.

Tajikistan is resolutely moving towards the
development of a democratic, secular and pluralistic society
that respects the views of the people and observes
fundamental human rights and freedoms. To use the image
cited by the President of the Republic of Tajikistan,
Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov, the outcome of the
parliamentary elections has cemented the achievements of
the peace process and laid solid foundations for the
sustainable development of the country.

We are grateful to the Security Council, the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative, the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and the
Contact Group of Guarantor States and International
Organizations for the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
for their constant attention to our problems, assistance and
support, which we have appreciated, appreciate and, I am
sure, will continue to appreciate in the future.

Tajikistan now has special need of all kinds of
international support. We have reason to hope that this
support will grow. This hope is bolstered by the concerned
and active work being undertaken in our country by the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Children's Fund and many other specialized agencies of the
United Nations.

Moreover, the country's transition to the peaceful path
of development and the socio-economic reforms being
carried out by the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan
are gradually leading to increased confidence in us on the
part of investors, who are devoting growing attention to the
opportunities offered them by participation in the revival
and development of our country.

We believe that the Secretary-General will soon
submit recommendations on the new role of the United
Nations in Tajikistan once UNMOT fulfils its mandate.
The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan is prepared
to continue to cooperate with the United Nations on the
basis and in development of the joint experience we have
gained in leading the country out of a most difficult
internal conflict. We feel that this experience deserves
a thorough analysis and assimilation. It should help
enhance the United Nations authority and serve the
interests of all its States Members. We hope that we still
have some time to address this question very seriously.

Right now, it is important to identify in a precise
and balanced manner the United Nations tasks at this new
phase in the development of the situation in Tajikistan. It
is important to bear in mind the depth of the respect of
the Tajik people for the people in blue helmets and to
plan United Nations activities so as to further deepen that
respect.

We believe that the Secretary-General, in preparing
his proposals, will base himself on the real needs of our
country, whose peace and stability can best be
consolidated by helping to revive and develop the socio-
economic sphere.

