Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank the President of the Republic of Poland and
his delegation for organizing today's very important
open debate. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to the briefers for their valuable insights.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
just delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make three
points in my national capacity.

First, international law plays an indispensable
role in preserving the rules-based international order.
However, we are now facing acute challenges in
achieving full respect for international law. Flagrant
violations of international law have been seen in many
parts of the world, including power politics, unilateral
measures, violations of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of States and
the threat of use or use of force. In that context, the
Security Council needs to further uphold the full
implementation of and compliance with international
law, including humanitarian and human rights law, and
strengthen the role and validity of international law in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Secondly, it is the obligation of each and every
State to peacefully resolve disputes in accordance with
international law. That main principle of international
law is clearly set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides for diplomatic and
legal measures and processes with a view to achieving
the pacific settlement of disputes. We would also like
to highlight the importance of international judicial
institutions in maintaining the rules-based international
order and resolving disputes among States.

Thirdly, regional organizations play a crucial
role in the maintenance of regional and international
peace and security through various effective means,
including the promotion of the peaceful settlement of
conflicts, mediation, inquiry, preventive diplomacy,
confidence-building measures and mutually beneficial
partnerships. The Security Council should make full
use of, encourage and further enhance cooperation with,
regional organizations in solving disputes, preserving
peace and preventing conflicts.

In our region, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations has made great contributions to strengthening
dialogue, fostering friendly and cooperative
environments and promoting peaceful solutions to the
disputes in the East Sea 4 also called the South China
Sea 4 in accordance with international law, the United
Nations Charter and the United Nations Convention of
the Law of the Sea, and at the same time ensuring the
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea in its entirety and the
early conclusion of an effective and legally binding
code of conduct.

Wars and conflicts remain unresolved mainly
because international law has not been observed. More
than ever before, we should renew our commitment to
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law.

In conclusion, as a candidate for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the term 2020-2021,
Viet Nam will spare no effort to uphold international
law and make contributions to the Council's noble
endeavours to maintain international peace and security.

