Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): In recent days we have witnessed, with deep
concern, extremely serious human rights violations in
Kosovo, which have led to the death of dozens of people
and deprived the inhabitants of the area of their basic
security. The increased violence in Kosovo has become
manifest in a variety of ways. On the one hand, the
Serbian police forces have used excessive and
unjustifiable force against peaceful demonstrators, and on
the other, acts of violence and reprehensible terrorist
attacks have been perpetrated. Those acts, in the context
of the very sensitive political and security balance in the
Balkans, constitute a clear threat to international peace
and security, which obligates the Council to take firm and
decisive action.

Respect for human rights constitutes a fundamental
value of the international community. As has been pointed
out by the International Court of Justice, their violation is
an offense against humankind as a whole. Thus Costa
Rica has always maintained that safeguarding human
rights is not solely and exclusively a matter of the internal
jurisdiction of States. On the contrary, Costa Rica
believes that respect for human rights, and the violation
of such rights, are matters of the utmost interest to the
international community.

In this connection, we believe that there are certain
circumstances in which a violation of such fundamental

 

rights is so serious that it constitutes, in and of itself, a
threat to international peace and security and therefore fully
justifies the Security Council's invoking the powers granted
to it under Chapter VII of the Charter.

We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Our position and actions, in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly, leave no room for
doubt on this score. However, combating terrorism does
not, as we see it, in any way justify human rights violations
or the failure to respect international humanitarian law.

Thus the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must, in the
specific case of Kosovo, respect the human rights of all of
its inhabitants, regardless of their ethnic origin or political
Views. Likewise, it is imperative that it not allow the
recurrence of any excessive and unjustified acts of violence
by its police forces, that it prosecute the accused and that
it fully cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia.

It is essential to begin a constructive dialogue with the
leaders of the Kosovar Albanian community in order to
resolve the political situation and allow for an appropriate
degree of autonomy. The authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia must also allow humanitarian
organizations full access to the Kosovo region and facilitate
a mission of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. These measures must be applied as soon as
possible. If the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia failed to do so and continued to violate the
fundamental rights of the population, we would be
obligated to consider the imposition of additional measures
in order to compel them to change their illegal policies that
are contrary to the principles and obligations set forth in the
Charter.

Finally, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. We believe that imposing a prohibition
on the sale or supply of arms and other military equipment
to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is the minimal
response the Security Council can provide at this time.

