Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate Peru's timely convening of this debate
on an important topic that undoubtedly merits our
in-depth consideration.

Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

There has been much discussion on the connection
between terrorism and organized crime, and, although
there are clear differences in their processes and
objectives, there is a growing convergence between the
two phenomena, whose cooperation - reflected above
all in terrorism's use of organized crime to obtain
financing and logistical support - has helped them to
achieve their respective goals.

Due to the transnational, flexible, adaptable and
recovery traits of organized crime, it is well placed to
interact with terrorism, thereby reinforcing itself and
increasing its dangerousness. Terrorist organizations,
for their part, have evolved from airtight groups that
are very separate from other types of crime due to their
ideology into decentralized networks with multiple
connections to organized crime or, at least, common
crime. In fact, 20 per cent of the terrorists convicted in
Spain linked to Da'esh or Al-Qaida had previously been
imprisoned for other crimes.

In Spain, especially after the terrorist attacks of
11 September 2001 in New York and 11 March 2004
in Madrid, the security forces began to detect the first
signs of that nexus. The explosives used in the Madrid
attacks, for example, were bought from criminals
involved in drug trafficking. The analysis of subsequent
attacks worldwide confirmed that trend, and Spain
came to the conclusion that it was necessary to adapt
the response of our intelligence and police services,
with two main objectives.

First, we needed to link investigations into terrorism
and organized crime; by not doing that, we would run
the risk of ignoring crucial aspects of the threat.

Secondly, we needed to share intelligence related
to both phenomena and interpret it in a more open
and creative way in order to facilitate new methods of
prevention, research and analysis.

In that regard, the Intelligence Centre for Counter-
Terrorism and Organized Crime was established in
Spain in 2014, which entailed the integration of two
pre-existing bodies: the Intelligence Centre against
Organized Crime and the National Anti-Terrorism
Coordination Center. That was a pioneering step in
terms of the architecture of the intelligence services,
based on the structure of the so-called fusion centres,
which broke with the traditional organic separation
of the fight against both phenomena by broadening
the scope of knowledge and intelligence, increasing
coordination, improving response and, at the same time,
facilitating a more efficient use of available resources,
while avoiding duplication.

The establishment of the Intelligence Centre led to
the interconnection of the relevant databases, which has
made it possible to detect commonalities in 14 per cent
of investigations. Such commonalities, mainly between
individuals linked to terrorist organizations and related
to drug trafficking and money-laundering, have served
to pave the way for fresh avenues of investigation with
an innovative and more effective strategic approach.

With that same philosophy, the new national
strategy against organized crime and serious crime,
adopted in January, establishes as one of its 10 focal
points the response to the link between organized crime
and terrorism, including the following actions.

First, the activities of the aforementioned
Intelligence Center against Terrorism and Organized
Crime must be stepped up, in both the preparation of
strategic intelligence and the effective coordination
of investigations.

Secondly, the work of the police units dedicated
to the combat against those two phenomena must
be promoted by fostering the creation of joint
investigation teams.

Thirdly, databases on organized crime and terrorism
must be improved so as to enhance the early detection
of possible links between criminal and terrorist groups
and their possible targets and interconnections.

Lastly, information exchanges at the international
level must be pursued.

In short, Spain believes that the existence of
connections between terrorism and organized crime
constitutes a threat that should not be underestimated
and that requires specific measures to ensure better
coordination in police investigations into both
phenomena and greater exchange of intelligence.

