Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank Mr. Gambari for his
briefing. I would also like to express my appreciation
for Mr. Gambari's tireless facilitation efforts in
addressing the Myanmar issue and the positive
progress that has been achieved.

China believes that Mr. Gambari's recent visit has
yielded positive results on many aspects, including the
following: visiting Myanmar earlier than scheduled;
engaging in candid dialogue with the Myanmar
leadership and several ministers; meeting with Aung
San Suu Kyi and with Minister Aung Kyi, the liaison
officer for this political dialogue; the positive
statement by Aung San Suu Kyi on the dialogue
process; and Aung San Suu Kyi's contacts with
Minister Aung Kyi and with the leadership of the
National League for Democracy. Also, Mr. Gambari
was invited to visit Myanmar again. Moreover, the
Myanmar Government has agreed to allow the
International Committee of the Red Cross to visit the
country and is now receiving Mr. Pinheiro, the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar. All these positive signs show that the
political process in Myanmar is on the right track and
is moving in the right direction. We have noted that the
Special Advisor was unable to meet the top leader of
Myanmar, which gave rise to various speculations by
the media. However, in our view, the benchmarks for
evaluating whether the visit was a success or not
should not rest on whom he met or where he has been.
The judgement should be based on whether the good
offices can move the overall situation of Myanmar
forward in a positive direction. By this standard,
Mr. Gambari's visit was, indeed, a success.

As mentioned by Mr. Gambari on many
occasions, the issue of Myanmar cannot be resolved
overnight and the Secretary-General's good offices are
a process. While putting full confidence in the good
offices, the international community should also show
due patience for the process and results of those
efforts. Rome was not built in a day. Myanmar is faced
with various kinds of complex problems, and an
appropriate and comprehensive settlement will,
inevitably, take some time. The Secretary-General's
good offices also need to be carried out in an
incremental, step-by-step manner, with gradual results.

By inviting Mr. Gambari for another visit,
Myanmar has shown its willingness to continue its
contacts and cooperation with the United Nations. We
encourage Mr. Gambari to further enhance mutual
trust, to continue his candid dialogue with Myanmar
and to put forward feasible policy and technical
recommendations based on the national conditions of
the country and provide facilitation and assistance for
the political dialogue process. China also calls on the
United Nations to focus its attention on how to help
Myanmar develop its economy and improve the
livelihood of its people.

The international community should make
positive efforts to compliment the Secretary-General's
good offices and provide constructive approaches for
the settlement of the Myanmar issue. In essence, the
Myanmar issue is an internal affair of the country and
does not pose any threat to international or regional
peace and security. The situation in Myanmar is
gradually calming down and turning for the better.
People's lives are coming back to normal. This is the
common wish of every nation that sincerely wants to
help Myanmar. The international community should
welcome the current good momentum and push for
further improvement of the situation.

Sanctions will not help resolve the issue, but
rather further complicate the situation. Sanctions will
even undermine the dialogue and the reconciliation
process that is starting and interrupt the existing
contacts on cooperation between Myanmar and the
United Nations. This is the last thing that China, and
all other countries in the region, wishes to see. The
international community should create a relaxing,
external environment for the dialogue process and
encourage the Myanmar Government to continue its
cooperation with the United Nations. It should also
provide assistance to the country in its economic and
social development. The comprehensive solution of the
Myanmar issue relies mainly on the efforts of the
Government and people of Myanmar through inclusive
dialogue and full consultation.

In our view, the Myanmar issue mainly has three
aspects. Firstly, the Myanmar Government needs to see
how to improve the lives of its people and achieve
comprehensive economic and social development.
Secondly, it also needs to decide how to promote ethnic
harmony and ensure that the fruits of development are
shared by all. Thirdly, it needs to consider how it can
expand political participation and promote democracy
and the rule of law.

We sincerely hope - and believe - that through
dialogue the Myanmar Government will listen
carefully to the views of all parties and take further
steps to address each and every issue relating to
ordinary people's lives, to the rights and interests of
ethnic groups and to democratization. We also hope
that all parties to the dialogue can give top priority to
maintaining national unity and stability and to
promoting long-term development, which is in the
overall interest of the country. We hope that mutual
trust will be built, common ground will be expanded
and a positive and flexible approach will be taken to
push for more positive and tangible results from the
dialogue.

China supports the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in playing a constructive role
in the Myanmar issue. Stability and development in
Myanmar are in the interest of all countries in South-
East Asia. We hope that ASEAN countries will
continue to help Myanmar as a family member and
work together for harmonious development in the
region.

China also welcomes the assistance offered to
Myanmar by other countries through bilateral channels.
We keep our minds open to all constructive ideas that
may help properly resolve the Myanmar issue. At the
same time, all assistance by the international
community, no matter in what form, should obtain the
understanding and cooperation from the Myanmar
Government and people.

As a friendly neighbour of Myanmar, China has
followed the Myanmar situation very closely. We
sincerely hope Myanmar will return to stability, make
progress in development and achieve political
democracy and national harmony at an early date. We
do not want to see a relapse into turbulence in the
country. China will continue, in its own way, to support
the Secretary-General's good offices and to help the
Myanmar Government and people properly address the
problems they are now facing. We are also ready to
work with other members of the international
community.

