Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, let me congratulate you, Madam President,
on the excellent conduct of the work of the Security
Council during Uruguay's presidency. We welcome the
convening of today's open debate and the presidency's
concept note (S/2017/365, annex) on the first
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) on
the protection of civilians. The note deals in particular
with issues related to medical personnel and health care
in the context of armed conflicts at a critical moment in
international affairs in relation to humanitarian issues.
We thank the Secretary-General, the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights Watch for
their statements.

Over the course of the last few years, we have
witnessed the increasing degradation that the
prolongation of conflicts has caused for the most
vulnerable, such as boys, girls, women and the elderly.
However, as stated in the report of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the health system,
and medical missions in particular, are increasingly
among the first victims of the war. In 2017 alone, more
than 80 attacks on medical missions worldwide have
been reported.

In that regard, my country shares the concern over
the situation being faced by the civilian population
in situations of armed conflict in some parts of the
world and the recurring failure on behalf of the parties
to recognize their obligation to respect and protect
civilians. That demands more accountability when these
parameters are violated, for that is not only a violation
of the guiding principles of international humanitarian
law, but also of humanity itself.

The policies of the Government in Colombia are
aimed at ensuring that all State and non-State parties in
armed conflicts respect their obligations to respect and
protect health and humanitarian workers and related
facilities, as well as the injured and sick. In that regard,
we rely on what we have learned from experiences
in the armed conflict that afflicted my country for
more than five decades. Our accomplishments include
the following.

We have achieved the continuous promotion of
the norms of international humanitarian law for health
personnel, the community in general and the armed
actors. With the ongoing support of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Colombian Red
Cross, we have made strides in this effort in many
regions of the country. We maintain an updated
record of violations against the Medical Mission and
are making progress in establishing an observatory
mechanism to follow up on those cases. That enabled
us to establish corrective measures in terms of security
and protection. We are also establishing an appropriate
legal framework for dealing with this problem, which
has included, for example, an ongoing programme for
showing and posting the Medical Mission emblem
by the Colombian Ministry of Health among health
workers and the community in general.

There is crosscutting work at the national level
to promote prevention of and responses to aggression
against the Medical Mission, with the participation
of universities, the national police, the Office of the
General Prosecutor, military forces, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Colombian Red
Cross, the National Protection Unit and the Ministry of
Labour, among others.

The fulfilment of mandates, including the protection
of civilians by the United Nations and other international
organizations, should be accompanied by the political
will of States. Such mandates include resolution 2286
(2016), which has brought us together today, and the
guidelines established by resolution WHA55.13 at the
fifty-fifth World Health Assembly of the World Health
Organization. That resolution urges member States to
vigorously promote and adopt relevant standards of
international humanitarian law, to condemn attacks
on health-care workers in humanitarian or health areas
and to promote actions that ensure the security of
health-care workers. Colombia has been implementing
those mandates for many years. States' capacity for
compliance must be encouraged by the international
community, and any violation should be explained and
the object of an impartial investigation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance that Colombia attaches to the fact that
the United Nations fully recognizes the work that
national Governments are carrying out in the area
of the protection of civilians. To that end, it needs
objective, balanced and impartial information, which
should include the identification of shortcomings and
challenges, but also recognize the progress made in
each country.

We believe without a doubt that the United Nations
should continue to promote respect for international
humanitarian law. In our view, this effort will lead to
the effective protection of medical personnel and, to the
extent possible, to a humanization of conflicts.

