The Kingdom of Morocco wishes to congratulate the Republic of Indonesia on its presidency of the Security Council for the month of August in this very challenging year. We welcome the initiative of the Indonesian presidency of bringing the Security Council's focus to pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace, and we wish to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for presiding over this important and timely high-level open debate. This meeting undoubtedly constitutes another major milestone for the Security Council in recognizing the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peacebuilding, following the Council's landmark unanimous adoption of resolution 2632 (2020) on 1 July. Over a matter of only a few weeks, we have unfortunately witnessed the detrimental impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on political and socioeconomic conditions in different parts of the world. That compels us today to acknowledge that pandemics such as COVID-19 do bear the traits of modern-day, global, unforeseen and multidimensional threats to peace and security and should be considered as such, as this exceptional worldwide scourge has proven to make no distinction between categories of Member States and populations. However, the new and volatile challenges triggered by the global health crisis are particularly harmful for regions and Member States currently battling to build and sustain peace; safeguard their security, socioeconomic development and stability; and meet their global sustainable goals. Indeed, this deplorable reality has pressed the international community to quickly realize that the propagation of the pandemic has an undeniable exacerbating effect and acts as a threat multiplier, especially with regard to day-to-day peacebuilding and sustaining peace challenges. It has had severe socioeconomic consequences and has led to the imposition of restrictive, but necessary, containment measures that have hampered daily life and sustenance. In Member States in transition, post-conflict or peacebuilding contexts, the combination of pre-existing and emerging challenges has considerably strained already heavily burdened vital areas, such as the health sector, service delivery and food security. For other Member States, it has also generated heightened levels of uncertainty and vulnerability with regard to the implementation of important peace and political processes. Unfortunately, the urgency linked to the pandemic has risked shifting the attention of the international community away from the primacy of the socioeconomic dimension, especially for Member States in peacebuilding and sustaining peace contexts. It is worth recalling that the peace-security-development nexus has become a reality, as consistently highlighted at the United Nations, including within the Security Council. It is safe to say today that this pandemic can affect not only future and long- term sustaining peace efforts but is also likely to hamper, stall or even reverse very hard-won global peacebuilding gains achieved so far. As such, our first collective step in addressing the question of pandemics and the challenges for sustaining peace has to be based on the accurate assessment that a pandemic has considerable destabilizing potential for national, regional and international peace and security. Only with an earnest stocktaking can the international community come up with adequate and efficient comprehensive responses for addressing unpredictable future global shared threats such as pandemics and their devastating effects. We therefore wish to take this opportunity to highly commend Governments, women, men and youth of the Member States affected by both the pandemic and challenges to sustaining peace for their continuing efforts aimed at containing and preventing the spread of COVID-19 and at mitigating the socioeconomic effects of the global health crisis. However, while striving to sustain peace, Member States cannot fight the adverse effects of pandemics on their own. The global nature of pandemics dictates that the international community should act in unison and work towards an integrated and coordinated response. In this regard, Morocco highly welcomes the great efforts the United Nations deployed at the earliest stages of the pandemic to mitigate the scale and severity of the global and borderless crisis, including from humanitarian, health and development perspectives. Morocco wishes in particular to commend the proactive engagement and mobilization of the Secretary-General, who has come up with concrete steps and initiatives such as his plan to address the potentially devastating socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, as well as his report Shared responsibility, global solidarity: Responding to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19, of March 2020, which paved the way for the recent launch of the United Nations framework for the immediate socioeconomic response to COVID-19. The framework is an important tool that will also act as an operating arm in the peacebuilding and sustaining peace contexts. We welcome the Secretary-General's numerous appeals, including those calling for people to come together to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and for an immediate global ceasefire in all corners of the world. In addition to praising the major international mobilization, my delegation wishes to commend in particular the current and the past Presidents of the Security Council who spared no efforts to ensure business continuity in and transparency of the work of the Council throughout the succeeding stages of the pandemic. Despite all the real and virtual complications imposed by the pandemic, important issues and discussions were advanced throughout busy and challenging times. It is of paramount importance that the Security Council uphold its mandate by remaining seized of pressing international peace and security matters and by maintaining a continuous focus on the specific effects COVID-19 has had on various parts of the world and on other issues on the Council's agenda. The group of actions the Security Council took to shed an appropriate light on the effects of the pandemic and to help address its implications for sustaining peace culminated in success with the historic adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and the organization of today's high-level open debate. We once again thank the Indonesian presidency for making the issue of pandemics and sustaining peace a priority of the Security Council. As Chair of a country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Morocco cannot but commend the pioneering role the Commission has stepped up to play since the start of the global health crisis by trying to highlight the various consequences of the pandemic in different parts of the world. Indeed, despite the very well-known challenges related to the global crisis today, members of the international community - and of the PBC - have before them historic opportunities to come up with new avenues of cooperation and innovative and effective partnerships in order to help preserve ongoing peacebuilding and peace- sustaining processes. The foresightful 2016 twin resolutions 70/262 of the General Assembly and 2282 (2016) of the Security Council on the review of the peacebuilding architecture have felicitously created space for the PBC to diversify its working methods and enhance its efficiency and flexibility, so it can be increasingly engaged in regional and cross-cutting issues relevant to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. These resolutions also provided for more coherent and coordinated support for regional peacebuilding priorities and greater partnership between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, which has proven critical in the current global crisis. Thanks to its unique status within the United Nations system, the PBC has been, by design, able to play a constructive role in current times, primarily by maintaining continuous attention on the challenges affecting specific Member States and regions; taking the mobilization of key partners forward; leveraging its advisory role, especially to the Security Council and to its country-specific configurations; and pooling the extensive experience it has gathered so far to come up with innovative ways to help prevent and mitigate the effects of pandemics, such as the COVID-19, as it had previously done with the assistance it provided in fighting the adverse effects of outbreaks, such as Ebola. However, in the context of the current 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture, Morocco wishes to highlight the importance of reflecting on the disastrous effects pandemics can have on efforts and gains made in sustaining peace, in order to enable the United Nations to better respond to future occurrences of unforeseen pandemics or global crises like the present one. In conclusion, and sharing the same concern about the impact of pandemics on sustaining peace, the Kingdom of Morocco, under the leadership of King Mohammed VI, has also reflected on the need for a continental preventive response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to overcome the social and economic impacts of the pandemic. Because Morocco gives the highest priority to the African continent, in the immediate aftermath of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, on 13 April His Majesty King Mohammed VI launched an action-oriented initiative with African leaders, aimed at enabling the sharing of experiences and good practices and establishing an operational framework to support African countries efforts in the various phases of the management of the pandemic. Within the framework of this initiative, on 14 June His Majesty King Mohammed VI issued his very high instructions to send essential protective medical aid, equipment and medicines to 20 African countries with a view to supporting their fight against the coronavirus. All the protective products and equipment were produced in Morocco, complied with the World Health Organization's standards and have already been delivered to the concerned countries. Moreover, Morocco recently decided to make a contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund with the firm belief that increased cooperation and solidarity can provide a response to preserve peace and to address the challenges linked to global crises such as the current pandemic. As dire as the consequences of pandemics can be for efforts aimed at sustaining peace and at ensuring global peace and security, the international community has before it a historic opportunity to reflect on how better to prepare for future global crises and to build back better, as we have all witnessed how a pandemic can not only disrupt national and regional peacebuilding processes and social cohesion but also turn our daily lives and the business-as-usual approach completely on their heads. We therefore commend the critical reforms engaged in early on by Secretary- General Antonio Guterres with a view to restructuring the United Nations to make it fit to tackle novel contemporary threats and to serve peace and development in all their forms, particularly at a time when the Organization is commemorating its milestone seventy-fifth anniversary. More than ever before, the international community must remain committed to bringing a helping hand to the Member States and regions affected by the twin challenges of setbacks to sustaining peace and the fight against the pandemic, in full respect of their national priorities and ownership.
