More than six years since the signing of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, the United States remains optimistic that the countries of the Great Lakes region can engage constructively on issues related to insecurity. These include tackling illicit flows of goods, which contribute to corruption, and addressing the threat posed by armed groups. I want to note that our confidence has been rewarded by positive regional momentum over the past year. As the international community responds to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, we recall the extraordinary measures taken in the past year and a half by Congolese and international actors to contain the Ebola outbreak in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo. We were saddened to learn of the resurgence of Ebola cases just days before being able to declare an end to the outbreak, but we believe that there will be progress again in the very near future. Today the United States again reiterates the need for transparency and the timely sharing of public health data with neighbours, and with the international community, in order to tackle public health challenges. This is a difficult moment, and Special Envoy Xia's role is more critical than ever. We urge his Office to innovate, including by using video-teleconferencing technology to support the Great Lakes Governments. They will need that support, especially as they balance their focus on both the COVID-19 response and the political, security and economic needs that remain essential to regional peace and security. Currently, the positive momentum for peace and economic integration will surely be slowed by the pandemic, but it must not be reversed. To prevent any such reversal and improve progress, we would encourage more regular reporting, in standard United Nations products, on the efforts of the Office of the Special Envoy. The United States emphasizes the importance of follow-through on the quadripartite outcomes between Rwanda and Uganda. We express our sincere appreciation to the Governments of Angola and the Democratic Republic of Congo for their leadership in mediating this dispute, and for encouraging the Governments of Rwanda and Uganda to continue to engage in constructive dialogue to resolve their differences. Turning to Burundi, we note that, as the May elections rapidly approach, there is an increasing COVID-19 caseload. The potential impact of the pandemic on the ability of Burundian citizens to fully participate in the electoral process raises new concerns. We are therefore encouraged by the Government of Burundi ensuring that all citizens can fully and safely participate in the 20 May elections. Beyond elections, we are gravely concerned by the reports of repression of freedom of expression, assembly and association. These come in addition to reports of other serious human rights abuses and violations, including arrests, disappearances, killings, torture and sexual violence. Our message to the Government of Burundi remains clear: inclusive, peaceful, transparent and credible elections that reflect the will of the Burundian people are critical to reducing long-term grievances, improving security and enabling economic growth. In conclusion, the United States commends the countries of the Great Lakes for continuing to engage constructively as they work towards lasting peace and stronger economic ties. Just as they have worked together, the United States will continue to work closely with the Great Lakes countries to address COVID-19. We are fully committed to helping save lives and to ensuring that the progress made since the signing of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework is not lost.
