At the outset, Indonesia thanks the presidency of the Security Council for convening today's meeting. I would also like to thank all briefers for their very comprehensive and insightful briefings. Before the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), an estimated 690 million people, almost 10 per cent of the world's population, was suffering from hunger. Some 75 per cent of the world's malnourished people live in conflict zones. Again, this was the situation before the outbreak of COVID-19. I join with what the Under-Secretary-General said in his September briefing (S/2020/897, annex III) that we need concrete measures to break the vicious cycle between armed conflict and violence and food insecurity. The recommendations contained in his briefing are a good starting point for us to focus on our actions going forward. The protection of civilians will remain Indonesia's top priority and should always be the core aim of the Security Council. The implementation of resolution 2417 (2018) is becoming increasingly relevant, particularly in the time of COVID-19. Allow me to focus on the following pertinent points. First, famine should never be used as a method of warfare. All parties should comply with international humanitarian law, which is something that Under- Secretary-General Lowcock has also mentioned, as did several other Council members. Parties must adhere to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and access for humanitarian assistance during the COVID-19 pandemic. Still, the most active parties in most conflicts today continue to violate the Secretary- General's appeal. Furthermore, attacks against humanitarian workers and medical facilities remain a deliberate disruption to humanitarian access. Secondly, international cooperation is vital for protecting civilians. We need to close the gap between a country's responsibility in protecting civilians and its capacity to do so. The countries mentioned in the 2020 Global Report on Food Crises, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, Nigeria, South Sudan, Somalia, Burkina Faso and Afghanistan, need international support, including through technical and financial assistance, which is truly vital to enable capacity-building. It is regrettable that the humanitarian response is funded at less than 35 per cent. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that number is as low as 22 per cent, as a Staggering 21.8 million people are acutely food-insecure. In contrast, 1.3 billion tons of food are wasted each year. We believe it is important to cite these statistics in order to place today's debate in the proper context. The Council must be able to facilitate measures to strengthen countries' capacities to protect civilians, including their food security. Thirdly, the imperative of protecting civilians must be embedded across the peace continuum, from conflict prevention and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustainable development. For peace to flourish, it is clear that sustainable development is required. It is a question of synergy, including among the existing United Nations bodies and agencies that are addressing this particular issue. For example, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the United Nations peacebuilding architecture are tools available to us for achieving this end. Let us utilize these tools. In closing, Indonesia will maintain its current determination to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, the purpose and principle enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. This is our collective effort. It is time to step up, not to step down. No one should be left behind. No one should be left hungry.
