Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): More than four
years ago, the World Summit called upon this Council
to provide for fair and clear listing and de-listing
procedures for individuals and entities on sanctions lists.

As Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) during
the past year, I have witnessed some of the
shortcomings of the present system. I am also aware of
2

the growing number of cases filed by listed individuals
and entities before national and regional courts in
various parts of the world. I can therefore also
appreciate how very substantially Security Council
resolution 1904 (2009) improves the procedures under
the sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999) in
terms of due process. For the first time ever,
individuals and entities seeking a de-listing will have a
chance to present their cases to an independent and
impartial ombudsperson, to be appointed by the
Secretary-General.

In the new resolution, the Council calls on
Committee members to make every effort to provide
their reasons when objecting to a de-listing request. It
also directs the ombudsperson to forward to petitioners
all information about a negative decision provided by
the Committee, including explanatory comments.
Furthermore, it instructs the Committee to conduct a
comprehensive review of all pending issues so as to
resolve them, to the extent possible, by the end of
2010. For these and many other reasons, I believe that
resolution 1904 (2009) represents a significant step
forward in improving the fairness and transparency of
the sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999), thus
enhancing both its effectiveness and its legitimacy.

My delegation would like to thank the United
States as the main sponsor of the resolution, as well as
the other sponsors and all the members of the Council,
for their strong engagement in this very important
matter. At the same time, special thanks are due to
many other United Nations Member States that have
actively supported this process over many years, in
particular the group of like-minded States and the
friends of the rule of law. I would also like to pay a
special tribute to our Belgian predecessors in the chair
of the 1267 Committee, who paved the way for today's
decisions.

Much will depend on the practical implementation
of this resolution, especially on the appointment of an
eminent ombudsperson with the highest qualifications
in fields such as law, human rights, counter-terrorism
and sanctions. This is a work in progress. This is a case
where the decision of the Council to remain actively
seized of the matter is of particular significance.
Therefore, my delegation very much hopes that the
Council will continue to show an active interest in the
state of the overall work of the 1267 Committee. To
that end, the biannual reports of the Committee to the
Council can prove to be a very useful instrument.
09-65516

