Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is my pleasure to
welcome Special the Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Zahir Tanin, back to the Council. I thank him for
his briefing.

I also thank First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic',
and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their important statements.

The Special Representative has provided us with
the latest analysis of the current situation in Kosovo,
which, in our opinion, still lacks improvement. Despite
some positive developments, the region continues to
face the same problems and challenges the Council
discussed back in February. The internal political
landscape in Kosovo is marred by violence. It is very
disappointing that the work of the Kosovo Assembly is
regularly disrupted, including by the release of tear gas
canisters by some representatives. We are also worried
about the street Violence, with the Kosovo institutions'
property being targeted by threats and vandalism. I
underscore that acts of violence in any form remain an
unacceptable means to express political views.

Ukraine is concerned that the political tensions may
negatively impact the progress of the implementation of
the major agreements between Belgrade and Pristina.
Among the issues that demand urgent attention, we
would underline the lack of needed actions on the
part of the Kosovo institutions in establishing the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
in Kosovo; problems incurred at the crossing points
by cars registered by the Serbian Ministry of Internal
Affairs; the implementation of the agreement on car
insurance, and so on.

We urge Belgrade and Pristina to redouble their
efforts to fulfil the provisions of the agreements of
19 April 2013 and 25 August 2015. We hope that, in
the next reporting period, the Council will hear more
positive news on their implementation, such as, for
example, the progress recently made by Belgrade
and Pristina in the area of the mutual recognition
of diplomas.

Ukraine fully supports the high- and technical-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated
by the European Union. In this regard, we hail the
commitment of both sides expressed in January 2016
to continuing the normalization of their relations and
to focus on the implementation of agreements reached.
In our view, the Brussels dialogue should continue to
play a central role. We also hope that the entry into
force of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the European Union and Kosovo on 1 April
will become another factor in the further stabilization
of the situation and will promote a better atmosphere in
the talks between Belgrade and Pristina.

Another important area in which success is much
needed is the promotion of greater tolerance and
reconciliation among communities in Kosovo, as well as
the protection of minority rights and the facilitation of
the return of displaced persons. Special attention should
be paid to the continuous assaults on the cultural and
religious heritage of non-majority communities, which
could further poison interethnic relations. Ukraine
is convinced that the solution of these problems will
promote further political stability in Kosovo.

Finally, I would like to make some comments on the
work of UNMIK. The Council's support for UNMIK,
as well as the Kosovo Force, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union presences in Kosovo is particularly
important at this stage. Their work and assistance to
Kosovo institutions and communities continue to be
essential to political stabilization and intercommunity
reconciliation. The priorities of the Mission for the
coming period should be focused on the promotion
of peace, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo. Another task is monitoring the process of the
implementation of the agreements between Belgrade
and Pristina, especially in the context of creation of
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
in Kosovo.

