Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I would
like to express my gratitude to the delegation ofMorocco,
acting as President of the Council, for convening this
important open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, as well
as to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh for
his statement.

Belarus aligns itself with the statement delievered
earlier by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We consider peacebuilding to be an important factor
that has a direct impact on settling conflicts, reducing
the level of instability and ensuring post-conflict
stability. The United Nations has garnered significant
and unique experience in the area of peacebuilding,
which is being successfully used in various regions of
the world. At the same time, the process of emerging
from conflict, establishing controls over domestic
State procedures related to the law and order sector
and making changes to the internal security situation
of States is an extremely complex process, and it
is comprehensive and multifaceted in nature. That
significantly complicates peacebuilding efforts.

The year 2005 saw the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to address a whole
range of peacebuilding tasks. In the short period
since then, it has made substantive progress in its
work in organizing the peacebuilding process and
in dealing with a number of complex tasks. At the
same time, as noted today by the Chairperson of the
PBC, the Commission still has a lot to do. We hope
that the Commission will continue to improve its
work in organizing peacebuilding and strengthening
cooperation with other entities through its efforts to
find effective peacebuilding paths forward.

As was already mentioned today, it is important
to strengthen the institutional links between the PBC
and the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. Furthermore, it
is necessary to establish closer partnerships with
the relevant countries and international financial
institutions, such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank.

A key element necessary in enhancing peacebuilding
activities is to establish clearer coordination, coherence
and cooperation among various United Nations agencies
and offices, both in New York and in those countries
receiving post-conflict support and assistance. Given
the limited resources available, it seems to us that
that could enhance effectiveness and delivery. We
believe that the greatest impact from post-conflict
peacebuilding can only be achieved on the basis of full
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned.
States in post-conflict phases are responsible for
ensuring peacebuilding in their territories. However, a
comprehensive, coordinated and targeted approach is
needed in that effort, taking into account the different
domestic conditions in the countries involved.

We note with satisfaction the increased attention
to the status of women in conflict-affected countries
and in States undergoing post-conflict peacebuilding.
As the representative of a State that is actively involved
in addressing human trafficking, I should like to draw
attention to the fact that the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted by
consensus by the General Assembly, calls for human
trafficking to be incorporated into broader United
Nations strategies and programmes in order to address
issues that also include the post-conflict recovery
period. I believe that serious attention should be given
to that aspect during the development of various
peacebuilding programmes.

As this is the last open debate of 2012, I would like
to take the opportunity to wish everyone the best for the
forthcoming year.

