Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I wish to express
my gratitude to your delegation for its initiative,
despite the time constraints involved, to prepare this
discussion today on the theme "No exit without
strategy". This is indeed an important subject that
necessitates in-depth study and special attention from
the Organization and its principal organs.

However, I would like to say candidly that I am
in full agreement with the introductory statement made
by Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa. I, too, wanted
many of our colleagues who are heads of the
delegations and of countries that are members of the
Council to listen to us during this meeting.

The delegation of Egypt concurs with the
summary in the President's document that an exit
strategy for a peacekeeping operation requires clear-cut
vision, specific, predetermined phases and
consideration of the political, military and security
conditions prevailing in the host country or region. In
this regard, the delegation of Egypt would like to
contribute the following points to this debate.

First, in dealing with the termination stage of an
operation, the Council should do so using a case-by-
case approach. It is not conceivable or practical for us
to apply one single policy or a number of strict policies
to all cases that the Council deals with without paying
attention to the particular characteristics of each case.

Secondly, while we recognize that there is a
certain amount of politicization in the work of the
Council and in the relations that certain members of the
Council, particularly the permanent members, have
with certain conflict areas for which peacekeeping
operations are instituted, the Council should not in our
opinion resort to exerting political pressure on any side
by hinting at terminating an operation, reducing an
operation or resorting to any method of political
pressure that would serve the political interests of one
or more States in the Council without paying attention
to the interests of the host State or region in which the
operation takes place, not to mention the interests of
the members of the society hosting the operation.

Thirdly, in this context, I feel duty-bound to refer
to the examples of Somalia and Rwanda. These are
cases that were not dealt with in the document
distributed by the presidency. These examples
unfortunately indicate that the Council had in mind
certain political considerations for ending an operation
that were different from, and perhaps even
contradictory to, the interests of the State hosting the
operation. Such considerations have led to huge losses
in human life and to cases of regional instability that
have continued to the present.

This is what comes to mind when we say that the
Security Council should shoulder its responsibilities -
the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter and
the role established for it within the framework of the
system of collective security, which makes it necessary
for its members to put aside any narrow, individual or
political considerations in favour of the higher and
more general interests by supporting the collective
security system and the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Fourthly, the Security Council, should consider
the mistakes made in the past- whether by
abandoning an operation before it was time to do so or
by terminating an operation that ran counter to the
political and social environment- and should learn
from them. In this respect, we call upon the Council to
establish a more direct and frank dialogue with other
organs, first and foremost among which is the General
Assembly which, through the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, deals with the subject and its
machinery and with the best methods of
implementation.

Fifthly, the time factor is of prime importance in
matters before the Security Council, but the time factor
should not be a decisive element in determining the
strategy of the United Nations for exiting from an
operation or from a host State. In saying this, we have
in mind United Nations peacekeeping operations that
have existed for decades, but their presence in the areas
concerned has become a factor that has helped to
reduce fears and has become an important symbol of
international presence until such time as the root causes
of a problem are dealt with and settled in a manner
acceptable to all parties.

Sixthly, the Council, while embarking on setting
up a strategy to exit from an operation or from a State,
should take into consideration that mandates are not
open-ended and unlimited and that an operation should
stop when the matter becomes one of peace-building,
which is dealt with in the Council and other organs or
the United Nations - first and foremost, the General
Assembly. The Security Council should consult with
the General Assembly and with other major organs and
agencies on the best way to carry out the next phase.

In conclusion, setting up strategies to exit from
peacekeeping operations is a matter that requires a
number of elements, first among which is the political
will of the members of the Council. Also required is
coordination and consultation between the Council and
other principal organs and, on occasion, between the
Council and other relevant regional organizations in
order to agree on the best way to exit from an operation
in an appropriate, positive and beneficial way for the
host State or region.

