I thank Germany for its true initiative. For nine years now, Libya has been entangled in a crisis that is having a high toll on the Libyans first, but also on the international community, mainly the neighbouring countries, among them Algeria. The time has come to root out the causes of the unending and unacceptable situation. It is needless to turn to the reasons that brought about the crisis; rather, we need to work, preferably together, on operational and practical solutions that are based on a ceasefire, the free will of the Libyans and international legality. We have the instrument, multiple Security Council resolutions, the conclusions of the Berlin Conference, the commitment of the neighbouring countries and the declared willingness of both the Libyan parties and international stakeholders. We support all sincere efforts based on the goals of peace, cohesion and reconstruction. From the very start, Algeria has lent its unwavering support to the Berlin Conference outcomes, which were confirmed by resolution 2510 (2020). We have ourselves engaged in helping the Libyans to unravel the complexity of the situation into which they were immersed, sometimes and somehow not by their choice. Let me state it as clearly as possible - Algeria is in no position to let Libya go towards an uncharted future. Libya is part of us, and we will not leave this part of us to suffer or allow it to sink in human-provoked tumultuous waters. The security of all neighbouring States, including Algeria, depends on the peace, security and territorial integrity of Libya. No one should ignore the fact that our deep-rooted family ties, our common history and our common future naturally impose our stand. The Algerian approach, overwhelmingly called for and accepted by all Libyans, is based on the following elements: an immediate ceasefire, de-escalation in all areas, including the issues of energy and the allocation of sources of wealth that must be distributed to all Libyans, and, lastly, help to assemble the representatives of Libya around a table of negotiations. There is no solution but a political one - that means no military solution - and there will be no political solution if the external forces continue to meddle in Libya through total disrespect of the arms embargo that the Council has established. We support the Berlin conclusions, and we will steadfastly participate in all the tracks of the follow-up, with the hope that all sides, not only the Libyans, will truly engage. Let me add that we hope that the Secretary-General will finally announce the designation of a Special Representative. With our support and that of the international community and the neighbouring States, it will be a very easy step and a good signal for a long-awaited restart. Let me add that our country will work within the international framework. We should not forget the efforts of the African Union and the projected inter-Libyan conference to help all Libyans, tribes and regions inclusively decide the future that awaits them and the outcome that they will freely choose, as well as their institutions and their decision-making processes. The Libyans, and only them, will define the outline with no more interference, no more arms flows and no more mercenaries. This is not yet the case today at this very moment as we are speaking with resolve. The solution that we want to promote and that seems to be accepted by all Libyans, despite their differences, will definitely preserve in the future the legitimate interests of all stakeholders currently involved in Libya. It is our shared responsibility to make that day a reality - the choice for a peaceful tomorrow clearly depends on the Libyans, but also us all - and to stop the "cynical absurdity" that Heiko Maas has so rightfully pinpointed. It is up to us to send a message of hope to the Libyan people.
