Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The comments of
the representatives of Armenia at today's meeting
exemplify that Member State's consistent attempts
to deny the facts behind its policies of aggression,
hostility, hatred and outright lies and falsifications. The
Armenian side's claims and misinterpretations sound
particularly astonishing within the Security Council,
which in 1993 adopted a series of four resolutions
condemning Armenia's use of force against Azerbaijan
and occupation of its territory and demanding the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal
from Azerbaijan of all Armenia's occupying forces. It
is curious that the representatives of Armenia - which
bears the primary responsibility for unleashing war and
perpetrating aggression against Azerbaijan, carrying
out ethnic cleansing on a massive scale, committing
other serious crimes during the conflict and advocating
undisguised racist ideology - are attempting to
criticize and lecture others.

However, their futile efforts collapse as easily
as a house of cards against a background of facts
that testify to a diametrically opposite situation. In
reality, the successive Governments of Armenia have
established a notorious pattern of complete disrespect
for the generally accepted norms and principles of
international law. Committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity, sponsoring international terrorism,
adhering to a dubious ethno-religious ideology and
making territorial claims against its neighbours
have become a sort of norm in the conduct of that
Member State.

I would like to cite Armenia's current President,
Mr. Serzh Sargsyan, by referring to his words in a
famous interview that he gave in 2000 to a British
journalist, Thomas de Waal, with regard to the tragic
genocide that occurred in the Azerbaijani town of
Khojaly. In that interview, Mr. Sargsyan said,

"Before Khojaly, the Azerbaijanis thought
that the Armenians were people who could not
raise their hand against the civilian population.
We needed to put a stop to all that. And that's
what happened."

In response to the journalist's question as to whether
things could have happened differently, and whether he
had any regrets about the deaths ofthousands ofpeople,
the Armenian Head of State answered quite clearly that
he had "absolutely no regrets, since such upheavals are
necessary even ifthousands have to die." I think that

there is no need for any further comment in that regard.

The stance of Armenia is an open challenge to
the conflict settlement process and a serious threat
to international and regional peace and security. The
earlier the officials of that country realize the lack
of any prospect of the unconstructive and dangerous
political agenda, the sooner our peoples will be able to
benefit from peace, stability and cooperation.

