Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to say how pleased my
delegation is to participate in this meeting under the
presidency of China, with its principled and patient
stance on addressing the various issues before the
Security Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing on the
latest developments in the Middle East region.

The Security Council's regular monthly briefing
on this issue comes at a time when the already dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza is deteriorating and in
the shadow of the lack of any sign of negotiations
resuming in the near or medium term. My delegation
would like to endorse the statements made by the
representatives of Oman on behalf of the Arab Group,
Syria on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Given the responsibilities of His Majesty
the King of the Kingdom of Morocco as Chair of the
Al-Quds Committee, I would like to focus in my
statement on the dire situation in Jerusalem and that of
its Palestinian population owing to the Israeli
authorities' determination to implement their plans
seeking to change its heritage and its demographics
and to seize Arab homes and property in that holy city.

With the ceasefire that followed the adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009), the international community
had hoped that Israel would put an end to its practices
and halt the collective punishment of the Palestinian
people and, indeed, its continuing attempts to impose a
de facto situation and to annex Palestinian land, acre
after acre. However, the opposite happened. Settlement
activities have continued illegally in the West Bank,
with Israelis seizing more Arab land and forcing Arab
inhabitants to leave their homes to be replaced by
Israeli settlers.

Regarding Jerusalem, Israel continues its policy
of Judaization by confiscating more land in Arab
neighbourhoods, persisting in building new units and
facilities in the illegal settlements in Jerusalem,
continuing to build the separation wall that divides
Jerusalem's Arab inhabitants from their natural,
political and demographic environment, demolishing
homes and confiscating residency permits. Israel
continues to target Islamic holy sites in the city
through suspect archaeological excavations, by
building a network of tunnels below the holy Al-Aqsa
mosque on empty pretexts and by preventing
worshippers from safely entering places of worship.

Over the past three months, we have followed
with grave concern the increasing pace of land seizures
in Jerusalem. Many statistics and documented reports
are available, stating the number of Jerusalem
inhabitants whose identity cards were withdrawn in
2008. During the same period, the Israeli authorities
continued to issue permits to build new housing units
in the illegal settlements in Jerusalem. Those unilateral
and provocative acts seek to change the legal and
demographic status of the holy city and obliterate its
identity, violate international law and add to the
tensions in the area, thus creating an explosive
situation that could obstruct any progress towards the
two-State solution advanced and advocated by the
international community.

The Kingdom of Morocco draws the international
community's attention to the dangerous situation in
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian
territories. At the same time and based on the same
responsibilities, commitments, international legal
instruments and resolutions, it calls for wisdom and
logic in addressing every aspect of the question of
Jerusalem, which is of interest not only to Muslims,
but to all those who follow monotheistic religions and
are actively engaged in this world.

On that basis, we are concerned about the
dangerous developments in the issue of Palestine and
their impact on security and stability in the Middle
East. Those concerns are counterbalanced only by our
firm belief that the peace process is an inevitable
choice and that its success is in the common interests
of all the peoples of the region who wish to live in
peace, harmony, cooperation. On the basis of that
commitment, the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to
work for peace in the Middle East. As a member of the
committee to follow up the Arab Peace Initiative, it

takes part in all international negotiations towards a
permanent and comprehensive peace that would
include the final status issues, especially Jerusalem, as
a major focal point of any possible solution.

The Kingdom also follows with great appreciation
the efforts of United States President Barack Obama
and his Special Envoy Senator Mitchell to overcome
difficulties in the Middle East peace process. We look
forward to these and other efforts to achieve the
desired objective of restarting negotiations.

It is high time that the international community,
the Security Council and the leading influential
countries assume their responsibilities and prevail upon
Israel to remove the obstacles to the negotiations and
respond to efforts to resume the peace process, which
must lead to a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East and transform Jerusalem from a centre of
conflict into a centre where the two States of Israel and
Palestine can coexist side by side in peace and security.
Such a just and comprehensive solution can be
achieved only through Israel's withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories, including the Golan Heights
and the rest of the occupied Lebanese territory.

