Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): We thank Equatorial Guinea for organizing
this important and timely debate on maritime security.
We also thank Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for
their briefings.

As you mentioned, Mr. President, 90 per cent of
world trade is maritime, and Belgium has always been
a hub of international maritime trade. Several Belgian
shipping and dredging companies are active worldwide
and are particularly exposed to maritime crime. The
port of Antwerp is the most important maritime hub for
trade transactions between the European Union and the
African continent and has established close links with
several ports in the Gulf of Guinea, including Dakar,
San Pedro, Cotonou and Kribi. We are concerned about
the increase in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. Since
2013, Belgium has joined the Group of Seven Group of
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea to support the Yaounde
interregional process. As a member of the European
Union's task force for maritime safety in the Gulf of
Guinea, Belgium provides concrete assistance to the
European Union Action Plan 2015-2020 in support
of the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.

Transnational maritime crime is a complex and
multifaceted issue that makes use of legal and security
gaps in international waters, the difficulties of ensuring
full control of all maritime coasts and of inadequate
regional cooperation, and the deep-seated roots of
organized crime and terrorism. A comprehensive
and integrated approach is needed to meet this
multidimensional challenge, and measures must be
taken in many areas, including defence, security
and justice.

First, on the defence and security front, Belgium has
engaged in several important international efforts. We
are participating in Operation Atalanta, which combats
maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa, the Red Sea, the
Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of Oman. We have deployed a
frigate to the Operation for four periods of three months
each and have also taken part in the command of the
Operation. Belgium also helped to create the Maritime
Security Centre-Horn of Africa, in which marine forces
and commercial shipping cooperate closely. Finally,
every year since 2013, our navy has sent a ship to the
Gulf of Guinea to support the countries of the region in
strengthening their maritime capacities.

On the policing and judicial front, Belgium has
taken a number of important steps. First, thanks to
international legal cooperation, new legislation and
the proactive efforts of our police and justice services,
several notorious pirates have been convicted in
Belgium. The best-known case is probably the 2013
conviction of Mohamed Abdi Hassan, who was behind
the 2009 attack on the Belgian dredging ship Pompeii.
Secondly, based on the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Belgium has adopted
a very progressive law that provides flexible options
for interviewing, arresting and detaining pirates'
accomplices and involves close cooperation between
judicial, police and naval personnel. Belgium has also
developed a legal framework for deploying private
armed guards to protect merchant ships. We have also
taken a strong stand on the issue of maritime drug
trafficking. At the port of Antwerp, in one of the first
arrangements of this kind in the world, local and federal
police, the social inspectorate, customs authorities
and the public prosecutor's office are working under
a single administration to promote exchanges and
increase efficiency.
Our national efforts are therefore important, and
we believe that the most vulnerable States deserve
to be supported, because we are all affected. The
support provided by the United Nations and a number
of its entities, particularly the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, is extremely useful and should
be increased. However, we all know that our national
efforts will be in vain if they are not accompanied by
genuine regional and international cooperation. Here,
too, we can and must do better, because crime thrives
when our efforts are fragmented.

Lastly, we cannot properly understand the
phenomenon of maritime crime without examining
its deep roots, including deteriorating economic
conditions for large sections of a population and a lack
of future prospects.

