Mr. Skoog (Sweden): The persistent disregard for
global norms and the consistent defying of Security
Council resolutions by North Korea puts millions of
people at risk. Its actions represent a threat not only to
the region but to all of us. This is indeed a clear threat
to international peace and security. For this reason,
Sweden welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2375 (2017). In the face of North Korea's destabilizing
actions, it is important that the Council once again stand
united and determined to address the most dangerous
crisis we are facing today.

Sweden reiterates its condemnation of North
Korea's recent nuclear test. We once again urge North
Korea to heed the Council's decisions and the call
of the entire international community that it cease
provocations, fulfil its international obligations,
engage in meaningful dialogue and abandon its nuclear
weapons and missile programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.

The strengthened sanctions adopted today aim to
add further pressure on the North Korean regime and
to contribute to a change in behaviour. To achieve that
end, the sanctions must be implemented in full. More
efforts are needed in this regard. Recommendations by
the Panel of Experts to the sanctions Committee must
be implemented. All States Members of the United
Nations have a responsibility to do their utmost to
ensure that the sanctions regime works.

Sanctions alone, though, will not resolve the
situation on the Korean peninsula, nor is there a
feasible military option to end the crisis. The solution
must be a peaceful, diplomatic and political one. We
welcome the call in the resolution for further work
to reduce tensions so as to advance the prospects for
a comprehensive settlement. Therefore, in parallel
with the tightened sanctions adopted today, we must
urgently undertake intensified, creative diplomatic
efforts to decrease tensions, increase confidence and
prevent escalation, paving the way for dialogue on a
peaceful and comprehensive solution.

It is clear that in order to achieve the longer-
term objective, there is a pressing need for regional
security arrangements. The United Nations should
provide additional support, especially with regard
to confidence-building activities in the region,
and we should explore how the good offices of the
Secretary-General can contribute. The continued
provocations by North Korea, as well as the current
confrontational rhetoric, are dangerous and risk
leading to unintended consequences. In the immediate
term, while tensions are running high, lines for direct
inter-Korean communication are critical so as to avoid
misunderstanding and miscalculations. As a member of
the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, we call
on North Korea to resume contact at the border station
in Panmunjom.
While the North Korean regime invests in expensive
weapons programmes, it shows utter disregard for the
well-being of its own people, who continue to suffer
from serious human rights violations and the grave
humanitarian situation. It is important to underline
that none of the measures adopted today or in previous
resolutions should prevent or make more difficult the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations and its partners to
provide life-saving humanitarian assistance. It is also
important to note that as the harsh North Korean winter
approaches, more support and humanitarian efforts are
likely to be needed.

