Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At its
summit meeting in Algiers, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) declared 2000 the year of peace, security
and solidarity on our continent. You yourself, Sir, chose
to make the first month of the new millennium the
"month of Africa", which, in many ways, it effectively
has been. In giving of yourself generously to our cause
you have served Africa well, for which we thank you.

Conflicts that for too long have pitted brothers and
neighbours against one another have benefited from the
attention of the Security Council. Tragedies that have
plunged millions of Africans into mourning and that are

 

often both the cause and the direct or indirect consequence
of these conflicts have also appeared on the Council's
agenda. Even the mass media, which are frequently
heedless of Africa and indifferent to its sufferings, efforts
and hopes have, in the course of your outstanding
presidency, honoured our continent with their interest.

Now that your presidency is coming to an end and
media interest has peaked, we feel it fitting and useful to
endeavour, in serenity and transparency, to draw
conclusions from what has been said within these walls, to
recall the forceful images we have each preserved of the
presence of so many illustrious African heads of State, to
take the measure of the commitments undertaken so as to
make them reality and, in the long run, to open new
prospects for the relationship Africa seeks to establish with
the United Nations.

What we must stress from the start is the tremendous
will of African countries to close the chapter on conflict
once and for all. Whether concerning the dispute between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, the situation in Burundi or in Sierra
Leone, or yet again in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Africa has indeed, with painstaking and subtle
efforts, prepared its own settlement plans and launched
processes to re-establish confidence among belligerents and
to restore peace, security and stability.

This determination of Africa to reconcile and to set
out on the road to recovery has been brilliantly reasserted
in this Chamber during this "month of Africa". If that is
what was expected of Africa, which it had solemnly
undertaken last July in Algiers to accomplish, today it is a
done deal.

N ow that the Security Council, here in New York, has
taken note of the sovereign determination of Africa to live
in peace and to abide by the commitments which its leaders
have freely undertaken, it must go beyond making
declarations of its good intentions and, without hesitation or
delay, offer our continent the support and assistance to
which it is entitled.

This will require the Council above all to discard its
former attitude to Africa, particularly with regard to the
deployment of peacekeeping forces. This is clearly relevant
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the OAU's
Joint Military Commission has managed, not without
difficulty and despite the conspicuous shortage of men and
means, to ensure overall respect for the cessation of
hostilities and where the Lusaka process cannot be properly
brought to term unless the Security Council authorizes
deployment in the field of enough Blue Helmets entrusted
with the authority necessary to ensure a genuine return to
peace.

In this respect, the Lusaka Agreement, to which the
parties have reiterated their commitment and the Security
Council its support, is very clear in its call for close
coordination between the OAU and the United Nations,
which we feel to be absolutely essential to the success of
the Lusaka process and must therefore be further
strengthened with the full agreement of the parties, in all
confidence and transparency. The speedy adoption of a
resolution authorizing the deployment of 500 observers
and of the four battalions to accompany them would, in
this regard, send a strong message that the Security
Council has heard and understood the message of Africa.

This would require the Security Council in all cases
to maintain its vigilance over the other conflicts besetting
the continent and to continue to give its full political
support to the efforts being made by the OAU to contain
the hotbeds of tension and to achieve or consolidate
peace. It must also demonstrate its readiness, goodwill
and celerity whenever the pan-African organization needs
its technical, logistical, financial or peacekeeping
assistance.

It will also require the Council's activities to raise
international public awareness of the tragedies caused by
the spread of HIV/AIDS and of refugees to be followed
up and effectively broadcast to the appropriate forums:
the General Assembly, where a Working Group on Africa
is preparing to begin its work; the Economic and Social
Council, the Bretton Woods institutions and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations system.

Lastly, it will require the initiation of more joint
endeavours and greater coordination between the OAU
and the United Nations on African questions. In the case
of the Security Council, both the chairmanship of the
OAU and the Secretariat must be closely associated with
the consultation and decision-making process. In this
context, I welcome the opportunity to share with the
Council today some of Africa's concerns and
expectations.

Moreover, as pointed out in the last Security Council
meetings of December 1999, we could try to begin
regular and more structured consultations between the
Council and the OAU. Dispatching joint envoys,
establishing working groups and holding joint meetings
could also be useful and appropriate.

 

Similarly, United Nations strengthening of African
capabilities in peacekeeping, including through troop
training, exchanges of personnel and arrangements
establishing logistical partnerships, are ways and means
worth exploring.

More than that, what Africa, in its desire to rebuild,
expects from the United Nations is that the Organization
will accompany it in its recovery effort and that it will help
mobilize the financial resources it desperately needs, which
shrink year by year, even as the debt burden becomes
heavier and export commodity prices become less and less
profitable.

In tackling the causes of underdevelopment with
determination, as it does today, and in working to promote
human rights and democracy, Africa understands well that
poverty, ignorance and intolerance are at the root of the
conflicts tearing it apart. Here is an area where the Security
Council could usefully intervene in order to prevent
conflicts that otherwise would be more costly in terms of
personnel and resources. Once conflicts have been
controlled, the other Council, the Economic and Social
Council, should act in coordination with the Security
Council in the peace-building process by helping restore
trust, stability and normalcy.

These are the initial conclusions the presidency of the
OAU wished to share with the Council at the end of a
month in which Africa has been at the centre of the
international community's concerns. It hopes that they will
be fully taken into account and that the Council, far from
tiring of Africa, will continue to give it its full attention and
that under the Russian presidency of the Council, during the
last month of the year 2000, there will be a more peaceful,
secure and united Africa; in other words, a renewal of our
continent.

