Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Given the impossibility of extending the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), my delegation would like to make the
following statement.

Colombia has participated in this process with a
constructive attitude, taking into account three aspects.

The first aspect concerns our relationship to the
Rome Statute as a signatory country whose Congress,
besides approving the constitutional reform, has
already begun the process of considering the law to
approve the Treaty. That law is currently being
reviewed by the Constitutional Court prior to
ratification, which will definitely take place very soon.
This circumstance imposes obligations on us, the first
of which is that the State must act in a way that is
compatible with the Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

A second aspect - which we have consistently
highlighted - is the position of the United States, a
country that has put forward a well-known position,
which we understand and which we have contributed to
analysing in a realistic manner, with a View to
achieving agreement in order to preserve the
cohesiveness of the Council and in particular to
safeguard the instruments available to the Council to
guarantee international peace and security.

We believe that progress has been made in the
deliberations and in the various consultations that have
taken place. We believe that progress can be made
towards achieving unanimity on this crucial subject.

We believe in particular that the principle of
complementarity which is present throughout and
informs the Statute, as well as other provisions of the
Rome Statute taken as a whole - such as, for example,
the status of forces agreement (SOFA), which was
mentioned by Ambassador Negroponte, among other
things - provide broad guarantees for nationals of
those countries that are not members of the Treaty. In
sum, we know that these interpretations are not entirely
satisfactory, even though they are being reaffirmed and
emphasized by the Council.

The third aspect concerns the fact that the
Council must, first and foremost, take into account the
potential implications of such a decision for
peacekeeping operations. Such operations are perhaps
the most effective and widely used means of
maintaining international peace and security. For that
reason, we reaffirm our position, which we believe is
constructive, and we join in the appeal of the
Secretary-General to continue efforts even more
intensively than in weeks past, with a View to
achieving a common position.

These efforts are even more necessary in a world
threatened by terrorism. These threats can be dealt with
only if there is political will, which requires robust
actions based on resolute agreements among those of
us who have the obligation to meet the challenges
posed by terrorism.

