Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Prime Minister Bellerive of Haiti. We thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
recent developments in Haiti and his introduction of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/200).

Immediately after the natural disaster, Edmond
Mulet resumed leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), skillfully
and professionally leading it in extraordinary
circumstances. We thank the Special Representative
and all United Nations personnel for their selfless
efforts to assist Haitians in difficult and tragic times.

We support the main conclusions and assessments
of the Secretary-General's report. We agree that
international assistance to Haiti should primarily be
provided directly through the Government of that
country, since the primary responsibility for
reconstruction ultimately lies with the Haitians
themselves. The role of the United Nations should be
to coordinate international assistance and to strengthen
the capacities of the national authorities.

We support the decision of President Preval to
hold municipal, presidential and parliamentary
elections by the end of 2010. We agree with the
Secretary-General's view that MINUSTAH must play a
leading role in coordinating international assistance to
the upcoming electoral campaign.

It was extremely important that the post-
earthquake security situation in Haiti was successfully
kept under control. The Security Council decision to
expand the Mission's military and police components
by 3,500 troops was an effective and timely response.
The report quite rightly indicates that new challenges
to the maintenance of security have taken centre stage,
linked above all to the possibility of increased criminal
activity. Maximum efforts should be made to prevent
the resurgence of violence in Haiti. We cannot allow
the recent progress in stabilization achieved by the
Mission in recent years to be undermined. Public order
and human rights, in particular those of women and
children, must be upheld in the temporary housing sites
for internally displaced persons.

We have closely considered the Secretary-
General's proposals for MINUSTAH'S future. We
support these recommendations and agree that, in view
of the situation, MINUSTAH's tasks can be
accomplished within the framework of the Mission's
existing mandate. Some of the recommendations in the
report - for example, the proposed increase in the size
of the Mission's police force by 680 officers by the end
of this year - require further consideration in the
context of the comprehensive implementation of the
Security Council's decision to strengthen
MINUSTAH'S military and police components by
3,500 troops.

There is also a need to further analyse the idea of
involving MINUSTAH in social issues. The
peacekeeping Mission, the main purpose of which is to
uphold stability and the rule of law, may not have the
necessary knowledge and experience in that field,
which lies within the competence of other specialized
bodies.

The elements have wrought unprecedented
destruction and loss of human life in Haiti. The United
Nations suffered the greatest loss of life in its history.
We honour the memories of former head of
MINUSTAH Hedi Annabi and the other United Nations
staff who died in the earthquake.

The assistance being provided to Haiti by the
international community, led by the United Nations, is
of vital importance. Alongside other countries, Russia
has contributed to assisting Haiti. From the very onset
of humanitarian operations, Russian emergency search-
and-rescue detachments, canine rescue teams and
medico-psychological units have worked at the very
epicentre of the disaster. An aero-mobile hospital has
been deployed. The Russian Government further
decided to provide $8 million, through the various
channels offered by international organizations, in
particular the United Nations system, for Haiti's
reconstruction.

