Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the countries of the
Stabilization and Association process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align
themselves with this declaration.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and EU Special Representative, for his
report (S/2008/300, annex, enclosure) and for today's
briefing on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to today's Security Council meeting.

Since the last discussion on this subject in the
Security Council (see S/PV.5782), important
developments have taken place in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The long-expected police reform is on
track, with two police laws having been recently
adopted, in implementation of the first phase of police
reform. We would like to remind the Council that the
agreement on police reform was one of the necessary
conditions for concluding a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union.

In addition to police reform, there are three other
key priorities with regard to which progress has been
noted: building up the country's public administration,
implementing public broadcasting legislation and
cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. Thus, while there are still
shortcomings, there are no obstacles to the signing of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will take place as soon
as technical preparations are concluded.

The Stabilization and Association Agreement will
be an essential framework for the relations between the
European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it
constitutes an important element in ensuring stability
and strengthening dialogue within Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We call on Bosnia and Herzegovina to
undertake all efforts to begin implementing the
Stabilization and Association Agreement immediately
after its signature.

We note in the report of the High Representative
and EU Special Representative that in this election year,
inter-party and inter-community tensions remain fraught.
We encourage all political forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to unite their efforts to pursue with strong
determination the reform agenda, including the priorities
set out in the European Partnership Programme.

Constitutional reform is essential for the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. While they are not
preconditions for concluding the Stabilization and
Association Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
need an efficient, functional and affordable
constitutional framework and sustainable State
structures and institutions to meet the challenges of
European integration.

The Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board determined in February that the Office of the
High Representative should remain in place and should
continue to carry out its mandate under the Dayton
Peace Agreement until the necessary objectives and
conditions are met. The objectives set out in the
Office's Work Plan need to be fully attained by the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to
ensure a viable State. The overall goal is to make the
transition as soon as possible, and the policy of
ownership remains the principle.

The European Union has a long-standing
commitment to the stability of the Western Balkans
region and will continue to fully and effectively
support the European perspective for the Western
Balkans, including Bosnia and Herzegovina. We highly
appreciate and fully support the work of High
Representative and EU Special Representative
Miroslav Lajcak, whose efforts to ensure that Bosnia
and Herzegovina evolves into a peaceful and viable
democracy on course for integration into European
institutions are indispensable. The European Union
will continue to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in
taking further steps towards European integration.

