Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour to speak today, during the first part of my
intervention, on behalf of the group of five small

countries (8-5). The other members of the group -
Costa Rica, Jordan, Singapore and Switzerland - will
also participate in this debate in their national
capacities.

We very much appreciate this opportunity to
engage in a dialogue with the Council on its working
methods. The 8-5 is of the View that the decisions of
the Security Council are particularly effective when
they are made genuinely on behalf of the membership
of the United Nations, as stipulated by the Charter. We
have therefore consistently worked to encourage
improvements in the working methods of the Council,
in particular in the areas of transparency, access and
inclusion. We continue to believe that the working
methods are an indispensable part both of
comprehensive reform of the Security Council and of
an ongoing discussion within the Council itself.
Holding periodic open debates on this topic is certainly
a good approach, and again today we see that the
membership has indeed a strong interest in this topic.
We therefore commend you, Mr. President, on this
initiative and thank you for capably steering the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

The 8-5 group has been active for more than four
years, and in 2006 tabled a draft resolution in the
General Assembly (A/60/L.49). That text was never
acted upon by the Assembly, in particular because, at
around the same time, the Council adopted its
presidential note, contained in document S/2006/507.
We welcomed the adoption of the note, while
expressing the View that additional and more far-
reaching measures would be needed to achieve the
goals of legitimacy, transparency and accountability
that our leaders had agreed upon in the framework of
the 2005 World Summit. Thus, while we welcome this
opportunity to talk about the implementation of note
S/2006/507, we will also address issues that go beyond
the contents of that note, as the Council has itself
actually done in its own practice.

The last open debate on this topic in August 2008
(see S/PV. 5968) resulted in no formal outcome, but
certainly generated some recommendations on the
implementation of document S/2006/507. Most of them
have not been followed in the 18 months since.
Generally speaking, the implementation of note
S/2006/507 has been slow, partial and inconsistent. We
appreciate the efforts carried out in the framework of
the Informal Working Group, headed by Japan, to make
implementation more consistent and effective, and look
forward to tangible results and concrete steps on
implementation within the current calendar year. The
8-5 will continue to reach out to the Council to make
constructive and positive contributions to the
improvements of working methods, both formally and
informally.

I will now offer a few remarks, more in my
national capacity, on a number of areas where we have
been particularly active.

It is generally recognized that the annual report of
the Security Council is a central channel of
communication between the Council and the rest of the
membership. It offers an opportunity for constructive
dialogue and accountability. The annual report
therefore figures prominently in note S/2006/507, even
though the relevant parts are mostly repetitions of
previous agreements. We have engaged with the
Council members, as well as with the President of the
General Assembly, to discuss possible improvements in
the preparation and consideration of the report. We are
very grateful for the open and positive conversations
that we have had in that regard as, generally speaking,
the opportunities that we have had to exchange views
with the Security Council have always been very
positive and constructive meetings.

The following are some of the main
recommendations that came out of the discussions on
the annual report.

On process, we believe that holding informal
consultations during the preparation and before the
adoption of the annual report could be very useful.
Such consultations have been organized in the past two
years by the delegations of Viet Nam and, last year,
Uganda, and we are grateful to them. Such
consultations offer a good opportunity to discuss, in
particular, the introductory part of the annual report,
which is the only part that includes political analysis.

We also believe that holding a public meeting, or
even an open debate of the Council, when the report is
adopted would be a useful measure. That would allow
for more transparency, and the verbatim record could
be taken into account when the report is discussed in
the General Assembly. Our records indicate that the
last such meeting was held in 2002 (see S/PV.4616).

On the format and contents of the report, we
believe that making more constructive use of the
monthly evaluations prepared by the respective
presidencies could enhance the quality of the report.
We are also missing an illustration of linkages between
issues dealt with in the report, in particular between
country situations and thematic issues. We also believe
that the report does not cover any cross-cutting issues.

We believe that including a chapter in the report
on the improvement of the working methods of the
Council is necessary. It is often argued that the Council
is the master of its own procedures and therefore of all
matters related to working methods. There is therefore
no better place than the annual report to inform
Member States of relevant developments. In the past,
we have seen no substantive language on working
methods in the annual report.

Finally, we believe that more information on the
work of the Informal Working Group could be useful.
Of course, the Group is informal in nature, but is also
the Council's only subsidiary body not to produce its
own annual report. There are different ways of making
more information available, including through the
Council's website. As the S-5, we will continue to
proactively engage with Council members and the
President of the General Assembly on such ideas, and
we hope that concrete improvements can be achieved
in the framework of the next report.

The work of the subsidiary bodies is becoming
ever more intense, complex and important. At the same
time, access to their proceedings and information
thereon continues to be difficult. We therefore attach
particular importance to the implementation of the
measure set out in paragraph 46 of the annex to note
S/2006/507, which asks subsidiary bodies to seek the
views of Member States that have a particular interest
in a topic under discussion. In that spirit, we strongly
welcomed the opportunity to meet as part of the 8-5,
with the Informal Working Group headed by Japan in
July 2009 and were again very encouraged by the open
exchange of views at that meeting.

In connection with the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we again welcome the
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) in December 2009
and thank the Austrian presidency for its efforts in that
respect. We believe that the resolution has brought
about significant changes that were long overdue in the
de-listing regime of the Council, including the
establishment of an ombudsperson. We therefore hope
that the appointment process can be finalized soon and
that the ombudsperson can start working as soon as
possible.

In conclusion, the format of Council meetings is a
key element of access and therefore highly relevant to
our agenda in the 8-5. The Council has been quite
creative in developing new formats, as is illustrated by
the very useful report that the organization Security
Council Report prepared in advance of this debate.
New formats that allow non-Council members access
or enable concerned parties or organizations to
participate include informal interactive discussions,
informal interactive dialogues and what is usually
called the Kosovo model. Taking these together with
older formats such as Arria Formula meetings, there is
now a wide range of mechanisms available to enhance
access and transparency. We continue to believe that
briefings by senior United Nations officials should
always be made accessible to all Member States,
without prejudice to the format of subsequent
consultations. We also see potential in the format of
specific meeting configurations, similar to those used
by the Peacebuilding Commission with some success
over the past years. This could facilitate the inclusion
of non-members in the Council's deliberations.

Finally, allow me a word on the new
arrangements for the Security Council. This is my first
opportunity to participate in the new Security Council
Chamber, which is surprisingly similar to the old
Security Council Chamber. We are of the view that the
temporary conference room arrangements should not
lead to a new wall of secrecy, but should rather be
taken as an opportunity for members to seek innovative
ways to interact with interested parties and with the
media.

