Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Nestor
Osorio, of Colombia for his 90-day report. We reiterate
our full support for the work of the Committee. We
commend Ambassador Osorio and the Colombian
delegation for the manner in which the Committee has
been chaired for the past two years.

We also wish to thank the Panel of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1929
(2010) for its midterm report, which was submitted to
the Committee last month.

The work of the Panel in presenting its findings
and using accurate, verifiable information is important
to support the work of the Committee and ensure
the credibility of its actions. We hope that the good
working relationship that exists between the Panel and
the Committee and guides its direction will continue.

South Africa congratulates the Committee on its
efforts to achieve consensus on the recommendations
contained in the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/395, annex). We encourage further discussion
on implementation assistance notices in a manner
that is conducive to the proper implementation of the
relevant sanctions resolutions.

The constructive spirit in the Committee is critical
to supporting the ongoing discussions between Iran and
interested parties over concerns about Iran's nuclear
activities. The Committee's work must reflect a holistic
approach to the sanctions resolutions and the will of the
international community. As we have stated before, our
task must be to operate within the larger international
framework of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The implementation of the
sanctions against the Islamic Republic of Iran should
reflect that and take into account the different priorities
of States in the implementation efforts.

We continue to encourage progress towards a
peaceful resolution of the concerns over Iran's nuclear
activities. The central role played by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in trying to resolve
the outstanding issues regarding those activities is
indispensable. We urge Iran to comply with the relevant
decisions of the IAEA and with its obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, South Africa wishes to stress
that a sustainable solution will be one that restores
international confidence in the peaceful nature of the
nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran
while respecting Iran's right, consistent with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy.

