I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I align myself with the statement submitted by the European Union. Estonia is concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and we call for unity and solidarity with all those affected. We join the Secretary-General's call to put aside mistrust and animosity, to create corridors for life-saving aid and to open precious windows for diplomacy. We also support the joint appeal by the five United Nations envoys to the Middle East calling on all parties to stop the rapid spread of the virus and to work to resolve their differences through dialogue, negotiation, mediation or other peaceful means. We welcome the cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to fight against the coronavirus disease outbreak, and we encourage them to enhance such cooperation even further. The role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in supporting that cooperation and in stabilizing the region is central. The mitigation and response to the spread of the coronavirus needs special attention in the Gaza Strip, where resources remain limited. We have also noted the initial encouraging signs by the leaders of Israel and Gaza with regard to a possible prisoner exchange, which would be a welcome humanitarian gesture. As the pandemic affects both the Israelis and the Palestinians, it also reminds us of the need to continue efforts to resolve the conflict. The initiative taken by the United States of America has given us the impetus to revive the process. We call on Israel and Palestine to take steps towards resuming direct and meaningful negotiations, in line with international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, leading to a negotiated two-State solution and taking into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties. We urge the regional and international players, including the Middle East Quartet, to continue their efforts towards negotiations. Recognizing the challenges ahead, the coronavirus not being the least of them, the most important goal should be to keep the prospects for moving towards peace alive and to call on the parties to refrain from actions that undermine that, in the spirit of resolution 2334 (2016). In that regard, Israel's announcements of settlement development in several areas in East Jerusalem and around it, especially in Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the E-1 area, are worrisome. Our position on settlement activity remains unchanged. It is illegal under international law and undermines the prospects for the peace process. In addition, we stress that the annexation of any parts of the occupied Palestinian territories would be in contravention of international law. It is also crucial that all parties refrain from acts of violence, terror and incitement and focus on the common fight against the virus. We condemn firing rockets from Gaza into Israel, as well as any other form of violence targeting the civilian population. An escalation of violence would be negative for all sides and would further undermine the prospects for a resolution of the conflict.
