Mr. Ali (Somalia): It is an honour for me to be
here before the Council today and to update members
on the developments that have recently taken place in
Somalia. This is the first time I have had the
opportunity to address the Security Council since my
appointment as Prime Minister in June. In the
intervening period, the humanitarian, security and
political landscape has altered, and it is my intention to
demonstrate the steps that the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) is taking to address the new
challenges and opportunities that face us today.

Let me begin by welcoming the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2011/549) which is
now before the Council and which notes the positive
political and security developments that have occurred
in the past three months. A month and a half after my
appointment as Prime Minister, Al-Qaida-affiliated
extremist insurgents were forced to withdraw from the
capital under pressure from the Somali National Army,
with the support of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

On 10 August, the Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, updated the
Council (see S/PV.6599) on the situation in the capital
following this withdrawal by Al-Shabaab, noting that
this presented both opportunities and challenges for the
Transitional Federal Government as we strived to
consolidate security in the city, provide public services
to the population and tackle the enormous
humanitarian emergency enveloping our country. We in
Somalia recognize, as the report of the Secretary-
General notes, that failure to do so would fatally

1 1-49644

undermine the legitimacy and popular support that the
Government currently enjoys. My Government is doing
the best it can within our limited resources to exploit
those opportunities.

Immediately following the extremists' withdrawal,
a ministerial committee was set up, visited vacated
areas and came up with plans for dealing with the
situation. The immediate concern was to re-establish
security and fill the vacuum with legitimate State
authorities. A state of emergency has been declared in
these districts, as well as in camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) across the city, in order to
prevent crime as well as to deter the return of warlords
and militias.

The Cabinet has established two task forces, one
with the responsibility to provide armed escort to
humanitarian convoys, and the other - a mobile patrol
unit - to tackle crime. District security committees
have been established in all 16 districts of the city and
are engaging local communities to determine their
priorities and needs. The security forces continue to
search for weapons and booby traps in the
neighbourhoods formerly occupied by the extremists.
Once those have been cleared, citizens will be
encouraged to return to their homes.

However, we must remain realistic as we enter
the next phase. Stabilizing security inside the capital
has been a determined focus of my Government over
the past month. The plan for Mogadishu is starting to
work. We cannot, however, afford to be complacent.
We are aware that pockets of insurgents remain in the
city who are intent on launching a campaign of terror
against the population using suicide attacks and
improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Already, our
security and intelligence agencies have foiled a number
of such attacks. The two largest IDP camps, Babaado
and Rajo, which provide shelter and food for tens of
thousands of the most needy, have both been targeted.
Last week an IED was discovered planted within the
Rajo camp. Two weeks earlier, a man wearing a suicide
vest and disguised as a woman was arrested before he
could detonate his explosives at the Babaado camp. A
car bomb was also recently found and defused at the
populous Kilometre 4 junction. At the same time, it
will be imperative to ensure that the Somali State is
able to keep clan rivalries and warlordism at bay.

The Secretary-General's report notes that the
TFG and Somali security forces are currently

overextended. It is essential that we work together to
enlarge and improve the Somali National Army and the
Police Force of the Somali Government as a matter of
grave urgency. In order to consolidate and build on the
security gains, it is essential to enlarge the force of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) -
which has sacrificed so much and worked so hard - in
the near future with the required air and maritime force
components that it badly needs. To support this united
effort, I look forward to announcing the national
security and stabilization plan in the near future, which
is a key part of the road map.

The fact that the extremists would target innocent
and hungry Somalis is an indication that they care
nothing for the fate of the citizens of the country.
Somalia is on the frontline in the global defence
against the plague of terrorism. The terrorists are
looking further afield. They have sought to export their
noxious extremism across the region, recruiting and
sponsoring acts of terror in countries such as Uganda,
where last year they murdered 76 innocent people. It is
a well known fact that they are focusing their
recruitment and radicalization efforts on Somali
diasporas in Australia, Canada, Europe and the United
States of America.

As the world marks the ten-year anniversary of
the 11 September 2001 attacks here in New York and in
Washington, DC, it is critical that we learn the lessons
of the past. The struggle to stabilize Somalia and deny
terrorists a foothold on the Horn of Africa is one in
which we all have a stake, and therefore one in which
we all have responsibilities. At this juncture, I would
like to thank the Council for the generous support it
has given to both the transitional federal institutions
and to the AMISOM. peace support mission, without
whose assistance much of the progress that I have
outlined here would not have been possible. I also join
the Secretary-General in paying tribute to the
Governments and people of Burundi and Uganda for
their continued sacrifice and commitment to the cause
of peace in Somalia, as well as in extending
condolences to the families of those who have lost their
lives in this worthy cause, including Somali forces.

The support of the international community is
critical if we are to continue to protect civilians, ensure
the safe and timely delivery of aid and prevent the
extremists from using our territory as a base from
which to plot terror attacks. The immediate deployment
of the extra 3,000 AMISOM. troops already authorized

by the Council is urgently needed to prevent a security
vacuum in the areas of Mogadishu vacated by
Al-Shabaab. As the Secretary-General notes, without
international support for equipping and outfitting
additional troops, troop-contributing countries will
continue to face difficulties in deploying their forces in
a timely manner. Going forward, more will be required
if we are to expand the zone of safety that has been
created in the capital to encompass the rest of the
country. In that regard, I ask the Council to urgently
reconsider the recommendation of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to increase the mandated
strength of the AMISOM. force to 20,000 troops from
the current ceiling of 12,000, and to provide it with key
enablers and force multipliers, including air and
maritime components.

On the humanitarian front, as all are aware, the
United Nations has declared famine in a sixth region of
Somalia, which means that up to half the population, or
4 million souls, are now facing the prospect of
starvation. Many of those continue to come to the
capital seeking refuge. The United Nations estimates
that over half a million have already arrived. To deal
with this situation and to oversee the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, a high-level Cabinet
committee has been created and, as per its
recommendations, the Government has established
several camps to house and feed them. A disaster
management agency, comprising members of civil
society, has also been established. We are working with
United Nations agencies - such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Food Programme - to synchronize our
efforts to deal with the famine.

On behalf of the entire Somali nation, I wish to
express my gratitude for the pledges of assistance that
have been received from Governments and
humanitarian agencies around the world. It is a matter
of urgency that we seek to better coordinate and
increase the humanitarian relief. There can be no
competition, only concerted effort, in a humanitarian
crisis of this scale, between what are known as
traditional and non-traditional donors. All estimates
predict that we will see the crisis deepen in the country
and the suffering of my kinsfolk worsen. I have
welcomed the proliferation of support and donors who
are seeking to help. It will be essential to ensure that
we play our part, Within our limited capacity, in
securing and helping the delivery of assistance to a
larger number of Somalis who are in such dire need.

We are indebted to the United Nations and its
agencies, which have so far delivered tons of food to
Mogadishu and other areas. Coupled with our measures
to ensure security, those deliveries have had a
considerable impact in Mogadishu and the surrounding
areas. According to a recent report by the Food
Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit, cereal prices for
August in the Banadir region, although still
unacceptably high, have come down by up to 20 per
cent compared to previous months.

The greatest need, however, continues to be felt
within areas still under the effective control of the
extremists, where access by international humanitarian
agencies is severely restricted. The insurgents are also
hampering the freedom of movement of millions who
are trying to reach help either in Mogadishu or in
neighbouring countries. Without urgent interventions to
change the situation, it is estimated that up to three
quarters of a million people may perish in the next few
months. Although normal to above-normal rainfall is
expected to return in the next three months, that is
unlikely to result in a significant easing of the crisis in
the short term, as the harvest would not be expected
until February. In any case, the production from the
short rainy season only accounts for a third of total
annual cereal production. The displacement of farmers
by the current famine will only further reduce the
expected yield. In fact, the United Nations has
indicated that it expects the famine to spread to the rest
of the South by the end of the year.

It is therefore critical that we accelerate efforts to
reach those in Al-Shabaab-controlled areas before the
crisis spirals out of control, threatening the security
and political gains made. The international community
must urgently reinforce our efforts to extend the zone
of safety for aid workers beyond Mogadishu and into
those areas. In the meantime, my Government will
continue to work closely with humanitarian agencies to
collect and share information on needs. We stand ready
to cooperate with all actors to ensure that aid gets to
the most critically affected populations, wherever they
may be.

I now turn to the political progress. In May, we
informed the Council of our intention, together with
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, to hold
a consultative meeting in Mogadishu with the aim of

1 1-49644

generating consensus on how to bring the transition
process to a successful conclusion. At the time, there
existed critical disagreements among the transitional
institutions on how that was to be achieved. However,
with the generous help of both the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Somalia, Augustine Mahiga,
and the President of Uganda, His Excellency
Mr. Yoweri Museveni, we were able to bridge the gaps
and to come to a common agreement on the way
forward in the form of the Kampala Accord. As a
result, it is today my privilege to report that the
consultative meeting on ending the transition was
successfully held in the capital just over a week ago,
and concluded with the adoption of a road map,
complete with specific timelines and benchmarks, to
ensure the return of a permanent Government in
August next year. The conference was the culmination
of Somali-led reconciliation initiatives dating back to
the Arta Declaration of May 2000, which established
the Transitional National Government - the first
Somali Government since 1991 to secure a measure of
international recognition, enabling Somalia to
reoccupy its seat at the United Nations and in regional
bodies.

Over the course of more than a decade, the
transition process has expanded to include many who
had initially opposed it, bringing on board the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council in 2003 to
form the Transitional Federal Government, as well as
the moderate wing of the Islamic Courts Union in 2008
and the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a, two years later. It is
therefore clear that while the peace process has not
always been smooth, it has nonetheless proven to be
inclusive and locally driven.

Critically, my Government is committed to
implementing the road map and delivering the priority
tasks of security, the Constitution, reconciliation and
good governance by 20 August 2012. In the run-up to
the conference, President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
and I visited Puntland and Galmudug. Those visits
created a strong foundation for good working relations
between the Federal Government and regional
administrations. We have signed an agreement with the
President of Puntland, which will help us further
develop the relationship. Further steps to enhance
reconciliation efforts at the national, regional and local
levels will be made in the coming months.

We in Somalia are grateful for the encouragement
and support of the international community in the

peace process, which has been critical to ensuring its
progress. We welcome the many statements issued by
the Council over the years expressing support for the
Somali people as we strive to achieve our dream of
lasting peace. In the next phase, my Government will
work hard to come together to make progress on the
road map so that we can hope to see united and
committed international support to the Transitional
Federal Institutions. A resource mobilization plan,
agreed with our international partners, will generate the
momentum to drive forward the implementation of the
road map.

The principles underpinning the road map
agreement in Mogadishu earlier this month were to
foster inclusivity and build Somali ownership. It will
be essential to follow-up the Mogadishu agreement
with a meeting, also in Somalia, that reaches out to a
wider group of stakeholders, incorporates the views of
more Somalis from around the country and maintains
momentum towards implementing the road map.

I also welcomed the formation of a technical
committee, which will work from Mogadishu, to
support the implementation of the road map. I look
forward to ensuring that future engagement with
international partners takes place in Somalia, as far as
possible, to help us meet the array of road map targets.

As required by the road map, we are now in the
process of identifying and appointing a committee of
experts to oversee the drafting of a new constitution.
They will soon embark upon consultations with all
relevant stakeholders, including civil society and
human rights organizations, to resolve any contentious
issues. We are also liaising with the parliamentary
leadership to ensure that the Transitional Federal
Charter is amended to provide a legal framework for
the constitutional process.

Transparency is a key element to providing
effective and legitimate governance. That is why we
have embarked on the process of identifying nominees
to the Interim Independent Anti-Corruption
Commission, as well as formulating a national fiscal
budget for the period 2011-2012. In the meantime, with
the assistance of our partners in the United Nations and
in the international community, we will continue to
provide services to the population as our current
capability allows. Those include, as has been
mentioned, the provision and protection of
humanitarian aid, policing and crime prevention and

modest infrastructure development, such as road
repairs, street lighting and the refurbishment of
schools, markets and hospitals. We are also working
with our neighbours in the region to address the root
causes of desertification and famine, as articulated in
the Nairobi action plan adopted at the recent summit on
the Horn ofAfrica crisis.

Today, Somalia faces two alternative futures. One
entails humanitarian relief being stepped up and
growth in the AMISOM. international peace support
force so that it can support the Somali Police and Army
in building on the security gains made so far. At the
same time, that will enable embarking on a political
journey to revitalize and strengthen the Somali State.
The alternative, however, spells dire consequences for
the State. Worsening famine, together with the cholera
and measles epidemics, will destroy the country's
social fabric and ruin economic livelihoods for a
generation. All the while, seriously overstretched TFG
and AMISOM. forces are unable to stop Al-Shabaab
from regrouping. Allied with the enemies of peace in
Somalia, they attack the fragile security in the capital
and fatally undermine all efforts to rebuild the
Government.

A week ago, I signed the road map on behalf of
the TFG - in cooperation with the Transitional
Federal Parliament, the Puntland State of Somalia,
Galmudug and Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a 4 because I
am confident that we can lead Somalia towards
growing social, economic and political stability.
However, Somalia's future hangs in the balance. We
therefore cannot take this journey alone. As I stand
here today and pledge my commitment to delivering
the priority tasks laid out in the road map, I ask for the
international support necessary to deliver the
humanitarian relief and security that are vital
components of stabilizing Somalia.

Let me conclude by saying that, while efforts to
ameliorate the effects of famine will continue to
demand our attention in the short term, we will not lose
sight of the fact that the progress made on the security
and political fronts is laying the groundwork for a
secure Somali State that is representative of and
capable of delivering to its own people. With the
increased and concerted commitment of the
international community, I am confident that Somalia
will overcome present difficulties and take the path
towards peace and stability.
