Mrs. Albright (United States of America): We meet
today to respond, on behalf of the international
community, to the Peace Agreement initialled yesterday
in Dayton, Ohio. The world can be grateful for the
tireless diplomacy of Deputy Foreign Minister Ivanov,
Foreign Minister Bildt and, I am proud to say, American
diplomats led by Secretary of State Warren Christopher
and by Assistant Secretary Richard Holbrooke.

Their efforts succeeded because the leaders of the
three countries involved were willing to make the hard
choices necessary to bridge past grievances and embrace
future possibilities. Their efforts succeeded because of the
prayers of average citizens in the region and around the
world who have been horrified by the senseless suffering
inflicted by this war. And their efforts succeeded because
of the heroic humanitarian work of United Nations peace-
keepers from countries on this Council and from around
the world.

For the Council, our task in adopting these
resolutions is to provide the first concrete results
reflecting the decisions of Dayton. Today we take another
 

step down the long road towards peace. By lifting the arms
embargo and suspending economic sanctions, we have kick-
started that long journey, and we have given the parties the
support they need to sign this historic Agreement and
ensure its effective implementation.

After many years, after many debates, after many
resolutions and after innumerable statements, this Council
is today truly helping to make the promise of peace a
reality.

The first of the two resolutions we have adopted
provides for the phased lifting of the embargo on the sale
or transfer of arms to States within the former Yugoslavia.
Under the resolution, the arms embargo will remain in
place for 90 days after a final Peace Agreement is signed.
A prohibition on the transfer of heavy weapons will
continue until 180 days have elapsed, or until the arms-
control pact envisioned by the Agreement is signed. The
Council will watch the effect of this regime with interest.

It is logical now, in the light of the events in Dayton,
to lift the embargo against Bosnia. An embargo should not
be maintained against a country whose only crime was to
preserve its sovereignty, defend its people and sign every
peace agreement put before it. Today we bring that injustice
and folly to an end.

But now we must move beyond past debates to focus
on the future. Our goal is to translate yesterday's promise
of peace into tomorrow's enduring reality of peace. Our
plan is to discourage an arms race and to encourage a
stable balance of military power. Our desire is to nourish a
conviction on all sides that negotiation, not confrontation,
is the practical way to resolve disputes.

To these ends the Framework Agreement places
restrictions on the military forces and heavy weapons of
each party, it establishes an arms control mechanism, and
it calls for talks to begin on measures to increase the
confidence of all sides that no side will seek to evade or
take military advantage of this Agreement.

I should also note that our action today will terminate
the arms embargo for all the successor States that arose
from the breakup of Yugoslavia, including the Republics of
Slovenia and Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

The second resolution we adopted today suspends the
economic sanctions that were imposed against Serbia and
Montenegro. This is a conditional step. The sanctions will
be reimposed if the Government in Belgrade fails to sign
the formal Peace Agreement and the other parties do.
Sanctions will also be reimposed if Belgrade or the Pale
Serbs fail to meet their obligations under the Peace
Agreement.

On this point, let me be clear. The international
community must be vigilant in monitoring compliance
with the terms of this agreement. We must insist that
words on paper become facts on the ground, and we must
heed the explicit language of this resolution, which notes
that compliance with the requests and orders of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - the
war-crimes Tribunal - is an essential part of the
agreement's implementation.

To answer the Ambassador of Botswana, let me say
that the war criminals are not freed by Dayton. On the
contrary, the obligations to cooperate with the war-crimes
Tribunal are strengthened.

The suspension of sanctions under this resolution
will not apply immediately to measures imposed on the
Bosnian Serbs. Those measures will remain in effect until
all Bosnian Serb military forces have withdrawn behind
the zones of separation established in the Peace
Agreement.

Especially given the statements we have heard from
Pale over the past 24 hours, compliance by the Bosnian
Serbs cannot be assumed. After the siege of Sarajevo, the
market-place shelling, the years of "ethnic cleansing" and
the unforgivable savagery at Srebrenica, the world has
had enough of Bosnian Serb arrogance and brutality.
Their compliance with this agreement must be demanded
by the Government in Belgrade; it must be demanded by
this Council; and it must be demanded by every civilized
person on Earth.

The adoption of this resolution reflects not a change
in policy but a change in circumstances. This Council
imposed economic sanctions for the explicit purpose of
encouraging Serbia to choose the path of peace. The
sanctions appear to have achieved their purpose - far
later than we would have hoped, but still earlier than
some predicted. Indeed, this much-criticized sanctions tool
has proved critical in bringing about the decision in
Dayton, and the leverage it brings us will continue to
serve us well in the complicated task of implementation.

The terms of the resolution are calibrated to the
realities of the situation in the former Yugoslavia. If the

 

Government in Belgrade or the Pale Serbs fail to fulfil their
obligations, the sanctions will be reimposed. With that
unwelcome possibility in mind, my Government believes
strongly that the infrastructure established and a cadre of
personnel assigned to monitor sanctions enforcement should
remain in place until sanctions are fully and finally lifted.

But this resolution also creates a strong incentive for
the parties to act in accordance with the Framework
Agreement. By so doing, the parties may free themselves
and their citizens to pursue the hard but rewarding work of
providing for the economic and social well-being of their
societies. In that work, the United States and the
international community are prepared to help all those truly
committed to peace.

I note that in crafting this resolution the Council also
sought to protect the interests of all the States that were
part of the former Yugoslavia, including those not directly
involved in the fighting. The resolution is not intended to
allow any Member State currently blocking assets of the
former Yugoslavia to release those assets where there exists
the possibility of ownership, in whole or in part, by another
successor State.

My Government believes there should be an orderly
and equitable distribution of real and financial property of
the former Yugoslavia between the successor States. To
achieve this goal, successor States must be provided with
sufficient notice of assets under consideration for release,
to allow them an opportunity to submit claims before a
decision is made with respect to the disposition of those
assets. This could be accomplished through a registration,
a census or some other orderly process whereby all parties
are given an opportunity to claim ownership.

To this end, the United States does not intend to
release any assets itself until all assets are examined against
possible claims by the successor States and against
outstanding commercial or private claims. We do not
believe any asset should be considered releasable until it
has been examined in these contexts.

The time has come for the voices of reason and simple
human decency in the former Yugoslavia to prevail over
the still-present apostles of intolerance and hate. We cannot
underestimate the difficulties. Member States must do
everything within their power to accelerate the momentum
towards lasting peace, to discourage further outbreaks of
aggression and to give those who want to live as
neighbours, not enemies, the confidence to do so.

The lesson of the past four years is that war in this
region produces no victors - only victims. This
morning's newspaper quotes a 67-year-old woman in
Sarajevo whose husband was killed by a shell while
sitting on the balcony of their apartment two years ago.
She said the agreement in Dayton "means a rebirth." She
said,

"I have been crying ever since I found out. We
all just want peace and to be allowed out of the
house to fetch our groceries without worrying about
being shot." (In Weary Bosnian Capital, Joy, and Tears for the Dead, The New York Times, 22 November 1995, p. A10)

Yesterday's agreement in Dayton marked the end of
one era in the Balkans, and the beginning of a new one.
Let us do all we can to define this new era within a
framework of law and justice - not as abstract
principles, but as realities in the day-to-day lives of
people throughout the region.

Let us do all we can to see that after years of fear
and deprivation, Serb, Croat and Bosnian families -
Serb, Croat and Bosnian children - are finally able to
know the quiet miracle of a normal life.

