First of all, let me thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative briefing. On behalf of the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, I extend our heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Mr. Saeb Erekat, Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Palestinian Chief Negotiator for the Middle East Peace Process. Mr. Erekat will be remembered for his great contributions and tireless efforts in defending the just Palestinian cause. In that regard, we also offer our solidarity to President Abbas and the people of Palestine as they mourn this great loss. Amid this sombre moment, we are reminded of the human costs of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). While we grapple with the ever-growing social, economic and political costs of the pandemic, we must also spare no effort to save lives. For that reason, we are concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation across the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, where continued instability creates fertile ground for increased transmission of the deadly virus. We are, however, heartened by the Palestinian Authority's recent announcement to resume security and civil coordination with Israel. That is indeed a positive step, and we encourage further cooperation between the two parties to help contain the spread of COVID-19. Despite repeated international calls for the cessation of all settlement activities, Israel continues to methodically plan, tender and build new settlements while expanding existing ones. Most recently, the non-governmental organization Peace Now reported that the Israel Land Authority had announced the opening of tenders for more than 1,200 new structures in the Givat Hamatos settlement. The construction and expansion of settlements are not only grave violations of international law and numerous relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), but are also a direct violation of Article 49 of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention. The settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem remain a serious obstruction to peace, and we therefore call on Israel to cease their construction and dismantle existing ones. Moreover, we remain deeply concerned about the political, physical and socioeconomic division of Gaza and the West Bank, which remains another major obstacle to advancing the prospects for peace. My delegation reiterates today the call to Israel to lift the Gaza blockade. To achieve peace and security there is no better alternative than dialogue. For that reason, we reiterate President Abbas' call for an international conference in 2021 under the auspices of the United Nations and the Middle East Quartet. We urge the relevant parties to make every effort to convene sucha timely international conference. I now wish to turn to the needs of Palestinian refugees, many of whom are located in Syria, Lebanon and Jordan, as well as in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. At this critical time when the needs of Palestinian refugees are increasing, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East needs international support to address its financial shortfall. We urge donor States to fill the large funding gap by providing additional funding to the Agency's budget. Let me conclude by reaffirming the need for the Security Council to speak with one voice on matters concerning Palestine and to move decisively towards a just and durable solution that will allow the Palestinian State, along the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, to live side by side and in peace and security with Israel.
