I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for convening this meeting. I should also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, for their briefings. We are meeting today in unprecedented circumstances, as the entire world is confronted with the challenge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In such difficult times, it is our humanitarian duty to think about children and vulnerable groups in conflict zones, who are being threatened by the epidemic even as they are also the victims of violations by parties to conflicts of their obligations under international humanitarian law. The adoption by the Security Council of its historic resolution 1612 (2005), which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, raised hopes that we might be able to end the abuses suffered by children in armed conflict. Regrettably, however, the report (S/2020/525) of the Secretary-General reveals the seriousness of the violations to which children in conflict zones are subjected and the failure of the parties to various conflicts to fulfil their legal obligations. This has had disastrous consequences for children's upbringing and future, the price of which will paid by their societies and countries. Everyone had hoped that this meeting would be dedicated to celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which was ratified by 170 States and subsequently reinforced by the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. While we acknowledge the successes achieved in that regard, the harsh conditions faced by children in conflict zones require the international community to redouble its efforts to protect children, ensure compliance with international law, put an end to such crimes and hold the perpetrators accountable via legal mechanisms. We therefore add our voice to those of the States that have been calling for the relevant annual reports to include a consolidated, accurate list of perpetrators compiled on the basis of impartial and evidence-based accounts. We also stress the importance of identifying and holding accountable the perpetrators, thereby ensuring that victims obtain justice and international law is observed. Access to safe quality education is one of the basic needs of children affected by armed conflict, and is essential to their well-being and ability to enjoy their most basic rights. Education is a basic element of reintegrating affected children and enabling them to resume their lives after conflict, not to mention the role that education plays in preventing children from being recruited and used in armed conflict in the first place. Sadly, however, educational institutions are among those most damaged by armed conflicts. As the Secretary-General confirms in his report, hundreds of schools have been attacked and thousands of children have left school. Given the disastrous effects of such attacks, the parties to various conflicts must be compelled not to target educational institutions, and they must be held liable for the legal consequences of doing so. At the same time, international efforts to achieve Goals 4 and 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development must be intensified. The COVID-19 pandemic poses a serious threat to children in conflict zones. The closure of schools will cause an increasing number of children to join armed groups, thereby threatening their lives and futures. We therefore reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General's call for ceasefires in various armed conflicts, so that efforts can be focused on responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. Qatar attaches great importance to ensuring that children in areas of armed conflict are able to receive an education. Accordingly, my country has launched several initiatives to deliver education in such areas. In September 2018, on the margins of the opening of the session of the General Assembly, His Highness the Emir of Qatar announced that the country had pledged $100 million to provide quality education by 2021 in areas experiencing conflict and in which conditions are precarious. The programmes and initiatives developed by the Education Above All foundation, the patron of which is Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser, President of Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development, have been highly successful and garnered international recognition. The Education Above All Foundation, together with UNICEF and more than 80 global partners, is providing quality education to 10 million children in more than 50 countries and has developed pioneering programmes to facilitate distance learning at home in different languages. Qatar, in keeping with its efforts to protect children in conflict, is proud that, on 28 May 2020, the General Assembly adopted resolution 74/275, designating 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. Qatar presented that resolution at the initiative of Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser, President of Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development, and it was co-sponsored by 60 other States. As part of our effort to support the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and enable it to fulfil its mandate to prevent violations from being committed against children and to protect them and reintegrate them into society, and in keeping with the partnership agreement that was signed in November 2019 by Qatar and the Office of the Special Representative, work is under way in Doha to open the Analysis and Communication Centre of the Office of the Special Representative. That centre will prepare studies, provide analyses and assessments, hold workshops, raise awareness and engage in capacity-building in relation to the protection of children in armed conflict. In conclusion, Qatar will continue to support all international efforts to protect children in armed conflict and to work with the Security Council and other United Nations agencies to achieve this noble humanitarian goal.
