Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): My delegation joins others
in thanking the Polish presidency for convening
today's all-important open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. A word of appreciation
also goes to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, the
Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and the civil society
representative, Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for their highly
informative briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalfofthe Group ofFriends ofthe Responsibility to
Protect, just delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Qatar.

The protection of civilians in times of conflict is at
the core of the work of the United Nations. Today's open
debate provides an opportunity for Member States to
consider concrete measures to deal with the continued
flagrant disregard for international humanitarian law
by some States and non-State armed groups in their
deliberate targeting of civilians in conflict situations.

It is a disturbing fact that more than 65 million
people worldwide are currently displaced as a result of
conflicts, atrocities and persecution. In the past year
alone we have witnessed tens of thousands being killed
or maimed and millions forced to flee their homes as a
direct result ofconflict. The United Nations is seemingly
unable to protect populations from horrifying reported
instances of mass atrocity crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated in various parts of the world,
with women and children bearing the brunt of such
crimes. This alarming trend should be of concern to
the international community and cannot be allowed to
go unchecked. We must do more to enhance respect for
international humanitarian law and safeguard the lives
of civilians caught up in far too many conflicts across
the globe.

Ghana condemns the use of starvation as a method
of war and the use of civilians as human shields. Other
reprehensible acts, such as obstructing medical care
and destroying facilities and infrastructure essential for
human survival, and such acts of terror as indiscriminate
shelling or bombardment of cities, must be condemned
by the international community. We need be reminded
that those acts amount to war crimes under customary
international law and a number of international
treaties, including the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. States in armed conflict must
observe protocols governing the conduct of war and,
in line with their primary responsibility to protect
their citizens in times of armed conflict, must abide by
norms of international humanitarian and human rights
law in order to minimize civilian death, suffering
and displacement.

It is also the responsibility of States to investigate
and prosecute crimes committed within their
jurisdiction and to bring to justice perpetrators of
atrocity crimes and crimes against humanity. My
delegation therefore wishes to urge Member States
to incorporate international law into their domestic
law by enacting appropriate national legislation and
putting in place appropriate institutional frameworks
to comprehensively address violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law and hold
perpetrators accountable.

Ghana supports the view that the international
community should make use of all the tools at its
disposal to uphold its collective responsibility to protect
civilians where national Governments are unable or
unwilling to do so. We wish to reiterate the point made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect that international investigative and judicial
mechanisms, including fact-finding missions,
commissions of inquiry and the International Criminal
Court (ICC), provide complementary avenues to
enable accountability when and where national options
prove insufficient.

Accountability is key and should be enforced if we
are to make progress in this matter. In that regard, Ghana
commends the ICC for its work in bringing perpetrators
to justice. Considering the workload of the Court and
the several cases that need to be investigated and
addressed, we are of the view that serious consideration
must be given to the effective implementation of the
principle of complementarity as a core principle of the
Roman Statute of the International Criminal Court and
a tool in trying crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Court. My delegation calls for capacity-building at the
national level to equip domestic court systems with
the required skills and knowledge and enable them to
take ownership of some of those trials. Certainly, the
independence of national courts should be paramount
in their capacity-building efforts.

Cooperation at the regional and subregional levels
as a means of sharing best practices and ensuring
adherence to international law in respect of human
rights will assist in those efforts. It is gratifying to
note that, in the West Africa region, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
made significant strides in strengthening regional
integration and the maintenance of peace and security
by adhering to internationally acceptable standards in
its peacekeeping and regional security mandates. That
subregional collaboration also includes the training of
defence and security personnel in basic principles of
international humanitarian law, with emphasis on the
protection of civilians and international human rights
law, which have been incorporated into the training and
operations of the ECOWAS Standby Force.

Ghana has endorsed the Kigali Principles, which
provide a blueprint for strengthening the international
community's resolve to effectively protect civilians
during armed conflict. The Principles provide practical
measures that emphasize training and preparedness for
peacekeepers, vigilance in monitoring and reporting
human rights abuses and signs of impending violence,
avoidance of delays in protecting civilians, and other
steps to enhance the implementation of civilian-
protection mandates. We commend Member States that
have endorsed the Principles and urge them to duly
operationalize them in international peacekeeping.

In conclusion, we wish to call on the Security
Council to re-examine peacekeeping mandates
and operational procedures to ensure that they are
matched with the requisite resources that contribute
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
must ultimately invest in conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We must promote
respect for international law and justice for all. We
must act collectively and decisively to end and prevent
atrocities. The protection of civilians in armed conflict
is our urgent duty and responsibility as States Members
of the United Nations, and we must live up to the letter
and spirit of the Charter.

