The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw members' attention to
document S/2006/950, which contains the text of a
letter from the Secretary-General dated 7 December
2006 addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the International Working Group
(IWG), recalls its role as guarantor and impartial
arbiter of the peace process, and endorses its final
communique of 1 December 2006. It also
encourages the IWG to promote enhanced
dialogue with all Ivorian parties. It insists that all
Ivorian parties apply, under the direction of the
Prime Minister, the implementation timeline for
the road map drawn up by the IWG.

"The Security Council shares the grave
concern expressed by the IWG at delays in the
implementation of resolution 1721 (2006), and
urges all Ivorian parties to cooperate fully with
the Prime Minister in order to implement all the
provisions of the road map drawn up by the IWG
and referred to in resolution 1721 (2006),
including the identification of population and the
registration of voters, and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme, which are central to the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council, bearing in mind
provisions of resolution 1572 (2004), recalls that
the neutrality and impartiality of the public media
are essential to the peace process, and supports
the IWG, which considered that it is
indispensable to reinstate the dismissed officials
of Radio Television Ivoirienne and Fraternite
Matin. It recalls also that obstacles to the freedom
of movement of the impartial forces, in particular
those put up by the Republican Guard, are
unacceptable.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Prime Minister, Mr. Charles
Konan Banny. It strongly encourages him to
continue his endeavours, in consultation with
President Laurent Gbagbo, including his efforts
to fight impunity and promote good governance,
and to utilize all the powers referred to in
resolution 1721 (2006) to prepare for elections,
which must be held by 31 October 2007 at the
latest. The Council welcomes in this regard the
announcement by the Prime Minister of
immediate measures to relaunch the identification
process, and expects more concrete measures in
place to implement the DDR programme. The
Security Council reaffirms that the Prime
Minister must exercise his powers without
hindrance, including his authority over the
Defence and Security Forces referred to in
resolution 1721 (2006), and calls upon all Ivorian
parties to support his efforts.

"The Security Council invites the African
Union Mediator to visit C6te d'Ivoire to relaunch
the peace process as soon as possible, if
necessary in cooperation with all other African
leaders.

"The Security Council requests the IWG, in
preparation for its next meeting on 12 January
2007, to provide a detailed updated timeline on
the implementation of the peace process, and all
the recommendations needed for the
consideration of the situation by the Economic
Community of West African States and the
African Union by 1 February 2007 at the latest.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Pierre Schori, for the
High Representative for the elections, Mr. Gerard
Stoudmann, and for the United Nations Operation
06-67749
in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as for the French forces
which support it."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/58.
06-67749

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
