Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the President for convening this important
discussion. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his personal engagement and his presence at
today's debate. I also thank Executive Director Fedotov
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Djinnit for their statements this morning. Today's
briefings highlight one of the core challenges facing the
Sahel and are relevant to the wider discussion on the
region held earlier this month (see S/PV.7081).

We welcome the adoption of today's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/22).

Permit me to take the opportunity of what might
be the last formal meeting of the Security Council
in 2013 to recognize the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Guatemala and to warmly acknowledge
the very valuable contribution that his country, as well
as the other four outgoing members of the Security
Council - Azerbaijan, Morocco, Pakistan and
Togo - have made to maintaining international peace
and security over the past two years.

Organized crime across the Sahel and West Africa
is a multimillion dollar business that damages the social
fabric, not just in the Sahel and West Africa as a region
of transit but also in the destination countries - in
Europe, the Middle East and North America. Drug
trafficking is one of the most serious aspects of that
organized crime activity in the region. In February, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated
that some 18 tons of cocaine transited West Africa
every year. While down from its peak of 47 tons in
2007, evidence shows that the trend is again upwards.

The United Kingdom's National Crime Agency
estimates that between 13 and 15 per cent of
Europe-bound cocaine, worth over $1 billion on arrival
in the European Union, transits West Africa. But it is
no longer just cocaine; we are also seeing an increase
in heroin transiting through West Africa, mainly by
couriers from South-West Asia, including Iran and
Turkey. Much of it is destined for Europe and some
for North America. Meanwhile, cannabis smuggling
through the Sahel remains a serious concern, with its
destination markets as far afield as Egypt, Israel and
even further east.

In addition to revenue raised from drug trafficking,
cigarette smuggling and kidnapping for ransom provide
terrorists with funding to continue their activities.
Yesterday, the United Kingdom became the fortieth
country to sign the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in
Tobacco Products, and we encourage all Member States
to sign that important Protocol. The United Kingdom
has also proposed a Security Council resolution
reminding Member States of their obligation not to pay
ransoms to kidnappers that could be used for terrorist
purposes. We hope that the Council will agree on that
draft resolution shortly.

To tackle the scourge of organized crime, we
must take a regional and holistic approach. We must
disrupt crime by all available means, not just through
law enforcement and prosecution, but by addressing
the enablers of crime. Of course, we face important
challenges. Widespread corruption continues to hinder
effective State action and attracts organized criminals
who exploit the distinctions between jurisdictions and
corruption within them. Organized crime groups exploit
instability and weak governance. Their activity further
undermines fragile States and Governments. Lack of
capacity and funding in law enforcement agencies and
limited intelligence-gathering capability across the
region create gaps that organized criminals can exploit.

Tackling the aforementioned challenges head on
will give regional Governments a better chance at
dealing with organized crime. Strengthening State
institutions will enable them to deliver basic services,
reducing the attraction of crime. That activity must be
matched by deeper regional cooperation to sustainably
disrupt transnational criminal networks. We need to
focus our actions, first, on building good governance
to set the preconditions for a successful response.
Secondly, the regional ability to share information
and conduct investigations needs to be strengthened.
Thirdly, criminal justice capacity needs to be built.
Fourthly, joint action on borders and cross-border
traffic needs to be improved.

During 2013, the United Kingdom's presidency of
the Group of Eight (G8) has built on the work of previous
presidencies by coordinating the action of the Group of
Eight Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea on organized
crime in West Africa. We have established a network
of criminal justice advisers that will help to strengthen
the rule of law and improve prosecutions by local
authorities. We have also proposed a donor coordination
mechanism that will improve strategic coordination,
particular with the Economic Community of West
African States. Let us commit today to redoubling our
efforts to combat organized crime to enable the region
to rid itself of the scourge.

