Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, President Mbeki, for
convening this important meeting.

President Bush noted upon his return from a
recent trip to Africa that there have been striking
changes in Africa, which are the result of a new
generation of African leaders. The United States
supports democratic transition and economic
development in African countries, working in
particular in post-conflict situations to strengthen
democratic institutions and across Africa assisting civil
society organizations in combating gender-based
violence, trafficking in persons and other human rights
violations.

Despite substantial improvements, we face
enormous challenges. The focus of today's discussion
is on how the Security Council can cooperate and
enhance its relationship with the continent's regional
organizations, particularly the African Union (AU).

As we all know, United Nations peacekeeping is
overstretched. The supply of well equipped
peacekeepers does not meet the demand. We must find
ways to use existing resources effectively and
efficiently and to build capacity, particularly regional
capacity, to do more. This will take time, so we must
look at both short-term and longer-term solutions. With
that in mind, I would like to make five points.

First, the Security Council needs to reassess how
we plan for and sustain peacekeeping operations. Our
peacekeeping operations should be goal-oriented in
nature and should clearly define missions, timelines
and budgets. Peacekeeping operations should be a
means to an end, rather than a substitute for resolving
conflicts or an excuse for delay. While we understand
the risks of leaving too soon, we should look to
terminate non-viable peacekeeping operations. The
goal must be to encourage self-reliance and free up
forces and funds for where they are needed most:
places like Darfur, where the United Nations is
collaborating with the African Union to address a dire
regional crisis.

On the subject of Darfur, the United Nations and
AU have embarked on a historic cooperative effort: the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Although it is
much too early to judge whether that cooperation has
been successful, the early results suggest that
UNAMID will not become a model to be followed in
other places of shared United Nations-AU concerns.
The United States continues to call for the immediate
and full deployment of UNAMID, both to improve the
situation on the ground in Darfur and to demonstrate
that the AU and the United Nations can form
formidable partnerships. The Government of the Sudan
must lift all restrictions and delays to allow for all
UNAMID troops and equipment to be deployed.

Secondly, the AU must enhance its capacity to
plan and execute viable peacekeeping operations, and
we should help. As we all know, the African Union
needs to build increased administrative, logistical and
military planning capacities, as well as better financial
accountability and transparency. To that end, the
United States has substantial programmes to assist
these efforts. We have provided significant support in
the form of logistical support and technical expertise to
the African standby force, to the AU Commission's
emerging Strategic Planning and Management Unit and
to the AU's Situation Room. The United States
continues to provide significant logistical capability in
support of both United Nations and AU peacekeeping
efforts in Africa. We are prepared to work with the AU
and other regional organizations to further enhance
their capacity, and we call on all other countries to step
up their bilateral support as well. The United Nations
should prioritize its efforts to help the AU deal with its
deficits in financial management and administrative
capacities. Improvement in this area will undoubtedly
help donor countries feel more comfortable in giving
resources to AU missions, such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The United States would like to recognize the
AU's efforts to stabilize and improve the situation in

Somalia. Over the past two years, the United States has
provided over $57 million to support the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and we continue to
seek additional resources to support that critical effort.
We call on all AU member States to send forces for that
important mission, and we call on the international
community to donate generously so that AMISOM. can
deploy fully. In addition to AMISOM, we support the
Secretary-General's call for a credible political process
and security presence, which the United States believes
should lead to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

Thirdly, we must work with African Union
member States to increase their national peacekeeping
capacities. The United States is committed to helping
African States to increase their capacities. Since 2005,
the United States has trained over 34,000 African
peacekeepers from 19 countries and has provided
$375 million to increase global capacity for
peacekeeping operations in Africa and elsewhere.
Additionally, we see an opportunity for several African
countries to increase their capacity for combined and
joint operations by stressing interoperability in
equipment, training and communication and by
building professional relationships among officers of
all African nations. Steps such as these will enhance
overall AU peacekeeping capacity and will be a focus
for the new United States Africa Command.

Fourthly, funding for AU peacekeeping capacities
is important. The United States is well aware of the
financial shortfalls that the AU faces, especially in
peacekeeping missions. We welcome the exploration of
realistic ways to address the financing challenges faced
by regional peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General's proposal for the
establishment of a panel of distinguished persons from
the African Union, the United Nations and other
relevant stakeholders to seek viable alternative and
cost-effective means of financial support, such as the
establishment of a trust fund or enhanced donor
coordination.

Fifthly, with regard to closer United Nations-AU
cooperation, in the realm of peace and security, we
applaud the formation of the joint United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations-AU Peace
Support Team and its work in the areas of mission
planning and the management of logistics and
resources. In the area of conflict prevention and
mediation, the United States is encouraged by the
efforts currently under way by the Department of
Political Affairs to strengthen AU conflict prevention
and mitigation capacities. On humanitarian action, the
United States appreciates the Secretary-General's
recommendations on enhancing the AU's early warning
systems through the development of a multi-risk early
warning tool that includes socio-political, natural,
human-made and economic vulnerabilities.

Such a system would have been particularly
useful in places like Zimbabwe. The United States
remains extremely concerned about the situation there.
Despite significant pre-election irregularities, the
people of Zimbabwe expressed their will during the 29
March elections. It has been 18 days since the elections
and the results of the presidential race still have not
been announced. However, based on publicly posted
results, it is clear that the people of Zimbabwe voted
overwhelmingly for change. The Zimbabwe Electoral
Commission needs to immediately release the
presidential election results and ensure their veracity in
a transparent manner.

We are gravely concerned about the escalating
politically motivated violence perpetrated by security
forces and ruling party militias that target opposition
supporters in rural areas. The Government and its
supporters must desist immediately from violence and
intimidation, act with restraint, respect human rights
and allow the electoral process to continue unfettered.

We commend the efforts of the Southern African
Development Community to urge the Zimbabwean
Government and electoral authorities to address the
unfolding crisis. The time has come for the United
Nations to support their efforts through a joint mission
with the African Union to ensure that the electoral
authorities act in conformity with the regional
organization's principles for democratic elections, that
the political violence ceases and that the will of the
Zimbabwean people is upheld. In that regard, we
welcome and support the Secretary-General's call
today for international observers.

Finally, I would once again like to thank
President Mbeki for his leadership in convening this
important meeting. We understand and appreciate
South Africa's interest in keeping the Security
Council's attention focused on Africa and in
developing a more effective working relationship
between the Security Council and the African Union.
