The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Belize, Canada, Haiti and Venezuela,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Longchamp
(Haiti) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Laing
(Belize), Mr. Fowler (Canada) and Mr. Tejera Paris
(Venezuela) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the question concerning Haiti,
documents S/ 1995/46 and Add.l. Members of the Council
also have before them document S/ 1995/85, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Argentina,
Canada, France, Germany, Honduras, Italy, Rwanda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Venezuela.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:

S/ 1994/ 1377, letter dated 5 December 1994 from the
Charge d'Affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the sixth report of the
Multinational Force in Haiti;
S/ 1994/ 1430, S/1995/15 and S/1995/70, letters dated
19 December 1994, 9 and 23 January 1995,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of
United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the seventh, eighth and ninth reports of
the Multinational Force in Haiti, respectively;

S/1995/55 and Add], letter dated 18 January 1995
from the representatives of Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Dominica, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, the Netherlands, the
Philippines, Poland, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad
and Tobago, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and

S/1995/90, letter dated 27 January 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Haiti to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Haiti, on
whom I now call.


