Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the delegation of the United States for convening this
debate and Ms. Sandra Honore for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/617) to us
today.

My country is pleased to note that the situation
in Haiti shows signs of progress in security, the
strengthening of the rule of law and the training of
the National Police. It is clear that these gains could
not have been made without the continued presence
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the support of the United Nations
system and others international organizations, in
cooperation with the Haitian Government. Thanks to
the intrinsic link among development, security and
human rights as the cornerstones of the mandate of the
Mission, happily we have been able to take measures to
advance the restoration of stability and harmony in the
country.

In his most recent report, the Secretary-General
indicates that "Haiti is at an important juncture in the
consolidation of stability and democracy" (S/2014/617, para. 68), but warns us most importantly that major
challenges remain in the economic, social and political
fields, where deep differences continue to hinder
the necessary stability in that country. Against this
background, Mexico hopes that the commitment of and
political dialogue among the relevant actors will create
an opportunity to successfully unblock the pending
elections that will facilitate a peaceful transition and
the normalization of democratic life in Haiti. That
view has been expressed by most speakers today. We
appreciate the resolve of the Haitian Government to
advance its democratic stability. The creation of the
Electoral Council and the enactment of measures to
amend the electoral law are decisive steps in the right
direction.

In addition to these challenges, my delegation is
concerned about the cholera epidemic, which, although
it seems to be in retreat, remains a challenge to the
future of Haiti and to the coordination of the efforts of
the international community. According to the Haitian
Ministry of Health, as of 5 August the epidemic had
claimed the lives of 8,000 people and infected more
than 800,000. We must not lower our guard. In that
regard, the Government of Mexico has followed the
situation very closely and is cooperating with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Mexico reiterates its commitment to continuing
to promote actions in priority areas for Haitian
development, such as agriculture, health, socioeconomic
development, the environment, and education areas.
Some days ago, we welcomed 100 young Haitians who,
in the framework of the 300 Scholarships for Haiti
programme, began their studies in various Mexican
institutions of higher education. This cooperative
venture will contribute to the training of Haitian
human capital for the benefit of the development of that
country.

Another issue that continually arises in these
discussions is defining the presence of MINUSTAH
in Haiti. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General for a reconfiguration of the
Mission, which must be gradual and based on the
premise of the overall stability, safety, training and
increasing capacities of the Haitian National Police.
This strategy will allow us to continue to strengthen
and professionalize the police, and open the possibility
of supporting the Haitian Government with a rapid-
reaction force when an emergency exceeds the capacity
of the national authorities.

Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General that
the drawdown of MINUSTAH must be progressive but
prudent, and based on a transition plan coordinated
between the Mission, the States Members of the United
Nations and the Haitian Government. History has
clearly shown us how on some ocassions our timetables
have not always been the most optimal. We should be
prepared to make the adjustments that are necessary.
Our delegation believes that an abrupt withdrawl of the
Mission could lead to the return of political instability,
with untold consequences. It is essential to consolidate
the progress made without undermining security.

In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to the
men and women deployed in MINUSTAH, who contiue
to do outstanding work to establish the foundation for a
prosperous and peaceful Haiti.

