Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
First of all, my delegation would like to express its
profound appreciation for all the efforts made in preparing
and drafting the text of this draft resolution, which
culminated in the text before the Council today.

The State of Bahrain has a firm position regarding
the humanitarian situation in Iraq and, in this context, it
supports all efforts aimed at facilitating the dispatch of
humanitarian aid to the Iraqi population, which has
suffered immensely under the sanctions regime imposed
on Iraq.

 

My delegation affirms what we discussed in the
extensive informal consultations regarding the distribution
plan. Our understanding is that the draft resolution to be
adopted today would not make the oil-for-food formula a
permanent one in the sense that it might suggest that the
sanctions would not be lifted against Iraq. Rather, it must
be perceived as a programme designed to mitigate the
suffering of the Iraqi people as a result of sanctions which
we hope will come to an end once the reasons for the
sanctions have been removed and through Iraq's fulfilment
of its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The adoption of the draft resolution follows from the
recommendations of the technical team dispatched by the
Secretary-General to inspect the viability of the Iraqi oil
facilities, which concluded that the output of those facilities
would not be commensurate with the quota for
humanitarian needs. On that basis the Council saw fit to
adopt this draft resolution in order to update those facilities
so that the prescribed increase set by the Council can take
place, upon the recommendation of the Secretary-General,
with the aim of alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi people
resulting from the sanctions regime imposed on Iraq.

When the Council approves the increase under the oil-
for-food formula in accordance with the provisions of the
draft resolution to be adopted today, it follows that realistic
and practical means must be made available in order to
achieve that increase on the ground. My delegation
therefore supports the draft resolution and will vote in
favour of it.

