Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I wish to thank
the United States presidency of the Security Council
for holding this debate. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
tirelessness dedication in carrying out her work. I
also thank all the other briefers for their valuable
contributions.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

We must maintain focus on this issue because,
for all the progress achieved on the legislative side,
crimes continue to be committed against children in
armed conflicts in different parts of the world, both by
Government and non-Government forces.

Due to the widespread availability and proliferation
of modern light weapons, children not even 10 years of
age are forced to kill. In that respect, we cannot stress
enough the importance ofimplementing resolution 2117
(2013), on small arms, including placing greater focus
on how to help States to tighten control over arms.

As others have said, children are used to clear
mines, manufacture and plant improvised explosive
devices and sent to carry out suicide attacks. Forced
displacement, sexual slavery, abductions and
recruitment and the resulting enormous physical
and psychological trauma shape the brutal reality for
countless children in conflict zones.

Girls are particularly vulnerable, as they may be
kidnapped into sexual slavery or forced to become child
brides. Crimes against girls often go unreported, either
because they are missed at the point of identification
and release or because assistance programmes are
actively avoided. Many of those girls will never benefit
from rehabilitation and reintegration assistance. For
that reason, we stress that special efforts are needed to
take into account and meet the special needs of girls.

Child recruitment remains a particular and
constant concern. Out of the 59 parties listed for grave
violations against children in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/339) eight are Government
security forces and 51 are armed groups. We note the
steps taken by the relevant Governments to address the
problem, and we strongly encourage all of them to live
up to their commitments and seek tangible progress in
implementing national action plans, so as to achieve
the goals set out in the joint campaign Children, Not
Soldiers.

While we welcome the recent delisting of Chad,
the signing by Yemen of an action plan and the
reconfirmation of commitment to end child recruitment
by Afghanistan and South Sudan, we also urge the
Sudan, the only remaining country among the eight
listed, to sign without further delay an action plan
aimed at stopping the recruitment of children.

Actions by various armed groups and non-State
actors are of particular concern to my delegation.
As others have mentioned, last April Boko Haram
kidnapped 276 girls from a school in north-eastern
Nigeria, following the destruction of a school in Borno
in February, where nearly 60 children were killed or
burned to death. In May the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria abducted more than 150 Kurdish boys returning
from Aleppo after end-of-year exams. My delegation
supports including the abduction of children as an
additional trigger for the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and in the name-and-shame listings
contained in the annexes to the reports of the Secretary-
General.

We must make sure that all the instruments at our
disposal are well suited to tackle crimes against children
and that they contain strong elements of dissuasion,
deterrence, accountability and justice. Existing lessons
learned, from the worst failures to the best practices,
from the States concerned should serve as useful
guidance. As Ms. Zerrougi has mentioned, the role of
the relevant regional organizations should be further
explored and utilized. All the tools available to the
Council should be consistently employed, including the
use of child recruitment and violence against children
as sanctions-designation criteria, regular thematic
briefings to the Council and the relevant Sanctions
Committees by the Special Represenative - as our
Australian colleague suggested just a few minutes
ago - and cooperation with the International Criminal
Court and special tribunals, fact finding missions and
commissions of inquiry.

Legal cases against perpetrators of child recruitment
and violence against children are still too few and far
between. We must redouble efforts to pursue justice and
end impunity for crimes committed against children.
In that context, let me note my delegation's concern
about the failure so far by the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to adopt its conclusions
on Syria, where more than 10,000 children have
fallen victim to conflict-related killing, maiming,
displacement and forced early marriage. Massive
numbers of Syrian children are deprived of their right
to education. We strongly urge all Council members to
place the fate of Syrian children above all and to rally
behind the relevant conclusions by the Working Group.

Earlier this year we adopted resolution 2143 (2014),
with a key focus on the need to respect and protect
schools from attacks and the use by armed forces or
groups. The recent situation in Gaza reminded us once
again ofthe huge gap between the letter ofthe resolution
and its implementation.

It is deplorable that schools - the very places that
should be safe havens for children - are subjected to
attacks or are converted to military uses, in blatant
violation of international humanitarian law. In fact,
a recent study shows that since 2009 schools and
universities have been used for military purposes in
more than 30 countries: as barracks, detention centres,
fighting positions, weapon-storage centres and so
forth. Timely and accurate monitoring and reporting is
crucial for responding to such attacks and for holding
the perpetrators to account.

Lithuania strongly condemns any and all attacks
on schools and reminds all parties to conflict of their
obligation under international humanitarian law to
respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution in attack. We call on all States and
non-State actors to abide by the Lucens Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict.

In conclusion, let me convey my delegation's
appreciation for the dedicated work carried out by
Luxembourg, Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Let me assure our Luxembourgois
colleagues and Special Representative Zerrougui of
our full support and cooperation as they continue their
vital work for the sake of thousands of conflict-affected
children.

