Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): Like previous speakers, I
wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and the
member of the Transitional Cabinet, Mr. Ramos-Horta,
for their comprehensive statements containing deep
analysis of the recent problems and the long-term tasks
that lie before the Transitional Administration and the
East Timorese on their way towards independence.

The Ukrainian views are very much in
consonance with what has been said around this table. I
shall therefore confine myself to making a few
remarks.

The latest review of the situation in East Timor,
including the report of the Secretary-General, enables
us to draw conclusions about the progress made in the
move towards independence. We are particularly
pleased with the successful process of Timorization. In
this regard, we view positively the activities of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET).

We consider the elections for the Constituent
Assembly a key issue on the political calendar for East
Timor at this stage. The elections on 30 August will
pave the way to independence for the people of East
Timor. It is necessary to ensure the holding of
democratic, transparent and orderly general legislative
elections.

It is also extremely important to avoid violence
and confrontation within East Timorese society after
the elections. It will be essential to ensure the smooth
formation of the Constituent Assembly and the new
Cabinet and to maintain a peaceful environment for the
debate over the first constitution of East Timor and the
transition to independence. In this connection, we
welcome the signing of the pact of national unity by
14 of the 16 political parties contesting in the elections.
But we are concerned that the potential for communal
or inter-party violence remains within East Timor over
the transitional period. Therefore, we are interested in
hearing what additional steps can be taken by UNTAET
and the Transitional Cabinet to prevent the possible
destabilization of the situation.

Establishing the economic foundation for
independence on the basis of a viable private sector
remains another priority for us. It is gratifying to see
the revitalization of the economic life of East Timor.
Revenues from the Timor Sea will give an additional
significant chance for strengthening East Timor's
economic independence. The future Government will
need to build on efforts by the Bretton Woods
institutions and the United Nations by creating an
environment favourable to attracting long-term
investments. It is important that the financial
programmes and projects that are being implemented
or are getting under way in East Timor be focused on
the future and adapted to the conditions that will
prevail after independence.

We believe that an indispensable step towards
independence is the establishment of an East Timorese
defence force, local police and an effective system of
justice. If these tasks are not accomplished, all the
other efforts to move towards independence may be
threatened.

The United Nations civilian police should
maintain a substantial strength until the East Timorese
police are fully trained and deployed. It is important to
enable the East Timorese to play an increasingly
greater role in enforcing public safety and in the
defence of East Timor's borders.

It is clear that the international presence in East
Timor needs to be extended after the transition to East
Timorese independence. In this regard, we fully share
the relevant provisions of the progress report of the
Secretary-General. We need a comprehensive, realistic
and lasting approach to a successor mission. A
considered exit strategy that is based on the continuing
needs and aspirations of the East Timorese people is
also important.
