The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

First of all, I would like to thank the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of C6te d'Ivoire, Mr. Marcel
Amon-Tanoh, for his presence. It is indeed a privilege
for us to have him in the Security Council Chamber
this afternoon.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire and Head
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI), Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, for the updated
information she has just presented as well as for her
excellent leadership. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate all her predecessors and
the civilian and military personnel of UNOCI for their
commitment to peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire. We
are grateful for and acknowledge their work done over
the years as well as UNOCI's contribution in terms of
lessons learned, which are an important contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping missions.

We commend the countries, regional and
multilateral organizations, including the African
Union and the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations agencies and country teams, and
all those countries that contributed military and police
contingents that assisted day after day in bringing
peace to this kindred country. Without the cooperation
and work of these organizations, the objectives of
UNOCI would have been difficult to achieve. Proof of
this is the certification of the 2010 election results by
the African Union, at the request of Cote d'Ivoire, and
the peace agreements signed through that organization.

Bolivia hails the people and the Government ofCote
d'Ivoire and encourages their efforts towards national
dialogue, peacebuilding, political reconciliation,
disarmament and the reintegration of ex-combatants
into society. The international community must
continue its work of cooperation, paving the way for
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
in Cote d'Ivoire with full respect for its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

We commend the country for its economic growth,
which has been remarkable. We acknowledge the
efforts of the President, the Government and the people
of Cote d'Ivoire in succesfully consolidating a stable
political environment with three elections that have
taken place peacefully and for the progress they have
made in the process of reforming the security sector
and in rebuilding the military.

We are encouraged to learn that the stakeholders
believe that the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire is
irreversible. We see success in the peace process as
an opportunity for the Security Council to use the
example and experience of our Ivorian brothers and
sisters, whose witness and knowledge should enrich
us, in order to do everything we can to promote ajust,
honourable and lasting peace for all.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Relations of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire.

