Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
expressing my gratitude to Kuwait for convening this
important debate on the anniversary of its liberation
in 1991. This remains an excellent example of how
the Security Council shouldered its responsibility by
taking collective measures in line with the Charter. The
fact that Kuwait just hosted a donor conference on Iraq
shows a deep understanding of how the prosperity and
stability ofones neighbor contributes one's own security
and well-being. Regional cooperation is enlightened
self-interest and represents one of the cornerstones of
international peace and security.

I should like to pay tribute to the presence here
today of former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
all his work to reinforce the values of the Charter. I
also want to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for
his briefing this morning. We strongly underscore and
echo his call for an urgent cessation of hostilities to
allow for humanitarian relief in eastern Ghouta and
elsewhere in Syria. We are working very hard, together
with Kuwait and other States members of the Council,
to ensure that we can take a meaningful decision on
that issue very soon.

The Charter of the United Nations was adopted
in in the shadow of two world wars. At that time, the
purpose of the Charter was clear. As Secretary-General
Guterres told us when he assumed office: "The United
Nations was established to prevent war by binding
us in a rules-based international order" (S/PV7857, p. 3). The Charter is the foundation of our collective
security system. However, making this system work
for all means that every Member State must play its
role. It is contingent upon each Member State to abide
by and defend the rules-based order prescribed by the
Charter. This is notjust a question of political will, but
a legal obligation.

Under the Charter's provisions much has been
achieved, but we must also recognise that for many, the
aspirations captured in its purposes and principles - to
live in peace and security without violence - remain
elusive. The continued aggression and illegal annexation
in Ukraine, the intolerable suffering inflicted on the
civilian population in Syria, our inability to find a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the continued
violence and humanitarian crises in the conflicts in
Yemen, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Libya, and the horrendous reports of violations in
Myanmar are all an affront to this system.

Under Article 24 of the Charter, the Council - elected
and non-elected members alike - acts on behalf of
all members of the United Nations and must do so in
in accordance with the Charter, its purposes and
principles. The permanent members have a special
responsibility. That is why the use of the veto to
protect narrow national interests in situations of
mass atrocities is totally unacceptable. I call on all
members to adhere to the code of conduct put forward
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and the Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint
in the use of the veto, especially in the event of mass
atrocities. In addition, the global world order must be
based on a fair and just system in which States have
equitable representation. We repeat the need for reform
of the Council in order for it to reflect the realities of
today's world.

The provisions on peaceful settlement of disputes,
as laid out in Chapter VI of the Charter, contain
powerful instruments to resolve disputes before they
escalate into serious conflicts. I would like to highlight
five tools that the Council should make better use of.

The first is early action to resolve conflicts
peacefully, in accordance with Article 33. A recent
example was the Council's response to the crisis in
The Gambia last year. Early and swift Council action
contributed to preventing a potential outbreak of
violence. A unanimous Security Council, working
closely with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, adopted resolution
2337 (2017), defending democratic principles. The
collective security system worked and the rules-based
international order was upheld.

Secondly, the Council should support mediation
and good offices in an engaged, supportive and
united manner. We welcome the formation of the
Secretary-General's High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation, and the Council should examine how it can
be supported. Women's meaningful participation in
conflict prevention and resolution is key. The Swedish
Women's Mediation Network is contributing to peace
processes around the world, and we are happy to bring
that experience to the table.

Thirdly, regional organizations are key actors
in preventing conflict and the settlement of disputes
at the regional level. The Council should make full
use of Chapter VIII of the Charter and encourage the
settlement of disputes through regional arrangements
and be kept informed of how the Council can support
regional efforts to prevent conflict. In this context, we
welcome regular meetings between the Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council, as well
as cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union. The Helsinki process in Europe can
serve as a model for building trust and confidence where
such assets are missing, such as in the Middle East.

Fourthly, judicial bodies, such as international
courts, contribute to resolving disputes based on
the rule of law. The International Court of Justice
continues to play an important role in this regard. The
Council should more actively consider the possibility of
recommending referrals to the Court. In addition to the
International Court of Justice, the number of dispute
settlement mechanisms and resort to such mechanisms
are increasing. The International Criminal Court, as
a deterrent of international crimes, has a key role in
preventing conflict. The decision to activate the Court's
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression arises directly
from the United Nations Charter.

Finally, we call upon the Secretary-General to
make even greater use of his prerogatives, including
under Article 99, to bring to the attention of the
Council any matter that, in his opinion, may threaten
the maintenance of international peace and security. Of
course, we encourage Council members to be responsive
to such petitions. The Secretary-General took this
step in relation to Myanmar late last year, bringing
our attention to the situation there and its potential
implications beyond the borders of that country.

Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in
2005 that

"we will not enjoy development without security,
or security without development. But we will
not enjoy either without universal respect for
human rights".

Therefore, the role of the Council in preventing conflicts
must be seen within the broader context.

Prevention requires addressing the root causes
of conflict and instability long before they reach the
Council's agenda. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development - with its aim of peaceful, inclusive and
sustainable societies - together with the sustaining
peace agenda, represents the masterplan for prevention.
We welcome the joint United Nations and World Bank
study Pathways for Peace on inclusive approaches to
preventing violent conflict, and we strongly support
the Secretary-General's reform agenda, which aims
to put sustainable development, conflict prevention
and sustaining peace at the centre of the United
Nations work.

Violations and abuses of human rights can be
the first indicators of a nascent conflict. Conversely,
respect for and the protection of human rights contribute
to addressing the root causes of instability, thereby
helping to prevent and resolve conflicts and sustaining
peace. We fully support the Secretary-General's Human
Rights Up Front initiative as a tool for early warning
and prevention.

It is more important than ever for Member States
to act on principles and to base their decisions and
actions on international law. I would therefore like to
conclude by again stressing that the Security Council
is central to upholding the rules-based international
order, as reflected in the Charter. This means that
Member States are expected to act in accordance with
the Charter, and that the Council must ensure that
States, as well as individuals, are held accountable
for the most serious of violations of the Charter. This
wonderful and visionary text - a copy of which I have
here in highlighted colour, which I hope will help in its
implementation * is still very valid, but we need to
make better use of its provisions and the instruments
that it offers.

