Mr. Eide: The Ambassador of Costa Rica had a
couple of questions that I am pleased to answer. To
comment, in a more detailed way, on changes in the
Government of a sovereign country is, perhaps, a bit
daring. I must say, however, that I do know the
gentlemen who have been appointed to their new
positions. I am convinced that the dedication is there,
the knowledge is there and the proven experience is
there. That is why I also believe that those changes
have been welcomed across the board. That is why I
also say that this is an opportunity. The topics that we
are dealing with are really critical to our overall
efforts. That is why I also compliment the President on
having chosen to change ministers in those particular
ministries and having brought new dynamism into the
Government.
Then there is the difficult question of
coordination. Can I say a few words about that? First
there is the question of resources: the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan was and is a small
and, as I said, a vulnerable mission. It is a mission that
was shaped at a period when one did not need the kind
of specific qualifications and experience that we need
today, and so to shift the profile is difficult.

Secondly, we are in a building where, over the
years and decades, rules and regulations have been put
in place that are probably of great value in regulating
activities, but sometimes perhaps slow things down a
little bit. I cannot blame the Secretariat because the
Secretariat acts upon the instructions given by Member
States.

Let me cite one example. We were given a
mandate by the Security Council in March; we were
given additional input by the Paris Conference on
12 June. In order to fulfil that mandate, we have to
formulate a budget that can provide the resources
required. The budget will then be debated throughout
the year and adopted some time in December, and then
the recruitment process can really start. That means
that, by May or June 2009, I will have the resources in
place that I need in order to implement the mandate
given to us in March 2008. Some members are
impatient. I can assure them that I am more impatient
than they are because every day I feel the pressure of
the lack of proportion between mandate and resources.
With all due respect, the Council votes in favour of
generous mandates and rather quickly, but does it vote
for generous resources just as quickly? That is where
the problem lies and that is where the people on the
ground feel the pressure.

There is a third element. I will be brief. There is a
long way, as we know, from generous statements of
commitment to changing policies and coordinating
action and to visible results on the ground. The Deputy
Permanent Representative of Pakistan said that there is
no quick fix. He is absolutely right, but nevertheless I
feel that sometimes some countries, here and
elsewhere, which should know that there are no quick
fixes tend to believe that for our part there is a quick
fix. We all know it is not like that. Let us work
steadfastly and stubbornly together and then we will
see results.

That is my answer to the question of
coordination. I am glad to have had this opportunity to

respond. I can only say that putting the coordinating
mechanisms in place, as I announced I would do in
April, took quite some months to have approved, not
least before countries here and elsewhere added details
and comments. Finally, what I suggested a few months
earlier was approved. So things take time and there are
no quick fixes, but we will do our best.

As to the question of poverty versus economic
growth, the Ambassador of Afghanistan will be in a
much better position to answer that question, but I think
some basic elements can be mentioned here. First, the
increase in food and fuel prices impacts the poverty
level of the population. With regard to the growth level
that we are seeing, there are two or three elements that
influence whether it will be 6 or 11 or 13 per cent. That
will depend on the relatively small agriculture sector
and the influx of foreign money. That clarifies a little
bit the phenomenon that was questioned.

I am pleased to see agreement on two or three
issues here. First, we must do away with the doom and
gloom that are too widely spread, almost as a hobby, by
some. We should put an end to that - not as part of a
smart strategic communication plan, but because there
are substantive reasons for having greater confidence
in what we are doing. I mentioned the changes; let us
believe that they will result in changes also on the
ground. I am pleased about that.

I am pleased about the support that was promised
by everybody around the table to the new team that the
President has put in place. I think that is tremendously
important. As I said, I am pleased about the support
that Council members give to us and I count on all of
them to see that support materialize on the ground. The
Ambassador of the United Kingdom mentioned the
eight points that I had drawn up as elements that I want
to address quickly, and he supported me strongly and
will follow and monitor that. All of those eight points
require the full support of some key donors, so we will
work together to see that they are actually carried out.

