Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States strongly supports the Council's adoption today
of resolution 2385 (2017), an important resolution that
renews the mandate of the Somalia and Eritrea sanctions
regimes. The renewal reflects the Security Council's
understanding that those regimes are a significant
part of the international community's comprehensive
response to the situation in the Horn of Africa. By
renewing the mandate of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea, we signal our commitment to
greater security and peace for the region.

We would like to acknowledge the recent
engagement between the Government of Eritrea and
the United States and the international community
generally. We encourage Eritrea to continue to work
to address the Security Council's concerns. While we
appreciate our dialogue with Eritrea, we must note our
disappointment that the Monitoring Group and the
Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 75l
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
continue to be prevented from visiting the country.
That lack of cooperation hinders the Monitoring
Group's ability to fulfil its mandate to fully assess
Eritrea's compliance. It will be essential to confirm
that compliance in order to ease the sanctions regime.
Allowing the Monitoring Group to visit and fulfil its
mandate is a necessary initial step.

We remain deeply concerned about the Monitoring
Group's reports of possible sanctions violations,
including the interdiction of military encrypted radios
being shipped from North Korea to Eritrea, as well
as Eritrean support to regional armed groups. We
also expect Eritrea to share any additional available
information in order to resolve any lingering questions
regarding any Djiboutian prisoners in its custody.

Turning to Somalia, we acknowledge the ongoing
efforts made by the Federal Government of Somalia
aimed at security sector reform and at complying with
its reporting requirements under the sanctions regime.
More broadly, it is clear that Somalia has an important
opportunity to solidify its political and security gains.
Now that the Federal Government of Somalia has
a president, prime minister and cabinet in place, the
Federal Government and Somalia's federal member
States must focus on providing effective governance to
the people of Somalia.

The continuing threat posed by the Al-Shabaab
cannot be overlooked. We note with grave concern
the Monitoring Group's reports regarding the group's
enhanced revenue from Somalia's natural resources,
and the United States strongly reaffirms the ban on
the import and export of Somali charcoal. We expect
all Member States to fulfil their obligations to ensure
full implementation of this ban and look forward to
additional detailed reporting from the Monitoring
Group on the sources of Al-Shabaab's funding.

Similarly, the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Somalia is a serious warning against
complacency. Somali authorities must continue to
work with the international community to neutralize
this threat. Resolution 2385 (2017) highlights the
importance of good governance, the gains already made
in the country and the prospects for future progress.

We support Somalia in its efforts to lay the
foundation for a more stable, representative and
inclusive Government. The United States stands by
Somalia, and the international community and the
Security Council must remain engaged to ensure the
region realizes a more peaceful future. By supporting
the full implementation of the measures reflected in
today's resolution, Member States will help promote
the long-term peace and stability of the Horn of Africa
and the wider region. We join Council members in
sending that strong message today.

