Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The French delegation will certainly support the
draft resolution that will be put to the vote to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 30 June 1997. When
resolution 1098 (1997) was adopted in February, our
delegation expressed its concern about the delays
affecting the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and
had to point out that it was UNITA which was essentially
responsible for those delays. But since then, the evolution
of the situation in Angola has been particularly
encouraging and, as the Secretary-General points out for
the first time, an end is about to be put to a devastating

 

conflict. We are nearng a settlement, as indicated by the
Secretary-General.

This is the favourable result of all the efforts made to
help Angola, notably those of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye. Like previous
speakers, we would like to express our great gratitude to
them.

France welcomed the formation of the Angolan
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, which
was officially inaugurated in Luanda on ll April 1997.
This event marks a crucial stage in the process of peace
and reconciliation begun in Lusaka in November 1994. The
inauguration of this Government opens a new era in the
history of a country bruised by more than 20 years of civil
war.

In the past two years, France and its European Union
partners have of course supported United Nations
endeavours to ensure implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. Today, we wish to assure the new Angolan
Government of the complete willingness of the French
authorities actively to help the new Government in its task
of reconstructing and developing a reconciled Angola.

While it is the new Government and the Angolan
people that must define the future of their country, France
is nonetheless convinced that the international community
must remain in Angola to facilitate the full implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol. It is in this spirit that we welcome
the recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding the
future of the United Nations presence in Angola with a
View to supporting and to consolidating the process of
national reconciliation, which will guarantee political
stability and lasting development in that country.

