Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes this meeting and
your initiative, Mr. President, in addressing the subject
of mine action. We would like to take this opportunity
to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing, as well as to express our thanks to the
Director of the Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining, Ambassador Dahinden.

Landmines have been widely used as a means of
warfare in conflicts around the world. Since the end of
the cold war, the humanitarian problems arising from
the use of landmines are receiving increasing
international attention. In peacetime, some former
conflict-stricken countries and regions continue to face
the scourge of large numbers of landmines that remain
from the wars and conflicts that have since ended.
Those landmines hang over the heads of the local
population like the sword of Damocles. They not only
threaten the life and property of the population and
impede the efforts of United Nations humanitarian
relief and peacekeeping operations, but also hinder
economic and social progress. This problem, if it is not
addressed effectively, will undoubtedly undermine the
international community's efforts to help the affected
countries in their post- conflict reconstruction.

The humanitarian problems arising from the use
of landmines have received great attention from the
United Nations. The General Assembly adopted a
resolution on this subject as early as in 1993. In August
1996, the Security Council dedicated a discussion to
demining in connection with United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In 1998, the United Nations
published a document entitled, Mine action and
efiective coordination: United Nations policy, which
elaborated on the United Nations responsibilities and
role with regard to landmines, as well as the principles
to be followed in mine action. In recent years, under
the guidance of these principles, United Nations bodies
have coordinated their efforts through a division of
labour to help the affected countries solve the problems
associated with landmines. In many peacekeeping
operations, mine action has been regarded as an
important component of their mandate. Missions such
as UNIFIL, UNMEE and MONUC, among others,
have, through mine action, made effective
contributions to improving the humanitarian situation
in the affected countries and regions, promoting their
economic recovery and development, and bolstering
the people's confidence in the peace process. We
appreciate the positive efforts made by the United
Nations in removing the dangers of landmines. We
encourage the Mine Action Service of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and other entities to
provide a review of their successful experience and
step up their communication and cooperation with the
relevant countries, Governments, international
organizations, and civil society.

China understands that the affected countries are
mainly concerned with the humanitarian problems
arising from the use of landmines. We have
consistently supported the international community in
its effort to solve this problem. As a State Party to the
revised landmine Protocol to the Convention on
Conventional Weapons, China has been implementing
in good faith all provisions of the Protocol. Although
China has yet to accede to the Ottawa Convention, we
identify ourselves with the purposes of the Convention
and support the ultimate goal of a total ban on anti-
personnel landmines.

China has also been active in the area of
international assistance for mine action. In 1998, China
contributed $100,000 to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Action, which has
assisted mine clearance in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
1999 and 2000, the Chinese Government cooperated
with the United Nations in hosting in China two
seminars on international demining techniques for
seven mine-affected countries, namely, Angola, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Mozambique,
Namibia and Rwanda. In 2001, the Chinese
Government provided to Angola, Cambodia, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Mozambique, Namibia and Rwanda, seven
countries affected by landmines, mine detection and
clearance equipment worth $1.26 million. In 2002, we
also donated some mine clearance equipment to
Lebanon. In 2002 and 2003, we dispatched two expert
groups to Eritrea to train demining personnel and to
direct on-site demining activities. To better participate
in the international assistance activities in mine action
and step up our demining cooperation with other
countries, Chinajoined the Mine Action Support Group
based in New York this year. We are ready to increase
our exchanges and enhance our cooperation with the
United Nations and all interested countries in an
untiring effort to help affected countries rid themselves
of the scourge of landmines at an early date.

