Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for convening this open
debate on new trends in the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

Peacekeeping operations are of great significance
because they contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Peacekeeping
operations began in the 1940s. They have changed from
traditional missions based on ceasefire monitoring to
multidimensional ones with increasingly complicated
tasks. In recent years, in addition to armed conflicts,
there have been threats, such as terrorism and cross-
border organized crime. The solutions have also
changed. Sometimes that has led to contradictions
with the fundamental principles of maintaining peace,
namely, the consent of the parties, impartiality, and the
non-use of force except in cases of self-defence or in
defence of the mandate.

Chad is participating in four ofthe 16 peacekeeping
operations across the world with more than 1,600
Blue Helmets, and has made significant sacrifices in
subregional African peacekeeping operations and those
of the United Nations. Chad's participation, while it
may be modest, confirms its strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Three aspects of the trends in United Nations
peacekeeping call for our attention: the issue of robust
mandates; the intervention of international forces
alongside and in support of peacekeepers; and the use
of aerial surveillance systems, or unarmed pilotless
drones.

In regard to United Nations participation in peace
enforcement operations, in particular in offensive
activities ~ for example, that authorized by resolution
2098 (2013), which created a rapid reaction force, the
Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations,
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) - Chad notes that the Intervention
Brigade enabled the defeat of the Mouvement du
23 Mars and a return to security and stability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo even if
other negative forces, such as the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda and the Allied Democratic
Forces, continue to run rampant and pose an ongoing
threat to the stability of the Great Lakes region. In
that respect, we support the Secretary-General in his
intention to create, as necessary, rapid intervention
forces within certain United Nations operations in
conflict areas where the protection of civilians poses a
major challenge.

With respect to the intervention of parallel
international forces alongside and in support of
peacekeepers, in recent years we have seen such
forces intervene in several conflicts. That situation is
explained, on the one hand, by a lack of resources on
the part of regional organizations and the weakness of
the States concerned. The recent experience of the use
of such parallel forces demonstrates that the Security
Council mandates are not always used in line with the
principles and requirements of the Organization. The
existence of parallel international forces alongside
peacekeepers sometimes creates overlap and confusion
in the implementation of mandates and can lead to
friction and competition in coordinating activities.
Sometimes, parallel forces deployed in support of
peacekeeping operations find themselves on the
front lines and must take the upper hand over the
peacekeeping operation mission. That is not conducive
to unifying energies and actions.

The issues of effective joint efforts and ensuring
consistency in mandates should be examined. That being
so, we think that we should stress the use of a regional
focus in the settlement of crises by strengthening the
intervention capabilities of subregional and regional
organizations, as those organizations provide an
alternative, given that they are closer, faster and more
flexible. The African Union Mission in Somalia and
the former African-led Support Mission in Mali are
concrete examples of the efforts of the African Union.

In regard to drones, the Secretary-General's
report of 5 March (S/20l4/153) provides the example
of MONUSCO, where their use has provided that
mission with strengthened capacities for intelligence,
monitoring and surveillance. It has allowed for more
effective action against illegal activities of armed
groups, notably those involved in the trafficking of arms
and precious minerals. Nevertheless, we would like to
express our concern regarding an ongoing lack of clarity
on the use of drones and the use of the information and
images collected. The use of drones, whether armed or
unarmed, raises concerns and questions, all of which
should be duly addressed.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as for the
noble cause that the Blue Helmets defend. We pay
tribute to all peacekeepers, including our compatriots,
who have given their lives in the service ofpeace across
the world. This discussion, given its importance, merits
being followed up at the level of the Council and the
General Assembly.

