Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to tell you at the outset how very grateful
my delegation is to you, Madam, for having convened
this open debate on children in armed conflict. I would
also like to express our thanks for your outstanding
personal contribution to our consideration of items
related to children in the course of your work in the
Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the
General Assembly on children.

In this connection, as previous speakers have
remarked, the situation is as devastating as it is
inadmissible. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict has
said that in the past decade 2 million children have died
in war. Six million have been seriously injured or
permanently handicapped. Twelve million are
homeless. More than 1 million children are orphans or
separated from their families and 10 million suffer
from profound psychological trauma.

For its part, the United Nations Children's Fund
estimates that 300,000 minors have been recruited as
active combatants in armies and rebel groups involved
in more than 30 non-international conflicts and are
often captured as prisoners of war.

Anti-personnel landmines also pose a great
danger to the physical safety of children. Every month,
800 minors die or are mutilated by landmines. They are
marked for life by amputations, the consequences of
which affect their capacity to move about, work and
live a normal life. The moving words of Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh that we heard this morning provided a
personal perspective and put a human face on such
terrifying statistics.

In order to address such horrors, Mexico supports
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, which
consolidate and expand United Nations activities
related to the situation of children in armed conflict.
We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment that
enhanced international cooperation and the political
will of nations are needed in order to help everyone to
meet their obligations to protect children in times of
war and in post-conflict situations.
My country is firmly committed to consolidating
international law in this sphere. On 30 June 2000, we
ratified Convention No. 182 of the International
Labour Organization on the worst forms of child
labour. On 7 September 2000, we signed the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In the
general debate of the General Assembly in New York,
the President of Mexico announced that our ratification
of that instrument is currently under way.

Mexico agrees on the importance of the Security
Council's continuing to study information provided by
humanitarian agencies on the situation of children in
various regions of the world and of its adopting
measures to ensure that parties to conflicts permit
secure and unrestricted access to United Nations
humanitarian personnel. Mexico also believes that it is
highly important that humanitarian assistance be
increased to children, that access to war-affected
children be guaranteed in all regions and that
prevention and support programmes be developed for
children affected by HIV/AIDS.

Mexico believes that activities of the Security
Council to protect children in armed conflict, together
with measures to be adopted by States in the context of
the commitments they will undertake at the special
session on children, will enable the international
community to meet the psychological, rehabilitation
and social reintegration needs of children and to ensure
their full enjoyment of their human rights.

One aspect to which Mexico attaches particular
importance is the demobilization and reintegration
programmes for child soldiers. Lessons learned in
warfare and post-conflict situations have underscored
the need to design specific programmes to address the
problems of boys and girls involved in armed conflict.
We support the Secretary-General's recommendations
that Member States provide sustained and adequate
resources to implement such programmes.

It is also essential that we keep in mind strategies
to ensure the progress called for in this context in the
road map towards the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration. We must work towards the
suggested objectives and, in particular, towards

"securing state commitments to ending the use of
children as soldiers, demobilizing and
rehabilitating former child soldiers and taking
into account the special needs of women and
girls". (A/56/326, para. 238)
I conclude by affirming, in reiteration of the
reference made by the representative of Colombia in
this connection, our support for the recommendation on
increasing restrictions on the transfer of small arms and
light weapons to conflict zones. In addressing this
problem, actions must be taken at the national, regional
and international levels, such as those included in the
Programme of Action on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects, adopted in July by
the General Assembly. Its effective implementation by
Member States will have a significant impact on
improving the protection of children in armed conflict.

