Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council. Let me begin by expressing the
condolences of the United States of America for the loss
of lives in today's helicopter accident in Afghanistan.

(spoke in French)

The coming year will be one of milestones for
Afghanistan that will involve Afghans taking on
an increasing responsibility for the security and
development of their country and set the stage for
further democratization, stability and peace.

(spoke in English)

The April 2014 presidential election will mark the
first democratic transition of power from one leader to
another in Afghanistan's history. The announcement
of the final list of candidates for the presidential
and provincial council elections is a first step, and
the Independent Election Commission (IEC) and
the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission
(IECC) did thorough work in vetting the candidate
lists. Canada is committed to supporting efforts to
ensure transparency and accountability in the electoral
process. That is why we recently announced that we
are providing more than $1.8 million to train election
observers, with a specific focus on training women. As
elections preparations proceed, we encourage the IEC
and the IECC to maintain transparency in their activities
to enhance the credibility of the democratic process and
ensure that all Afghans have the opportunity to make
their voices heard.

The coming year will also see the end of the
International Security Assistance Force's mandate and
the transition of the United States and NATO missions
in Afghanistan. The Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have taken over the lead and are now
consolidating responsibility for security across the
entire country. Through that transition, the ANSF must
demonstrate that it is becoming ever more capable and
professional in confronting security challenges, which
originate from both within Afghanistan and within
neighbouring countries.

However, the ANSF still requires continued support
and training to be able to carry out its operations
effectively. Canada has pledged $330 million between
2015 and 2017 to improve the capacity and sustainability
of the ANSF. However, for those funds to be effective,
there must be a clear framework for international
support in place. We urge President Karzai to sign the
bilateral security arrangement with the United States,
which was endorsed overwhelmingly by the members
of the consultative loya jirga, so that planning for a
post-2014 NATO support mission can begin.

(spoke in French)

The progress being made should not make us lose
sight of the challenges still faced by Afghan women
and girls. We are deeply troubled by the latest figures
from the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, which indicate that it received more than
4,100 reports of violence against women in the first
six months of 2013. We must be clear - sacrificing
the safety and security of women cannot be viewed as
an acceptable compromise for stability. Such numbers
show how widespread the problem of violence against
women is in Afghanistan and underscore the importance
of fully implementing the law on the elimination of
violence against women. Canada remains committed to
advancing the rights of Afghan women and girls and
looks forward with interest to the Afghan Government's
report on the implementation of that law - a key
commitment under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.

(spoke in English)

It is crucial that the Government of Afghanistan
take concrete steps to implement that law by providing
training to police, prosecutors and judges and by
strengthening investigative units to ensure that those
responsible for carrying out the law have the tools they
need to do so. It is also essential that the rights ofwomen
and girls be taken into account in all legislation being
developed, including the Afghan Penal Code and the
Criminal Procedure Code, and in discussions regarding
a peaceful settlement to the current conflict. Without
those efforts, the gains that Afghan women have made
in the past 12 years are at risk of being stripped away.
The future success and stability of Afghanistan will
be a result of the integration and leadership of women.
Afghanistan's success will come hand in hand with
the realization that women are an essential resource
necessary for the country's development.

(spoke in French)

The coming months represent a critical time for the
democratization and future stability of Afghanistan.
We all know that that path is difficult and there are
those who are actively working to reverse the progress
made to date. That is why it is important that the
international community recognize the progress made,
while not losing sight of the challenges that remain.
Ungoverned spaces remain havens for terrorists, and we
condemn the actions of States that sponsor terrorism as
an extension of their policy. We also note with concern
from the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/721) that
poppy cultivation has increased by more than one third
over the past year, with production increasing by more
than 49 per cent. That illicit activity serves only to
strengthen the insurgency and undermine the rule of
law.

(spoke in English)

However, the Afghan people have demonstrated
that they are resilient in the face of ongoing instability
and are determined to build a better future for
themselves and their children. In that context, Canada
is committed to supporting those that are working to
build that better future. That is why we announced in
2012 a commitment of $227 million in development
assistance to Afghanistan for the period between
2015 and 2017. Together with the Afghan people, we
will help strengthen the country into one that is more
secure, stable and prosperous and never again a haven
for terrorists or one that embraces transparency,
accountability, human rights and the rule of law.

