Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): To say the least, the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains of grave
concern to us. The regime and its allies continue to
pursue their own military objectives with complete
and cynical disregard for the still-existing cessation of
hostilities and their obligations under the May statement
of the International Syria Support Group, to which no
one seems to pay any attention any longer. Damascus
has made no effort to save the political momentum but
instead is keeping the Syrian people hostage to its plans
to change the equation on the ground by military means.

We are alarmed by the dozens of deaths and
hundreds of injured as a result of a systematic shelling
by the pro-regime forces and its allies in both eastern
and western Aleppo in the past weeks. As the head
of delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross in Syria recently said, the situation in
Aleppo is devastating, with the city being constantly
bombed. We share concern that civilians on all sides
are unable to find shelter, food and medical care. We
call on all sides to the conflict to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

In a number of meetings we have raised the issue
of the situation along the Castello road. Now the fears
that we expressed have become a reality. Food supplies
in eastern Aleppo are sufficient only until the end of
July, and health care is not available. A humanitarian
catastrophe is looming for some 300,000 people.
Humanitarian access to eastern Aleppo city must be
restored without any delay or preconditions.

Assessing the state of implementation of the July plan
for cross-line deliveries, we stress again the importance
of observing the principle of no conditions attached with

regard to the type of assistance to be provided. We are
dismayed by the fact that in almost half of the locations
the Syrian authorities have allowed lower numbers of
beneficiaries to receive the humanitarian aid than the
United Nations had projected. In this context, we join
the United Nations and other colleagues in calling
on all parties to the conflict to immediately provide
unconditional, unimpeded and sustained access to
the people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas across
Syria, or at least to agree to the establishment of the
weekly 48-hour humanitarian pause.

An improved humanitarian situation can only be
achieved through the political resolution of the conflict.
However, as we are less than a week away from the
1 August target date, we unfortunately do not see any
positive changes that could lead to the resumption of
the negotiation process. Without tangible progress on
the political track, the best we and the Syrian people
can hope for is reliance on irregular and interrupted
deliveries of humanitarian aid by the United Nations
and other actors, which is rather dismaying after all
the efforts devoted to alleviating the suffering of the
Syrian people.

We need to ask ourselves how many more briefings
like today's we will have to hear before it is too late.

