Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, I wish to thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Ann Veneman,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and the representatives
of the United Nations Development Programme and
the World Bank, for their briefings and contributions to
the debate. I pay special tribute to UNICEF for its
invaluable work for children in the world under the
strong leadership of Ann Veneman.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict. France, as the chairman of the Security
Council Working Group on the subject, has shown its
commitment and genuine leadership on the issue,
which we greatly appreciate.

Since the landmark report of Graca Machel in
1996, the focus of the international community on the
promotion and the protection of the rights of children
affected by armed conflict has greatly increased. In the
last 10 years, the Security Council has played an
important role concerning the issue, and its adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005) to establish a monitoring and
reporting mechanism marked another important step
forward in addressing the issue more effectively.

It is reported that, since 2003, over 14 million
children have been forcibly displaced within and
outside their home countries, and between 8,000 and
10,000 children are killed or maimed every year as a
result of landmines. Those are saddening figures and
show that the international community still has much
to do for the protection of children from forcible
recruitment, murder, abduction or sexual exploitation.

My Government welcomes the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism, pursuant to
resolution 1612 (2005), in Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Somalia and the
Sudan. We also welcome the fact that similar
mechanisms are being established in Sri Lanka and
Nepal. We strongly hope that the information given by
these mechanisms will provide us with an objective
and reliable picture of the situation of children under
armed conflict and thereby contribute as the basis for
appropriate actions to be taken.

Japan appreciates and supports the activities of
the Working Group established under resolution 1612
(2005), which is actively implementing its mandate
under the strong chairmanship of the French
delegation. As its important first step, the Group
reviewed the first report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in June (S/2006/389). The
report is based on the information given by the
Working Group. Japan considers it important that the
Working Group consult closely with the countries
concerned in order to ensure steady progress toward
solving the problems of those countries. We will
participate actively in the Working Group to make
recommendations from the Group to the Security
Council.

Japan is deeply concerned about the situation of
children who are drafted or abducted by parties
involved in armed conflict and who are forced to
engage in fighting or mobilized to work for
combatants. Child soldiers are deprived of the
opportunity to receive an education and cannot
experience sound growth.

In addition, as many child soldiers have lost their
parents or are unable to obtain appropriate assistance
for reintegration into their communities, they are often
pressed into service once again by armed forces and
groups. Thus, special attention should be given to
reintegration assistance programmes as part of the
process of disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating
child soldiers.

Japan advocates the concept of human security to
protect and empower ordinary people, especially those
who are most vulnerable. In line with that concept, my
Government has extended assistance for the
consolidation of peace, supporting the projects of such
international organizations as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and UNICEF,
principally in Africa and Asia. There are approximately
120,000 ex-child soldiers in Africa and most are said to
be in the Great Lakes region. We regard it as of the
highest importance to help children associated with
armed forces and groups return and be reintegrated into
their families and communities.

My Government has supported such projects as a
rehabilitation programme for ex-child soldiers in the
Great Lakes region through UNDP and a community
support programme in Liberia in 2006. We also
supported the interim disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme for the Sudan in 2005.

In conclusion, we would like to stress once again
that the issue of children and armed conflict should be
a priority for the international community, and it is
especially important to mainstream it into all the
policies and programmes of the United Nations system.

For its part, Japan will continue to work closely
with other Member States, the United Nations system -
including the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights -
national organizations, non-governmental organizations
and civil society, to improve the situation of children
caught in the midst of armed conflict.

