Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to say that yesterday, which saw the first
meeting under the Egyptian presidency of the Security
Council (see S/PV.7685), after listening the briefings of
the representatives of the Red Cross and Medicins Sans
Frontieres in this Chamber, I could see how difficult it is
follow satisfy all protocols for running these meetings,
so I wanted to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your handling the role of president. I also wanted to
assure you, Sir, of the full cooperation of the delegation
of Uruguay. At the same time, I would like to join
those who preceded me in thanking the delegation of
China for the excellent work accomplished during its
presidency in the month of April.

I would also like to thank the three Chairs for
their briefings on the activities of their respective
Committees, as well as the Groups of Experts that
support the work of the three Committees.

I will be very brief. My comments actually apply to
the work of all of three Committees since each of them
are different facets of the same risk that is threatening
international peace and security today.

First, I would like to reaffirm Uruguay's
commitment to freedom, democracy, the rule of law,
respect for human rights, and tolerance. All of these are
values that terrorism is seeking to eradicate from the face
of the earth. For that reason, we energetically repudiate
their activities and their world view. The success of
the work of the Committees depends essentially on the
responsibility of States in implementing the decisions
and recommendations of the Security Council. The
exercise of responsibility requires above all the will of
States to comply with their obligations. I emphasize that
there must be resolute will and a strong commitment
from States, and I say this because there has been a
distinct impression that such will and commitment
have been lacking in certain quarters.

But in addition to will, there must also be capacity,
and the need to build capacity is a theme that was
touched upon by several colleagues who preceded me
this morning, including Mr. Yoshifumi Okamura, who
provided us with a detailed analysis of the various
aspects of capacity-building and institution-building.
This is essential for implementing and strengthening the
decisions and measures adopted at the Committee level.

The various degrees of non-compliance are often
not the result of a lack of will, but the result of lack of
capacity. Something that might seem simple for some,
such as border controls, is something that for others
entails huge prior capacity-building, in terms, for
example, of personnel - a trained, educated, equipped
staff. Infrastructure is also needed, from buildings to
communications and transportation infrastructure.
Customs staffis needed, and it must be paid well enough
to withstand the temptation of bribery. Capacity-
building is therefore at the crux of the ability ofa State
to comply with the task we have given it.

International cooperation in this area is therefore
crucial. When I speak of international cooperation, I
mean not only the United Nations, but also international
financial institutions and the different ways to raise the
level of development of peoples so that they can take on
both the material aspects of implementing resolutions
as well as the ultimate way of beating terrorism, which
is by changing minds. We must achieve a level of
development in which terrorism is no longer seen in the
lives of our peoples as a viable option.

