Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France is
appalled by today's vote and the result of the Russian
veto. This result is particularly serious in and of itself,
but it is also potentially fraught with consequences for
the future. The situation we are confronted with - the
proven use of chemical weapons in Syria - is indeed
one of those case studies that should provoke a
unanimous and immediate mobilization of the Security
Council.

All conditions are there for that result. Faced with
the despicable use of chemical weapons in Syria, the
Security Council created the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigation Mechanism (JIM) to establish facts
and responsibilities. In keeping with its mandate,
this investigative mechanism works tirelessly with
undeniable professionalism and impartiality. It leads to
clear, well-documented conclusions that unambiguously
prove the responsibility of the Syrian regime in several
cases and that of Da'esh in others.

Contrary to what the professionals of confusion
would have us believe, we are not in a gray zone here.
The situation in all its horror is crystal clear. In the
twenty-first century, terrorists - and a State - are
intentionally using chemical weapons to kill women
and children, among others. Their faces disfigured by
an atrocious death will long haunt our memories and
our consciences.

And in the face of this situation, one of the major
players in the international community - one of the
major partners of my country, to which we are bound
by so many links - has decided for the fourth time to
veto the renewal of the Mechanism in order to protect
the Damascus regime. Such an attitude leaves those
who deeply respect Russia speechless. This cannot be
the last word of that great country whose role in the
international balance of power is decisive.

It is even more true that the raison d'etre ofthe JIM. is
more justified than ever. More than 60 cases ofuse need
to be examined. The Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons has already confirmed for us
the use of sarin gas on 30 March in Latamneh. That is
why France supported the draft resolution prepared by
the United States and would like to acknowledge the
efforts of our American friends who worked with all
the delegations to propose the renewal of the JIM. by
presenting a balanced text which contains substantial
concessions aimed precisely at trying to bring members
of the Council together.

Let us carefully assess the seriousness of the
issues together. Beyond Syria, what is at stake first
and foremost is the safeguarding of the most basic
human rights and the fight against impunity. The use
of chemical weapons is not only morally untenable
and legally unacceptable; it is also a terrifying step
backward for all of us, as the Syrian regime and Da'esh
are trying to outdo one another to see who is the more
horrific and barbaric.

Let us also not forget that these atrocities are war
crimes, and they have made chemical terrorism into
a dangerous reality. What is also at stake today is the
future of the international non-proliferation regime.
While international non-proliferation regimes are one
of the major achievements of recent decades, we should
not let the most successful of them - the chemical
regime - be undermined by political calculation and
division. It would be a deadly precedent for the other
non-proliferation regimes and an irresponsible attitude
for which we would all pay a high price.

The use of chemical weapons by anyone is notjust a
moral abomination against the most basic principles of
humanity: to look away - to accept the use of chemical
weapons in Syria without reacting - would amount
in fact to giving a blank check or a green light to the
proliferation and the use of these weapons elsewhere
and would create, moreover, the most favourable soil
for the very chemical terrorism that all of us fear.
We created the JIM. upon the joint initiative of
Russia and the United States in order to transcend
political disagreements and establish the truth. That
is why we established it. It is therefore a moral failure
and a strategic mistake on the part of those who renege
on their word and commitments when the truth comes
to light.

The JIM. was never a Western tool. It belongs to the
entire international community and we are duty-bound
to strengthen it. The Mechanism cannot and must not be
held to ransom by political squabbles, or worse, tactical
games. Undermining the JIM. is tantamount to playing
with fire, and could, in the long-term, jeopardize the
non-proliferation regime, in particular with regard to
chemical weapons, which we all built block by block.
The JIM. should be able to conduct its activities without
preconditions or interference.

A political solution alone will enable us to put an end
to the horrendous conflict in Syria, through a negotiated
and credible democratic transition, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva Communique.
However, there will be no sustainable peace in Syria
in an environment of impunity. Peace will depend on
justice and justice requires the means for determining
those responsible for committing atrocities in Khan
Shaykhun, and other chemical attacks, who must be
held accountable for their criminal acts.

I would like to share a profound belief with the
Council. Today's vote cannot be the final word. France
will not resign itself to failure or resort to playing
political games that will not address the current
challenges. Given the gravity of such challenges,
we have no right to give up or to lose heart. The
Council can count on France's continued efforts in
all relevant forums to combat impunity in Syria and
elsewhere, and to promote, forever and everywhere, the
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime on which
our security depends.

