Mr. Nathon (Hungary): I should like to join those
speakers who have congratulated you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
January. I wish you much success during the rest of the
month.

First of all, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the important document that
is before the Council today. In the position paper, he has
provided us with a thoughtful and comprehensive analysis
on how to improve the capacity of the United Nations to
maintain peace and security. We believe that the
proposals he has put forward in the present document can
serve as a useful additional basis for evaluating and
further developing some conceptual and practical elements
of "An Agenda for Peace".

No one can deny that during the last two and a half
years the activities of the United Nations relating to the
maintenance of peace and security have undergone
significant changes. Nevertheless, most of the ideas set
out in 'An Agenda for Peace' have remained relevant. At
the same time, we should admit that the rapid increase in
peace-keeping operations and the diversification of their
mandates have resulted in an inadequate use of related
principles, methods and resources as well. We must,
therefore, agree with the Secretary-General that it is time
to highlight certain areas of the activities of the United
Nations in order to draw lessons from the experience
gained.

Certain developments in the nature of conflicts have
further increased the importance of rapid actions. This
calls for the strengthening of preventive diplomacy,
including developing adequate early warning capacities,
dispatching field missions, and utilizing the good offices
of Governments, international or regional organizations or
eminent personalities in order to get to the source of an
imminent conflict and safeguard the security, well-being
and human rights of the affected civilian population.
Hungary, for its part, supports the Secretary-General's
proposal that a climate be created within which it would
be a basic rule for Member States to accept the
involvement and the assistance of the United Nations in
such conflicts.

During the last few years the character of the
peace-keeping operations has changed dramatically. The

 

operations have become more complex and also more
dangerous. It has become increasingly difficult to find
sufficient troops and other personnel. The Secretary-General
presents to us a set of proposals on how, in his opinion, the
United Nations could get out of this "pitfall" situation. In
this respect we look forward to receiving further details
about his idea of a rapid reaction force.

The importance of the post-conflict peace-building
activity of the United Nations has grown considerably in
recent years. Objectives like demilitarization, control of
small arms, development of the police force and the
judiciary, establishment of the rule of law, building up of
democratic institutions, monitoring of human rights, and
assistance for social and economic development have all
become indispensable elements of this activity, in which
peace-building efforts should go beyond traditional
functions. Post-conflict peace-building has thus turned into
a multifunctional activity in which the responsibilities of the
United Nations have increased, particularly in the
humanitarian and human rights fields. We welcome the
progress that has been made in this regard and encourage
the Secretary-General to further strengthen all aspects of
this crucial activity.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
regional arrangements under Chapter VIII of the Charter is
on the rise. We whole-heartedly welcome this relatively
new phenomenon. The various fields of collaboration
between the United Nations and regional organizations are
duly reflected in the document in the reference made to
concrete examples of consultation, diplomatic support,
operational support, co-deployment and joint operations. I
would like to mention here an additional example: the
participation of regional arrangements - the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Western European Union (WEU) - in enforcing sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). We think it would be appropriate for the
United Nations and the regional organizations to strengthen
cooperation in the fields of preventive diplomacy and
regional arms control and disarmament arrangements.

In our capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE
we deem it extremely important that the already promising
and fruitful cooperation between the two organizations
develop further. Recent changes in the institutional structure
of the OSCE - for example, the establishment of the post
of Chairman-in-Office and the Troika - have made it
possible for the OSCE to act more efficiently in its
relations with other organizations. A good reflection of this
development is found in the almost daily contacts between
the United Nations and the OSCE. Working-level
cooperation between the two secretariats should be further
encouraged. For our part, we will do everything in our
power to give impetus to this collaboration.

In his paper the Secretary-General pays special
attention to the question of sanctions. Undoubtedly,
sanctions are a very blunt instrument. However, in the last
couple of years, the Security Council has increasingly
resorted to the imposition of sanctions in order to either
modify the behaviour of a party that constitutes a threat
to international peace and security, or enforce the
mandatory resolutions of the Council. Since sanctions do
not involve the use of force, they are the last 'peaceful'
means among the instruments for peace and security at
the disposal of the international community to enforce its
will.

The imposition of sanctions inevitably affects the
economic interests of neighbouring countries of the
targeted State. An important element for consideration
could be the involvement of such countries in the
negotiating process of the Security Council before the
actual imposition of sanctions. However, under the
relevant provisions of the Charter, mandatory sanctions
imposed by the Security Council represent internationally
binding obligations for all States, which are duty bound
to implement them. Article 25 of the Charter remains a
cornerstone of the United Nations. Therefore, those who,
for one reason or another, call into question their
obligations relating to the implementation of sanctions,
undermine the very existence of the world Organization.

