Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation takes the opportunity offered by this
meeting of the Security Council on the nineteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
(S/2009/2l) to describe, on behalf of the Ivorian
Government, recent developments in the situation in
cote d'Ivoire.

Allow me first to thank the Secretary-General for
the high quality of his report, which describes the
efforts of the Ivorian parties to implement the peace
3
process launched with the signing of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement.

We also wish to thank the French presidency of
the Security Council for this month. On behalf of the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire, we wish once again to
express our deep appreciation to Ambassador Jean-
Maurice Ripert and his team for their outstanding
leadership of the work of the Council.

The Government of Cote d'Ivoire has carefully
considered the latest report of the Secretary-General,
which covers the situation in C6te d'Ivoire and offers
criteria for a possible progressive drawdown of ONUCI
troops. We welcome the strong signal sent by the
United Nations through the Secretary-General's
recommendations on reducing the United Nations
military presence in Cote d'Ivoire. It reaffirms the
significant progress made since the assumption by
Ivorians of the process of overcoming the crisis with
the signing of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement.

We also wish to thank Ambassador Choi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
objective assessment of the situation in Cote d'Ivoire
and for his work to restore genuine peace to my
country.

This progress was consolidated by the signing, on
22 December 2008, of the fourth supplementary
agreement to the Ouagadougou Agreement, which
identifies the modalities and timetable for operations to
disarm ex-combatants of the Forces nouvelles, disband
the militias, relaunch the process of reunifying the
Ivorian defence and security forces, and complete the
redeployment of public administration throughout the
territory, including local authorities, the judiciary and
the tax and customs administrations.

I am pleased to announce that the implementation
of the fourth supplementary agreement began on
Thursday, 15 January, with the celebration by the
Ivorian Government of a dual ceremony marking the
return of the financial and judicial administrations to
the central, northern and western zones of the country
that had previously been occupied by the Forces
nouvelles.

Regarding the financial administration, I note
that, once the current mobilization phase is complete,
customs posts will open in Ouangolo, Pogo and
Bouake in less than 10 days, on 2 February. The tax
administration, for its part, is now being deployed in
the formerly occupied zones.

As to the judicial administration, some 380
members of the judiciary - including judges,
registrars and corrections officers - were presented in
Bouake and are to be redeployed in the central,
northern and western zones in the framework of the
restoration of State authority and the redeployment of
the administration throughout the national territory.

The police and the gendarmerie are also being
redeployed to support the other administrations. Police
commissariats and gendarmerie brigades will be open
to receive the 3,400 personnel of the joint brigades, the
list of whom is being drawn up by the integrated
command centre, which has already been partially
funded to undertake the operation.

With regard to the identification of the populace,
on 15 January the Government of Cote d'Ivoire
disbursed 4.6 billion CFA francs, equivalent to some
$10 million, to the Independent Electoral Commission
and all the national agencies in charge of the
registration process so as to continue and complete the
operation under way by 28 February. This
disbursement is supplementary to the 2.3 billion CFA
francs disbursed by early January for a total of
6.9 billion, equivalent to approximately $14 million,
towards the $15 million requested by the Commission
to fund the nationwide deployment of 4,000 teams in
charge of identification and registration on electoral
lists. The next disbursement of 2.7 billion CFA francs -
about $5 million - will take place in February. This
financial effort on the part of the State of Cote d'Ivoire
has been supported by the international community
through ONUCI, the United Nations Development
Programme and the European Union.

More than 3.5 million individuals have now been
identified, accounting for over half of the 6.5 to
7million persons who will ultimately comprise the
electorate. It will be noted that prospects for the
electoral process are promising, and by mid-February
the Permanent Consultative Framework of the
Ouagadougou Agreement will be able to meet and
propose to the Independent Electoral Commission
dates for the holding of presidential elections, probably
in the last quarter of 2009.

Cote d'Ivoire is indeed a stable country, but the
prolonged crisis ultimately exhausted the financial
resources of the State and is jeopardizing its financial
equilibrium. That is why my Government is requesting
assistance in financing activities related, in particular,
to the demobilization of former combatants, the
restoration of State authority, the redeployment of State
administration throughout the country and
peacebuilding in general.

Regarding peacebuilding, I take this opportunity
to thank the French Government for its ongoing
support to Cote d'Ivoire in the relevant bodies, with a
view to substantially reducing Cote d'Ivoire's debt;
this is necessary for reviving our economy and for
post-crisis reconstruction.

I wish in conclusion to draw the Council's
attention to a situation that is on the verge of becoming
a humanitarian issue: the individual sanctions that
09-21513
remain in force on Mr. Charles Ble Goude', Mr. Eugene
Kouadio Djue and Mr. Martin Fofie Kouakou. The war
has ended, and those three individuals are playing a
significant role in putting an end to the crisis. My
delegation hopes for an end to their ordeal, which has
become a tragic one for those individuals, who have
been forgotten during the national reconciliation
process.

