Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, let me first express my full
confidence in your leadership and ability to steer the
deliberations in the Council in the month of December.
I also wish to thank you for convening this important
and timely meeting on the question of Palestine.

In recent days, the Israeli regime, in pursuit of its
bloody campaign and racist and aggressive policy, has
been employing more vicious measures against the
defenceless Palestinian people. It has once again
reacted excessively and disproportionately in the
occupied territories, killing and injuring dozens of
civilians. The Israelis have further escalated their
inhumane practice of repression against the Palestinian
people in full disregard for any established humane
standards against civilians.

The targeted assassination by Israelis of a
Palestinian on 23 November lies at the origin of the
recent cycle of violence. That criminal act was
committed on the eve of intended new efforts by
Western envoys and also followed statements by a
number of Western countries that might provide new
opportunities for addressing the flagrant injustice the
Palestinian people have faced for decades.

Familiar with the pattern of actions and aware of
the possible reaction, the Zionist officials authorized
these targeted killings, knowing that they would disrupt
the new efforts that could lead to the easing of the
tension in the region. We believe that the recent
escalation of violence in the occupied territories should
be seen from this point of View, and the Israeli
Government should be held fully responsible for the
new cycle of violence.

There should be no doubt that the Israeli
campaign of extrajudicial killing of Palestinians on the
basis of hit lists is a flagrant violation of key tenets of
natural justice and provisions of international
humanitarian law. The deeds and words of the Israeli
leadership made it obvious that extrajudicial executions
have become part of the regime's policy. That policy
amounts to organized acts of terrorism by a
government, and the international community should
not turn a blind eye to it. It is very unfortunate that
those Governments that criticize the Palestinians and
hold them responsible for the ongoing violence in the
area ignore the crimes perpetrated by the Israelis and
do nothing to stop them.

Occupation lies at the very origin of the
Palestinian conflict and the overall tension and
instability in the Middle East. The shocking
developments of the past few months brought closer
into view the fact that, unless the principal cause of
conflict is effectively addressed, the crisis will never
subside. Therefore, no link whatsoever can be
established between terrorism and the right of the
Palestinian people to resist Israeli aggression and
occupation, considered to be a legitimate right ensured
by international laws and conventions.

We reject the contention that the Israeli
aggression is in self-defence. We further reject the
policies of unlimited support extended to Israel. As to
the real intention of the Israeli regime, it is significant
that the Israelis continue to reject the call for a freeze
on all settlement construction activities in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip.

The international community in general, and the
Islamic world in particular, are deeply concerned about
the ongoing atrocities committed by Israeli troops.
Undoubtedly, these latest acts by Israel are likely to
further exacerbate the Middle East crisis unless the
international community and the United Nations
intervene immediately to stop the Israeli armed forces'
brutal campaign against civilians.

There is no doubt that the Security Council in
particular is expected to act appropriately with a view
to putting an end to violations by the occupying power
and paving the way for bringing those who are
responsible to justice. Several times in the past, the
Council was called upon to shoulder its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security by putting an end to the inhuman
and aggressive acts of the Israeli regime. Regrettably,
however, the exercise or the threat of exercise of the
veto has so far prevented the Council from discharging
its constitutional responsibility in this crucial issue and
thus has raised profound international disappointment.
Undoubtedly, the Council's inaction emboldens Israel
to defy the wishes of the international community
reflected, inter alia, in numerous General Assembly
resolutions.

Recent events have further demonstrated the need
for an international intervention, protection and
observer force to be established by the Council with a
view to protecting defenceless Palestinian civilians
from ever-increasing atrocities at the hands of the
Israelis. The veto last March of a draft resolution to
authorize the establishment of such a United Nations
observer force proved to be a disservice to the volatile
situation in the area. The presence of such a force on
the ground could have forestalled more violence and
bloodshed and could have saved many precious lives.

