Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We,
too, would like to begin by congratulating the United
Kingdom on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. We wish you,
Madam President, every success and assure you of our
support. We would also once again like to congratulate
the Swedish delegation for the successful discharge of
the presidency during the month of July.

In addition, we welcome the convening of this
meeting, and we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. John Ging for their briefings. Peru applauds and
supports their tireless efforts, together with their
teams, to find a solution to the conflict in Yemen and
to protect the population under extremely difficult
circumstances. We believe that it is important for the
Council to discuss the issue transparently, reporting on
the ongoing efforts to prevent escalations and to put an
end to a conflict that has no military solution and that
has brought about the worst humanitarian crisis in the
world today.

Peru deplores the ongoing violence and suffering.
At this juncture, we are concerned about the risks to
Al-Hudaydah, the port of entry for the food, medical
supplies and fuel containers that Yemenis depend on.
We also deplore the fact that as the Panel of Experts
on Yemen mandated by resolution 2342 (2017) reports,
all the parties to the conflict continue to violate
international law and international humanitarian law, as
well as specific mandates of the Council on the conflict
in Yemen. The most recent violations are the coalition's
bombings of civilian infrastructure in Al-Hudaydah,
including the health, water and sanitation services that
are crucial to coping with the new cholera outbreak.
Just today there were attacks on a market and near a
hospital. This must stop.

Peru firmly condemns the crimes committed by the
Houthi rebels, including the indiscriminate firing of
rockets at urban centres in Saudi Arabia, the planting of
anti-personnel mines and attacks on vessels in the Red
Sea. However, we must emphasize that any response
must comply with international law, and any claims to
a military solution must be ruled out, considering that
they entail the risk of aggravating an already disastrous
humanitarian situation. The reality is that there is no
humanitarian plan B if Al-Hudaydah port collapses, and
there is no guarantee that an offensive will not result in
that collapse. As Mr. Ging reminded us, many of the
people's needs are still unmet despite the commendable
humanitarian efforts. We must be consistent in our
responsibility to protect them, including by preventing
further escalation. If not, we run the risk of pushing
the people's support to the rebels and generally turning
to the violent extremism that leads to terrorism. We
emphasize that the ports and airports must remain
open and operational, in accordance with the Council's
provisions. And humanitarian aid and the people's
access to it cannot and should not be made conditional
on any military objectives.

We would like to highlight the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to restore dialogue and
build trust between the parties, with a View to achieving
a ceasefire and facilitating a political solution. We
believe that his work should have the full and unanimous
support of the Council and the international community.
We welcome the announcement of the forthcoming
meeting in Geneva between representatives of the
Government of Yemen and the Houthis, which we hope
will enable us to make progress towards a political
solution. We emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the parties commit in good faith and without prior
conditions and that they act pragmatically, moderately
and quickly. We also emphasize how important it is that
countries with influence on the parties to the conflict
use their diplomatic efforts, and we welcome the work
being done in that regard.

Lastly, we would like to point out that the achieving
a sustainable peace will require broad consensus
on a shared vision for the future. In that regard, it is
important to ensure that the process is inclusive and
that all sectors of Yemen's population are represented,
particularly women and young people.

I would like to conclude by recalling the words
of the Executive Director of UNICEF when she
recently visited the country and learned that more than
11 million children are at risk. She said that there is no
justification for continuing this carnage.

