Mr. Rodriguez Parilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Since the provocative visit of Sharon to al-
Haram al-Sharif in September 2000, almost 3,600
people have died; almost 2,800 of them have been
innocent Palestinian civilians. The most massive,
flagrant and systematic violation of human rights in the
world today has continued. Every time there is a hope
for progress towards peace, it is dissipated by
deliberate extrajudicial executions. State terrorism and
the use of modern and lethal weapons of war against
the civilian population continue. A strange wall is
being built to create a Palestinian bantustan. There are
new Israeli illegal settlements and there is no end to the
demolition of Palestinian homes. The suffocation of the
Palestinian economy continues. The Palestinian
Authority and its legitimate President, Mr. Arafat,
continue under political and military siege, and their
installations have practically been destroyed.

Without the end to the Israeli occupation, there
will be no peace. The Security Council remains
handcuffed by the United States veto, which has been
used 25 times to stop the implementation of its
resolutions. There cannot be a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East until the Palestinian people exercise
their legitimate right to establish an independent State
with its capital in East Jerusalem; until all the occupied
Arab territories are returned and Israel withdraws from
the Gaza Strip, West Bank and Syrian Golan to the 4
June 1967 border; until there is an end to Israeli
provocations in southern Lebanon, the return of
Palestinian refugees is guaranteed and the Israeli
settlements are dismantled, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 465 (1980).

While it reiterates its condemnation of suicide
attacks with bombs against Israeli civilians, who
continue to be the innocent victims of the spiral of
violence generated by the policies of their Government,
Cuba rejects the manipulation of those individual acts
to try to justify State terrorism. Cuba demands full
respect for the person and dignity of President Yasser
Arafat and calls upon the Council to act with energy,
and rapidly. The General Assembly will also have to
exercise without delay the far-ranging powers entrusted
to it by the Charter.

I am sorry that the Security Council does not
have the time to hear more than three minutes from
Member States.

